Part I, Bylaws
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Acceptance of Bylaws
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:3
[Warrant
articles
accepting
Part
1,
Bylaws,
of
the
Code
of
the
Town
of
Chelmsford
and
making
certain
substantive
changes
to
the
chapters
in
Part
1
were
adopted
by
the
Town
Meeting
on
October
21,
1999.
See
Warrant
Articles
30
through
48
of
the
October
1999
Town
Meeting.]
CHELMSFORD CODE
1:4
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 1926 ATM; amended Oct. 1973 STM by Art. 3]
§ 1-1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
32]
Any violation of these bylaws shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$5 nor more than $300, or any such other amount as may be authorized,
from time to time, under the General Laws.
§ 1-2. Noncriminal disposition. [Added 5-21-1979 ATM by Art. 39]
Any person taking cognizance of a violation of a specific ordinance,
bylaw, rule or regulation which he or she is empowered to enforce,
hereinafter referred to as the "enforcing person," as an alternative to
initiating criminal proceedings, may, pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, give
the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District
Court of Lowell, or any other court having jurisdiction thereof, at any
time during the office hours, not later than 21 days after the date of
such notice.
Such notice shall be in triplicate and shall contain the name and
address, if known, of the offender, the specific offense charged and
the time and place for his or her required appearance. Such notice
shall be signed by the enforcing person and shall be signed by the
offender whenever practicable in acknowledgment that such notice
has been received.
(1)
The enforcing person shall, if possible, deliver to the offender a
copy of said notice at the time and place of the violation. If it is not
possible to deliver a copy of said notice to the offender at the time
and place of the violation, said copy shall be mailed or delivered
by the enforcing person, or by his or her commanding officer or
the head of his or her department or by any person authorized by
such commanding officer, department or head, to the offender's last
known address within 15 days after said violation.
(2)
Such notice as so mailed shall be deemed sufficient notice, and a
certificate of the person so mailing such notice that it has been
mailed in accordance with this section shall be prima facie
evidence thereof.
(3)
When enforced through this noncriminal disposition procedure, the
penalty for violation of any Town bylaw, rule or regulation shall
be as follows: a written warning for the first offense, $100 for the
second offense, $200 for the third offense, and $300 for the fourth
and subsequent offenses. Each day upon which a violation exists
shall be deemed to be a separate offense. [Added 10-22-2007
ATM by Art. 12]
(4)
A.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5
At or before the completion of each tour of duty, or at the beginning
of the first subsequent tour of duty, the enforcing person shall give to
his or her commanding officer or department head those copies of each
notice of such violation he or she has taken cognizance of during such
tour which have not already been delivered or mailed by him or her
as aforesaid. Said commanding officer or department head shall retain
and safely preserve one copy and shall, at a time not later than the next
court day after such delivery or mailing, deliver the other copy to the
clerk of the court before which the offender has been notified to appear.
The Clerk of the District Court shall maintain a separate docket of all
such notices to appear.
B.
Any person notified to appear before the Clerk of the District Court as
hereinbefore provided may so appear and confess the offense charged,
either personally or through a duly authorized agent or by mailing to
the Town Clerk of the municipality within which the violation occurred,
together with the notice, such specific sum of money not exceeding
$300 as the town shall fix as penalty for violation of the ordinance,
bylaw, rule or regulation. Such payment shall, if mailed, be made only
by postal note, money order or check. Upon receipt of such notice,
the Town Clerk shall forthwith notify the District Court Clerk of such
payment, and the receipt by the District Court Clerk of such notification
shall operate as a final disposition of the case. An appearance under
this subsection shall not be deemed to be a criminal proceeding. No
person so notified to appear before the Clerk of the District Court shall
be required to report to any probation officer, and no record of the case
shall be entered in any probation records. If any person so notified to
appear desires to contest the violation alleged in the notice to appear,
he or she may avail himself or herself of the procedure established in
MGL c. 40, § 21D. [Amended 4-27-1992 STM by Art. 6]
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
§ 1-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 1-2
1:6
Chapter 5
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire alarms — See Ch. 42. Noise — See Ch. 100.
§ 5-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM INSTALLATION — The design, installation, repair, alteration and
maintenance of systems designed to cause alarm to be sounded in the event
of a burglary or robbery.
ALARM USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the Town of Chelmsford, except for alarm systems on
motor vehicles or proprietary alarm systems.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A telephone answering service which provides
the service of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems and
thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the Chelmsford
Police Department.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility which is privately owned that
owns or leases alarm systems and whose facility is staffed by employees
who receive, record or validate alarm signals and relay the information of
such signals to the Chelmsford Police Department by any means.
DIAL ALARM — An alarm system which automatically selects a telephone
line connected to the Chelmsford Police Department and reproduces a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm system which is directly connected to the
alarm processing unit within the police monitoring facility.
EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices,
or a single device, arranged to signal a hazard or intrusion requiring urgent
attention and to which police are expected to respond. In this chapter, the
term "emergency alarm system" shall include the terms "dial alarm," "direct
alarm" and "local alarm," as those terms are herein defined. Fire alarm
systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature, humidity and any
other conditions not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized
intrusion into a premises, robbery or attempted robbery at a premises are
specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 1-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 5-1
5:7
FALSE ALARM —
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system which may or may not be connected
to a central station or answering service which, when activated, causes
an audible and/or visual signaling device at the premises within which the
alarm system is installed.
MANUAL ALARM — Any alarm in which the activation of the alarm is
initiated by the direct action of the alarm user or the user's agents or
employees and which is installed to elicit a police response to a burglary,
attempted burglary, robbery or attempted robbery.
PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the town
upon payment of the required fee.
PERMIT YEAR — A twelve-month period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31 of each year.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated association or
other legal entity.
POLICE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR — An employee of the town whose
responsibility is to coordinate the administration and documentation of
alarm businesses and alarm systems as they relate to the effective
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town of Chelmsford or his or
her designated representative.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Town of Chelmsford Police Department or
any authorized agent thereof.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM — All alarm systems sounding and/or recording
alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the
protected premises, the control center being under the supervision of the
proprietor of the protected premises or the proprietor's employees or
agents. If a proprietary alarm system includes a signal line connected
directly or by means of a dialing device to a central station or answering
service, it thereby becomes an emergency alarm system as defined in this
chapter.
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user of an alarm
system or of the user's employees or agents.
A.
Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the Police Department
requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the Police
Department when in fact there has been no unauthorized intrusion or
attempted unauthorized intrusion into a premises and no attempted
robbery at a premises. Excluded from this definition are activations
of alarm systems caused by power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes or
earthquakes or an alarm user who has no other means of eliciting
an emergency response by the Police Department for valid emergency
reasons.
B.
§ 5-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 5-1
5:8
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Anything which annoys, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health or safety of any persons or any community or
neighborhood.
TOWN — The Town of Chelmsford, Massachusetts.
§ 5-2. Permit required; application procedure.
Within 90 days from the effective date of this chapter, every alarm
user shall make application for a permit which shall be required to
maintain and/or operate an emergency alarm system within the Town
of Chelmsford.
A.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue a permit to any
owner of property located within the Town of Chelmsford, or the lesser
thereof, to maintain, install and modify an alarm system upon
application to the Chief of Police and subject to the following
provisions:
The alarm user applying for the permit shall provide to the Chief
of Police the name, address and current telephone number of at
least two persons for one-family residences and three persons for
all other property who will be available at all times for the purpose
of responding to alarms by personally appearing at the building
protected following an alarm of any kind.
(1)
The Chief of Police, upon application to him or her for a permit,
shall, in his or her sound judgment, determine whether the
application conforms to the requirements of this chapter and that
the facts stated therein are true and accurate, and the Chief of
Police may cause such system to be inspected to determine
whether such system is reasonably operational.
(2)
All information obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Police Communications
Center and the Police Alarm Administrator.
(3)
It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to keep all
information necessary for proper notification, with the Police
Communications Center/Police Alarm Administrator, current and
up-to-date.
(4)
A residential permit shall include all private dwellings, individual
apartments or condominium units occupied primarily by the
applicant for which the applicant will pay to the Town of
Chelmsford a permit fee set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F. The
effective date will be January 1, 1994. Said effective date does not
exempt the payment of said fee for previously installed systems.
[Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 15]
(5)
A commercial permit shall include all businesses, corporations or
unincorporated associations for which the applicant will pay to the
(6)
B.
§ 5-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 5-2
5:9
§ 5-3. False alarms.
Town of Chelmsford a permit fee set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F.
[Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 15]
All federal, state, county or local government agencies who operate
alarm systems shall be exempt from all permit fees and service
charges but shall comply with all other requirements of this
chapter and with all requests of the Chief of Police as shall concern
the operation of their alarm systems.
(7)
All persons 65 years of age or older who are the principal
occupants of the private residence listed on the application shall
also be exempt from all permit fees but shall comply with all other
requirements of this chapter.
(8)
Applications for the renewal of an alarm user's permit shall be
made every year within 30 days immediately preceding January 1
and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee set pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 22F for each application in behalf of a residential
building and set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F for each application
in behalf of a nonresidential building. [Amended 10-17-2005
ATM by Art. 15]
(9)
A late charge set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F will be charged
in addition to the fees provided above to an alarm user who is
more than 60 days delinquent in renewing a permit. [Amended
10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 15]
(10)
All alarm users to whom a permit has been issued shall keep the
permit within the protected premises for which the permit was
issued.
(11)
Any alarm permit issued under this chapter shall be made available
for inspection, suspension or revocation purposes upon the demand
of any authorized Chelmsford police officer.
(12)
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter may
constitute grounds for the Chief of Police to deny the issuance of a
permit or suspend/revoke an existing permit.
(13)
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages through
relay to the Police Department shall be worked on, tested or
demonstrated without notifying and obtaining permission from the
Police Chief. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm
devices not transmitting emergency messages through relay to the
Police Department. An unauthorized test constitutes a false alarm.
A.
If in the event of any alarm the Police Communications Center is
unable to notify any listed representative of the alarm user or if a
representative of the alarm user fails to appear at the building
protected within 30 minutes after notification, the Police
B.
§ 5-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 5-3
5:10
Communications Center shall not respond to any further alarms from
that system until the alarm is reset by the alarm user or, in the case
of a defective alarm system, until the alarm system has been repaired.
Whenever a representative of an alarm user fails to appear at the
building protected following an alarm within 30 minutes after being
notified by the Police Communications Center, the alarm user shall pay
a charge set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F in addition to any service
charge assessed for every such event to the Town of Chelmsford.
Violation of the provisions of this subsection is sufficient cause for
suspension/revocation of the emergency alarm system permit required
by § 5-2 of this chapter. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 15]
Service charges and fees.
Any user of an alarm system which transmits false alarms requiring
a response from the Chelmsford Police Department shall be
assessed a service charge set by the Chief of Police pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 22F for each false alarm in excess of three occurring
within a thirty-day period. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art.
15]
(1)
All service charges assessed hereunder shall be paid through the
Police Alarm Administrator to the Town of Chelmsford Treasurer-
Collector for deposit into the general fund. Upon failure of an alarm
user to pay the assigned service charge within 30 days, a five-dollar
late fee shall be assessed and the total amount shall be payable
within 15 days. Failure to remit payment due within a total of 45
days from original notice shall result in the Chief of Police ordering
the permit (for the premises recording the false alarm) revoked.
Any such revocation shall be effectuated within 10 days from the
date of mailing of the Police Chief's order. [Amended 10-21-1999
ATM by Art. 31]
(2)
C.
After the Police Department has recorded three separate false alarms
within a calendar year from a particular alarm system, the Police Chief
shall notify the alarm user, in writing, of such fact and require said
alarm user to submit, within 10 days after receipt of said notice, a
report describing efforts to discover and eliminate the cause(s) of the
false alarms. If the alarm user, on the basis of absence from the town
or on any other reasonable basis, requests an extension of time for
filing the report, the Police Chief may extend the ten-day period for a
reasonable time. If said alarm user fails to submit such a report within
10 days or within any such extended period, the Police Chief may order
the alarm permit (for the premises recording the three false alarms)
suspended until the alarm system is made to function properly. Any
such order of suspension shall be preceded by a written notice of intent
to the alarm user by the Police Chief. Any such suspension shall be
effectuated 10 days from the date of mailing of the Police Chief's notice
if no hearing is requested.
D.
§ 5-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 5-3
5:11
In the event that the Police Chief determines that a report submitted
is unsatisfactory or the alarm user has failed to show by the report
that the alarm user has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate
or reduce false alarms, then the Police Chief shall order the alarm
permit (for the premises recording the three false alarms) suspended
until the alarm system is made to function properly. Any such order
of suspension shall be preceded by a written notice of intent to the
alarm user by the Police Chief. Any such suspension shall be effectuated
within 10 days from the date of mailing of the Chief's order.
E.
In the event that the Police Department records five false alarms within
a calendar year from a particular alarm system, the Police Chief may
order the permit for said alarm system to be suspended for a period
of not less than six months from the date the alarm system is
disconnected. Any such order of suspension shall be preceded by a
written notice of intent to the alarm user by the Police Chief. Any such
suspension shall be effectuated within 10 days from the date of mailing
of the Police Chief's order.
F.
Upon receipt of a notice of intent to revoke or suspend an alarm user's
permit pursuant to this chapter, the alarm user may, within five days of
such receipt, submit a written request for a hearing before the Chief of
Police or his or her designee setting forth the reasons why the permit
should not be revoked or suspended.
G.
At the hearing before the Chief of Police or his or her designee, the
holder of the permit shall have the right to present evidence, to crossexamine
witnesses and to be represented by counsel. Such a hearing
shall be informal and shall not be subject to the rules of evidence or
formal courtroom procedure. After the hearing, the Chief of Police or
his or her designee may either issue an order of revocation, withdraw
the notice of revocation or suspend the permit until such time that he
or she is satisfied that the cause (or causes) of the false alarms has (or
have) been eliminated.
H.
Any alarm user who has, in accordance with this section, had his or
her alarm permit revoked/suspended by the Police Chief may appeal the
order of revocation/suspension to the Board of Selectmen. An appeal
shall be filed within five days of the date of the order of revocation/
suspension. Thereafter, the Board shall consider the merits of the
appeal and in connection therewith shall hear evidence presented by all
parties concerned. After hearing such evidence the Board may affirm,
vacate or modify the order of revocation/suspension.
I.
An alarm user whose permit has been revoked is not precluded under
this chapter from applying for a new permit. The Chief of Police will not
issue a new permit unless he or she is satisfied that the user's system
has been properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The Chief of
Police may also impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the
user before issuing a new permit. (These restrictions and/or conditions
shall appear on the permit and shall provide for automatic revocation
J.
§ 5-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 5-3
5:12
§ 5-4. Abatement of nuisance alarms.
on the occurrence of two false alarms in the remaining permit year.)
[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 33]
Any alarm user, central station, answering service or proprietary
system who or which does not possesses an alarm user's permit or
whose permit has been suspended, revoked or denied who or which
transmits by any means to the Chelmsford Police Department an alarm
signal from his, her or its respective system shall be charged a service
fee set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F for each signal eliciting a response
from the police. This service fee shall be separate from any fines which
may be assessed by the court upon a finding of a violation of this
chapter. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 15]
K.
Any alarm user, owner or lessee who possess an alarm user's permit
may appeal false alarm service charges in writing to the Chief of Police
within 10 days after receipt of the notice of penalty.
L.
The Chief of Police or his or her designee may waive assessment of the
service charge when, in his or her judgment, reasonable attempts are
being taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarm.1
M.
All alarm systems as defined in this chapter which make or sound an
audible signal which may be heard outside of the protected premises
shall be equipped with a device which shall limit the duration of such
audible signal to not more than 20 minutes.
A.
Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted audible
signal for more than 20 minutes between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which
cannot be shut off, reset or otherwise curtailed due to the absence
or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons designated by
the alarm user and which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a
community, a neighborhood or inhabitants of the area where the alarm
system is located shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving
complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted audible
signal, the Police Communications Center shall endeavor to contact the
alarm user or members of the alarm user's family or those persons
designated by the alarm user in an effort to abate the nuisance. The
Police Chief shall cause to be recorded the names and addresses of all
complainants and the time each complaint was made.
B.
In the event that the Police Chief is unable to contact the alarm user
or members of the alarm user's family or those persons designated by
the alarm user or if the aforesaid persons cannot or will not curtail
the audible signal being emitted by the alarm system, and if the Police
Chief is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance, the Police Chief may
direct a police officer or a fire fighter or a qualified alarm technician
C.
1. Editor's Note: Original Section 3N, which immediately followed this subsection and
contained the same wording as § 5-7C, was deleted 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 33.
§ 5-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 5-4
5:13
§ 5-5. Administration and enforcement.
to enter upon the property outside the home or building in which the
alarm system is located and take any reasonable action necessary to
abate the nuisance.
If entry upon property outside the home or building in which the alarm
system is located is made in accordance with this section, the person so
entering upon such property shall be considered lawfully present but
may not conduct any search, seizure, inspection or investigation while
he or she is upon the property and shall not cause any unnecessary
damage to the alarm system or to any part of the home or building
and shall leave the property immediately after the audible signal has
ceased. After an entry upon property has been made in accordance
with this section, the Police Chief shall have the property secured, if
necessary. The reasonable costs and expenses of abating a nuisance in
accordance with this section may be assessed to the alarm user, said
assessment not to exceed expenses incurred by the town.
D.
Within 10 days after abatement of a nuisance in accordance with this
section, the alarm user may request a hearing before the Chief of Police
and may present evidence showing that the signal emitted by the user's
alarm system was not a public nuisance at the time of the abatement;
that unnecessary damage was caused to the user's property in the
course of the abatement; that the costs of the abatement should not be
assessed to the user; or that the requirements of this section were not
fulfilled. The Chief shall hear all interested parties and may, in his or
her discretion, reimburse the alarm user for the repairs to the user's
property necessitated by the abatement or excuse the alarm user from
paying the costs of the abatement.
E.
The Chief of Police shall establish a written procedure for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
A.
In January of each year the Chief of Police shall submit a report to
the Town Manager regarding the effectiveness of this chapter and any
recommendations thereon.
B.
The Police Department of the Town of Chelmsford shall take every
reasonable precaution to assure that the alarm signals and alarm
messages received by the Police Department are given appropriate
attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the Police
Department shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of alarm
devices, for any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt
of an alarm from such source nor for the failure or neglect of any person
or in connection with the installation and operation of alarm systems or
their components, the transmission of alarm signals and prerecorded
messages or the relaying of such signals and messages. In the event
that the Police Department finds it necessary to disconnect an alarm
device after exhausting all other provisions of this chapter, the Police
Department shall incur no liability by such action.
C.
§ 5-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 5-6
5:14
§ 5-6. Dial alarms and direct alarms.
Dial alarms and direct alarms are not allowed.
§ 5-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 8
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 8-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any beverage defined as an alcoholic beverage
in MGL c. 138, § 1.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property within the Town of Chelmsford
which is not owned by the town.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Includes all town commons, school grounds,
municipal parking lots, municipal parks, municipal playgrounds and all real
property, buildings or offices owned by or leased to the town or occupied
or used by any board, department, committee, commission or office of the
town.
PUBLIC WAY — The entire width between the lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel, and shall include the entire width of any
sidewalk within the lines of such way. In the case of ways established by
prescription or concerning which no official layouts exist, the edge of the
surface of the traveled way shall be deemed to be the lines of such public
ways.
It shall be unlawful for any person or alarm user to maintain or operate
an alarm system, as defined by the terms of this chapter, without first
obtaining a permit as provided.
A.
Any person or alarm user who does maintain or operate an alarm
system without a permit shall be guilty of a violation and, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.
B.
Any alarm user who, after having a permit suspended/revoked and after
exhausting his or her right to a hearing, fails to disconnect the alarm
system shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not less than $100.
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
§ 5-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 8-2
8:15
§ 8-2. Consumption on public ways.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages on any public way or on
any way to which the public has a right of access.
§ 8-3. Possession or consumption on public or private property.
No person shall bring any alcoholic beverages onto any public property or
onto any private property or possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in
or upon any public property or private property without the permission of
the owner or person lawfully in charge or control of such public or private
property.
§ 8-4. Seizure.
All alcoholic beverages possessed or consumed in violation of this chapter
shall be seized and held until final adjudication of the charge against
the person or persons arrested or summoned before the court. After final
adjudication all alcoholic beverages seized shall be returned to the person
or persons entitled to the lawful possession of them.
§ 8-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
34]
Violations of this chapter are punishable by a fine of $100 for each offense.
§ 8-6. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced on behalf of the town by its Police
Department, which shall have the right to arrest any and all persons in
violation of said chapter.
§ 8-7. Severability.
If any part, section or provision of this chapter is found to be invalid, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 10
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC
§ 10-1. License required; features promoting misuse.
In accordance with MGL c. 140, § 177A, as amended from time to time,
any individual or business desiring to keep and operate an automatic
amusement device for hire, gain or reward shall secure an annual
license from the Board of Selectmen.
A.
§ 8-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 10-1
10:16
§ 10-2. Use restrictions.
§ 10-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Board of Selectmen shall not grant a license for any automatic
amusement device that presents a risk of misuse as a gaining device.
Automatic amusement devices which may present a risk of misuse
as gaming devices are those devices which have one or more of the
following features:
The device involves matching random numbers, patterns or
cards.
(a)
(b) The device accumulates more than 26 plays.
The device is equipped with a "knock off" switch, button or
similar device that resets the total points won as shown on the
video screen and adds these points to a second meter and/or
recording device.
(c)
(d) The device has a mechanism for adjusting the odds.
The device has a remote control feature that can reset the
device from another location.
(e)
The device is capable of returning money to the player, other
than the change for the excess amount put in.
(f)
The device permits a player to pay for more than one game at
a time.
(g)
(1)
Each game on the device shall cost exactly the same amount for
each player, and no player may change any aspect of the game by
paying a different amount than any other player before or during
the game.
(2)
There shall be no metering device that accounts for both money/
points in and money/points out.
(3)
B.
The maximum number of automatic amusement devices allowed on
any single business premises shall be four, except in the case of duly
licensed arcades and amusement parks.
A.
Any individual or business desiring more than four automatic
amusement devices on a single business premises shall require a
special license from the Board of Selectmen.
B.
The enforcing authority under this chapter shall be the Chelmsford
Police Department.
A.
All licenses for automatic amusement devices granted by the Board
of Selectmen shall be subject to inspection by the Chelmsford Police
B.
§ 10-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 10-3
10:17
§ 10-4. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or part thereof is, for any reason, held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or part of the chapter.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 11
ANIMALS
Department to ensure conformance with submitted application
information and local code requirements.
Any unlicensed automatic amusement device shall be subject to
immediate seizure by the Chelmsford Police Department.
C.
Violation of this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of $250, with each
unlicensed amusement device constituting a separate offense.
D.
§ 10-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 10-4
10:18
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 5-5-1986 ATM by Art. 17]
§ 11-1. References to Massachusetts General Laws.
Any reference to a section number in this article shall mean Chapter 140 of
the Massachusetts General Laws, unless otherwise stated.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
§ 11-3. Registration and license. [Amended 11-30-1987 STM by Art.
13; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 20]
Unless otherwise set out in this article, any term defined in § 136A
shall have the same meaning in this article and shall be expressly
incorporated herein.
A.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control
of the owner or authorized escort either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
LICENSE PERIOD — From January 1 of each year to December 31 of
the same year.
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping or harboring a dog owned or kept in the Town.
B.
A person who at the commencement of a license period is, or who
during any license period becomes, the owner or keeper of a dog six
months old or over which is not duly licensed, and the owner or keeper
of a dog when it becomes six months old during a license period,
shall cause it to be registered, numbered, described and licensed until
the end of such license period, and the owner or keeper of a dog
so registered, numbered, described and licensed during any license
period, in order to own or keep such dog after the beginning of the
succeeding license period, shall, before the beginning thereof, cause
it to be registered, numbered, described and licensed for such period.
The registering, numbering, describing and licensing of a dog shall be
done in the office of the Town Clerk on a form prescribed and supplied
by the Town Clerk and shall be subject to the condition expressed
therein that the dog which is the subject of the license shall be
controlled and restrained from killing, chasing or harassing livestock or
fowls.
The Town Clerk shall not grant such license for any dog unless the
owner thereof provides the Town Clerk with either a veterinarian's
certification that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with
the provisions of MGL c. 140, § 145B, or has been certified exempt
(1)
A.
§ 11-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 11-3
10:19
§ 11-4. Kennel license.
from such provision as outlined in MGL c. 140, § 137, or a notarized
letter from a veterinarian that a certificate was issued.
The owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall cause it to wear
around its neck or body a collar or harness of leather or other
suitable material to which shall be securely attached a tag in a
form prescribed by and issued by the Town Clerk when a license is
issued. Such tag shall state the following: Town of Chelmsford, year
of issue and tag number. If any such tag shall be lost, the owner or
keeper of such dog shall forthwith secure a substitute tag from the
Town Clerk at a cost of $2. This subsection shall not apply where it
is otherwise provided by law, nor shall it apply to a person having a
kennel license.
(2)
The provisions of MGL c. 140, § 138, shall be expressly incorporated
under this article.
B.
A license duly recorded shall be valid throughout the commonwealth,
except that, in the case of the permanent moving of a dog into the Town,
the owner or keeper thereof shall, within 30 days after such moving,
present the original license and tag of such dog to the Town Clerk,
and said Town Clerk shall take up the same and issue to said owner
or keeper a transfer license, together with a tag, for such dog upon
payment of $2. The provisions of this article relative to the form and
furnishing of licenses and tags shall apply to licenses and tags issued
under this subsection.
C.
Any person holding a kennel license shall maintain the kennel in a
sanitary and humane manner. [Amended 10-16-2006 ATM by Art.
14]
A.
Any person who meets any requirement of the Town of Chelmsford
bylaws and § 137A may obtain a kennel license from the Town Clerk
on a form prescribed and supplied by the Town Clerk and for a fee as
set out in § 11-5 of this article. The Town Clerk shall, upon application,
issue without charge a kennel license to any domestic charitable
corporation incorporated exclusively for the purpose of protecting
animals from cruelty, neglect or abuse for the relief of suffering among
animals.
B.
The provisions of § 137B shall be expressly incorporated under this
article.
C.
The Chief of Police or Animal Control Officer may at any time inspect or
cause to be inspected any kennel and, if in his or her judgment the same
is not being maintained in a sanitary and humane manner or if records
are not properly kept as required by law, shall file with the Selectmen
a petition setting forth the facts, and the Selectmen shall, upon this
petition or upon a petition of 25 citizens setting forth that they are
D.
§ 11-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 11-4
10:20
§ 11-5. License fees. [Amended 12-8-1986 STM by Art. 1;
11-30-1987 STM by Art. 13; 6-4-1990 ATM by Art. 12; 10-1-1990
ATM by Art. 11; 10-28-1991 ATM by Art. 19; 4-29-2002 by Art. 12;
10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 14; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 20]
aggrieved or annoyed to an unreasonable extent by one or more dogs
at a kennel maintained in Town, because of excessive barking or vicious
disposition of said dogs or other conditions connected with such kennel
constituting a public nuisance, within seven days after the filing of such
petition, give notice to all parties in interest of a public hearing to be
held within 14 days after the date of such notice. Within seven days
after such public hearing said Selectmen shall make an order either
revoking or suspending such kennel license or otherwise regulating
said kennel or dismissing said petition. Within 10 days after such order
the holder of such license may bring a petition in the District Court as
outlined in § 137C. Any person maintaining a kennel after the license
therefor has been so revoked or while such license is so suspended
shall be punished as set forth in § 11-18 of this chapter. The Selectmen
may, in the case of any suspension, reinstate such license. [Amended
10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
The provisions of § 137D shall be expressly incorporated under this
chapter.
E.
All kennels shall be limited to a total of 100 dogs to be maintained on
said premises. It shall be a violation of this article to have any dogs on
said premises over and above said number. [Added 11-30-1987 STM
by Art. 13; amended 10-24-2016 ATM by Art. 14]
F.
License fees for dogs and kennels shall be set by a majority vote of the
voters present at a Town Meeting.
A.
The license fee for a spayed or neutered dog shall be less than the
license fee for an intact dog. Upon application for a license, the Town
Clerk shall require a certificate from the veterinarian who spayed or
neutered the dog as proof that the dog is spayed or neutered; provided,
however, that if the Town Clerk is satisfied that the certificate of the
veterinarian who spayed or neutered the dog cannot be obtained, the
Town Clerk may instead accept a receipt of a bill from the veterinarian
who performed such procedure or a statement signed under the
penalties of perjury by a veterinarian registered and practicing in the
commonwealth describing the dog and stating that the veterinarian has
examined the dog, which appears to have been spayed or neutered and
incapable of propagation.
B.
To determine the amount of the license fee for a kennel, a dog under
the age of six months shall not be counted in the number of dogs kept
in a kennel.
C.
§ 11-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 11-5
10:21
§ 11-6. Animal Control Officer. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art.
18; 10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
No fee shall be charged for a license issued for a service animal
as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act2 or regulations
promulgated thereunder.
D.
No license fee or portion thereof shall be refunded because of the
subsequent death, loss, spaying or removal from the commonwealth or
other disposal of the dog, nor shall a license fee or portion thereof paid
by mistake be paid or recovered after it has been paid over to the Town.
E.
All fees shall be increased by $5 on the first day of the second month
following the commencement of the required license period and by an
additional $5 on the first day of each succeeding month up to June 30
each year.
F.
In addition to all other sums due and owing for any license fee
hereunder, a person who applies for a license hereunder shall be
obligated to pay all prior amounts of license fees and citations
determined to be due and owing by the Town Clerk pursuant to this
article for past periods in which said person was obligated to obtain a
license. It shall be a violation of this article to fail to pay any said sum
due hereunder. This remedy shall be cumulative.
G.
The following fees shall apply for licenses issued under Chapter 11:
Dog License Fee
Intact male or female dog $20
Spayed or neutered dog $15
Kennel License Fee
Domestic charitable corporation
kennel
$0
Commercial boarding or training
kennel
$350
Commercial breeder kennel $350
Personal kennel
(1) 4 dogs or less $85
(2) 5 dogs $100
(3) 6 to 10 dogs $150
(4) 11 to 25 dogs $250
Veterinary kennel $300
H.
2. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 11-5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 11-6
10:22
§ 11-7. Nuisances. [Amended 10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
Every owner or keeper of a dog shall exercise proper care and control of
his/her dog so as to prevent said dog from becoming a public nuisance.
The Town Manager shall annually appoint a Animal Control Officer
and as many Assistant Animal Control Officers as the Town Manager
determines necessary to enforce this article, and said individual(s)
shall enforce this article and perform such other duties as the Town
Manager may determine. The Town Manager shall determine hours
and conditions of work for the Animal Control Officer(s). Compensation
for persons appointed under this article shall be consistent with other
bylaws dealing with salaries of appointed officials.
A.
The provisions of §§ 151 and 151A regarding killing and/or transfer of
any dogs shall apply and are expressly incorporated in this article. No
Animal Control Officer shall be a licensed animal dealer registered with
the United States Department of Agriculture, and no Animal Control
Officer, either privately or in the course of carrying out his or her
official assignments as an agent for this Town, or any other agent of the
Town shall give, sell or turn over any animal which may come into his
or her custody to any business or institution licensed or registered as a
research facility or animal dealer with the United States Department of
Agriculture. Whoever violates the provisions of this subsection shall be
punished as provided in § 151.
B.
Running at large. No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such
dog to run at large at any time. The provisions of this section shall
not be intended to apply to dogs participating in any dog show, nor to
Seeing Eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons for the purpose
of aiding them in going from place to place, nor to any dogs properly
trained and under control of and aiding the deaf, nor to any dogs being
trained or actually being used for hunting purposes, nor in any area
officially designated by the Town for off-leash activities. [Amended
4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 29]
Any off-leash area designated by the Town will comply with all
other Town of Chelmsford general bylaws.
(a)
Owners of dogs shall be legally responsible for any and all injury or
destruction of property caused by their dogs.
(b)
Within areas that have been officially designated as off-leash areas,
dogs may be allowed to run at large, subject to such rules and
regulations as may be determined by the Town and as follows;
All dogs are leashed prior to entering and upon leaving the offleash
dog area;
[1]
The owner/keeper of the dog(s) at all times while his/hers
dog(s) is (are) using the designated off-leash dog area is in
attendance with the dog(s) in the designated area;
[2]
(c)
1.
§ 11-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 11-7
10:23
§ 11-8. Impoundment. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 35;
10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
The Animal Control Officer shall seek out, catch and confine any dog within
the Town that has not been licensed with 60 days of the time the dog is
required to be licensed under this article and shall seek out, catch and
confine any dogs within the Town that are found on public property, or on
private property where said dog is trespassing and the owner or person in
control of such property wants the dog removed, said dogs being in violation
of this requirement of this article, and shall seek out, catch and confine
any dog within the Town when said dog was cited for a violation of any
provision of this article and the owner or keeper has failed within 21 days to
avail himself or herself of § 11-16 or 11-17 of this article or, within 21 days
of a determination by the court under the provision of Chapter 1, General
The owner/keeper of the dog(s) has a leash in his/her
possession for each dog he/she owns/keeps that is using the
dog park.
[3]
All dogs using the off-leash dog areas must be licensed and
vaccinated per the Town of Chelmsford general bylaws;
[4]
All dogs must be accompanied by an owner/keeper and be
under his/her control at all times;
[5]
Dogs determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous
pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 157, or Town of Chelmsford general
bylaw Chapter 11, Article I, § 11-2, are not permitted to use
these off-leash parks;
[6]
Use of these off-leash dog areas will be restricted to daylight
hours;
[7]
(d) The rules and regulations shall be posted at any off-leash area.
Barking. Dog owners or caretakers shall not allow excessive or untimely
barking, howling, crying or scratching by their dogs which disturbs the
peace and quiet of any neighborhood. Excessive barking is defined for
the purposes of this section as barking for over 30 minutes.
2.
Dog Waste Removal. A person owning or having the care, custody, or
control of any dog shall not permit such dog to soil or defile or commit
any nuisance upon any sidewalk, street, thoroughfare, beach, bike path,
park/common or wetland, in or upon any public property or in or upon
the property of persons other than the owner or person having the care,
custody, or control of such dog, unless said person picks up any such
waste and disposes of same in a sanitary manner.
3.
Nothing contained in the foregoing subsection shall prevent the Board
of Selectmen from passing any orders authorized by Massachusetts
General Laws or by MGL c. 140, § 167 at such times as the Board shall
deem it necessary to safeguard the public.
4.
§ 11-7 CHELMSFORD CODE § 11-8
10:24
Provisions, § 1-2 of the Code of the Town of Chelmsford that any sums are
due, has failed to pay said sums.
§ 11-9. Disposition. [Amended 10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
Any dog confined by the Animal Control Officer, unless picked up by the
owner, shall be kept for at least 10 days, at which time said dog may be
disposed of in a manner determined by the Board of Selectmen, provided
that at the end of 10 days the Animal Control Officer may make available
for adoption any male or any spayed female dog not found to be diseased.
Any dog confined by the dog officer shall not be released to the owner until
the owner produces evidence of a current dog license and pays a sum of
as voted by the BOS pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F for care of the animal,
each day or part of a day counted as one day. For any dog adopted under
this section, a fee as voted by the BOS pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F shall
be charged, and said dog shall be licensed before adoption. Any fees in
this section are to be in addition to fees or fines as specified elsewhere
in this article and/or under Massachusetts General Laws. No dog shall be
turned over or sold in any manner inconsistent with § 151 or disposed of
inconsistent with the provisions of § 151A.
§ 11-10. Emergency treatment. [Amended 10-16-2006 ATM by Art.
14]
Any veterinarian registered under the provisions of MGL c. 112, § 55 or 56A
who provides emergency treatment of a dog or cat that is injured on any
public way in Chelmsford shall receive, in lieu of payment from the County
Dog Fund as allowed in § 151B, payment from the Revolving Dog Fund. All
other provisions of § 151B shall be incorporated herein under this article.
§ 11-11. Damage caused by dogs.
Whoever suffers loss in a manner described in § 161 shall inform the
Animal Control Officer of such loss, who shall investigate the
circumstances of said loss. In the event it is found that the damage
was caused by a dog and the estimate of damages by the Animal
Control Officer is less than $50, the Animal Control Officer shall submit
a report to the Board of Selectmen. If the estimate is over $50, the
Animal Control Officer shall have the damage appraised on oath by
three persons, one person appointed by the Animal Control Officer, one
appointed by the person alleged to be damaged and one appointed by
the other two. Said appraisers shall act as outlined in § 161 and turn in
said appraisal to the Board of Selectmen, which may authorize payment
or make such independent investigation as it thinks proper and shall
issue an order upon the Town Treasurer-Collector for any amount as it
decides to be just and shall notify all interested parties of its decision.
The appraisers shall receive payment from the Town in a manner as is
authorized in § 161. All funds expended under this section shall come
from the Revolving Dog Fund. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
31; 10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
A.
§ 11-8 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 11-11
10:25
§ 11-12. Liability for damages.
The owner or keeper of a dog which has done damage to livestock or fowls
shall be liable in tort to the Town for all damages so done in which the Town
has been requested to pay as provided by MGL c. 140 or by this article.
The obligations and liability of the Town and the Town's agents,
servants, employees and/or elected officials hereunder shall be limited
to $100 per animal and $500 per residence per fiscal year. This shall not
limit the Town's remedies and rights to seek compensation in excess of
said amount pursuant to this article. [Added 11-30-1987 STM by Art.
13]
B.
The Selectmen may appoint a temporary investigator in any case that
the Board believes in its reasonable discretion requires further
investigation, and if said investigator believes that the evidence is
sufficient to sustain an action against the owner or keeper of the dog,
the investigator shall recommend to the Board of Selectmen that said
action be brought, unless the owner or keeper before action is brought
pays him or her such amount in settlement of the damages as he or
she deems reasonable. After the recommendation of the investigator,
the Selectmen may order that action shall be brought in his or her
own name or in the name of the Town of Chelmsford, or both, as the
Selectmen determine.
C.
If the Selectmen determine, after notice to parties interested and a
hearing, who is the owner or keeper of any dog which is found to
have worried, maimed or killed any livestock or fowls, thereby causing
damages for which their owner may become entitled to compensation
from the Dog Fund under this article, they shall serve upon the owner
or keeper of such dog a notice directing him or her within 24 hours
to kill or confine the dog. A person who owns or keeps a dog and who
has received such notice and does not within 24 hours kill such dog
or thereafter keep it on his or her premises or under the immediate
restraint and control of some person shall be punished as provided in
§ 11-18 of this article, and any police officer, constable or dog officer
may kill such dog if it is found outside of the enclosure of its owner or
keeper and not under his or her immediate care.
D.
The Board of Selectmen, or its agents thereto authorized in writing,
may, after written notice to the owner or keeper, enter upon the
premises of the owner or keeper of any dog known to the Board to have
worried or killed livestock or fowls and then and there kill such dog,
unless such owner or keeper whose premises are thus entered for said
purpose shall give a bond in the sum of $200, with sufficient sureties,
approved by the Board of Selectmen, conditioned that the dog shall be
restrained for 12 months next ensuing, and if the owner or keeper of the
dog declares his or her intention to give such a bond, said Selectmen
or their agents shall allow him or her seven days, exclusive of Sundays
and holidays, in which to procure and prepare the same and to present
it to them or to file it with the Town Clerk.
E.
§ 11-11 CHELMSFORD CODE § 11-12
10:26
Such action may be brought by the Board of Selectmen or by a temporary
investigator as authorized in § 11-11 of this article.
§ 11-13. (Reserved)3
§ 11-14. Ordering dogs to be muzzled or restrained.
All the provisions of § 167 shall be incorporated into this article, except that
any dog held under the provisions of § 167 may not be released until all the
requirements of this article regarding licensing and the fee for care of the
animal are complied with. All other provisions of § 167 shall be incorporated
herein.
§ 11-15. Citations. [Amended 10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 14]
Any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter 11, Animals,
Article I, Dogs, shall, in addition to any pickup of the dog pursuant to this
article, issue a citation to the owner or keeper of any dog violating the
provisions of this article. Any such citation shall include, in addition to the
violation charged, the name and address of the owner or keeper of the dog,
the date and time and location of the alleged offense and the amount of the
penalty due. Said citation shall be on a form prescribed by and furnished by
the Town Clerk.
§ 11-16. Informal disposition process.
§ 11-17. Noncriminal disposition.
If any person so notified by citation desires to contest the violation alleged
in the citation notice without availing himself or herself of the provisions
The owner or keeper of the dog that receives a citation under this
article may, within 21 days, confess to the offense charged personally
or through a duly authorized agent or by mailing to the Town Clerk
said citation along with payment in the amount as authorized under the
penalty provisions of this article. Said payment shall be by postal note,
money order or check. The payment to the Town Clerk shall operate as
a final disposition of the case.
A.
If such person when issued a citation desires to contest the violation
through the informal disposition process, such person may, within 21
days of said issuance, request a hearing with the Town Clerk, or a
hearing officer appointed by said Clerk, and may present either in
person or by counsel any evidence he or she may have to refute the
allegation contained in the citation. At such hearing, the Clerk or
hearing officer shall make a determination as to facts of the allegation,
and said determination shall be final regarding the informal disposition
process.
B.
3. Editor’s Note: Former § 11-13, Reward for killing dog, as amended, was repealed
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 20.
§ 11-12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 11-17
10:27
of the informal process or desires to contest the decision of the Clerk or
hearing officer, he or she may avail himself or herself of the procedures
established in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2 of the Code of the Town
of Chelmsford. In either of the above cases, or if the owner or keeper of
a dog fails to respond to the citation within 21 days, the Town Clerk shall
forward a copy of the citation to the District Court, where it shall be handled
under the provisions of Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2 of the Code of
the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 11-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-16-2006 ATM by
Art. 14; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 20]
The following penalties shall apply for violations of Chapter 11. Any person
who violates this section shall be subject to payment of the following fines:
Section Violation Penalty
11-3 Non-current dog license $50
11-3A(1) Non-current rabies vaccination $25
11-3A(2) Not wearing tag $50
11-4D Failure to maintain kennel in
sanitary and humane manner
$50
11-7-2 Barking dog $25
11-7-3 Failure to remove animal waste
First offense in a calendar year $50
Second offense in a calendar year $75
Third and subsequent offenses in a
calendar year
$125
11-7-1 Running at large
(1) Informal disposition
process:
(a) First offense in a
calendar year
$50
(b) Second offense in a
calendar year
$75
(c) Third and
subsequent
offenses in a
calendar year
$125
(2) Non-criminal disposition
(a) First offense in a
calendar year
$75
(b) Second offense in a
calendar year
$150
§ 11-17 CHELMSFORD CODE § 11-18
10:28
Section Violation Penalty
(c) Third and
subsequent
offenses in a
calendar year
$200
All other sections of Article 11 $100
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 11-19. Anti-rabic vaccine and treatment.4
The Board of Health shall, upon application, furnish free of charge to any
resident who has been exposed to rabies or may have been so exposed
anti-rabic vaccine and anti-rabic treatment, in accordance with rules and
regulations which the Department of Public Health is authorized to make.
Any resident shall have the right to select his or her own physician, who
shall be paid by the Town at a rate established by the Board of Health,
and the fact that a physician is a member of the Board of Health shall
not disqualify him or her from being so selected and from being paid by
the Town for his or her services. Reimbursement for the cost of furnishing
vaccine and treatment, not exceeding $50 in the case of any one person,
shall be made from the Dog Fund.
§ 11-20. List of dog owners. [Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 20]
Persons authorized or directed by MGL c. 51, § 4, or by any special law to
make lists of persons three years of age or older shall make a list of all dogs
owned by the inhabitants of the Town at the time of making lists required
under such section and return the same in duplicate to the Town Clerk on
or before April 1. An owner or keeper of a dog who refuses to answer or
answers falsely to persons directed or authorized to make a list of owners
of dogs shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20.
§ 11-21. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
The provisions of the following sections of Chapter 140 of Massachusetts
General Laws shall be incorporated into and apply to this article: §§ 145B,
149, 155, 155A, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161A, 168, 174A, 174B and 174D.5
§ 11-22. Severability.
If any part, section or provision of this article is found to be invalid, the
remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby.
{END OF CHAPTER}
4. Editor's Note: Former § 11-19, Dog Fund, as amended, was repealed 10-16-2006 ATM by
Art. 14. This enactment also renumbered former §§ 11-20 through 11-23 as §§ 11-19
through 11-22, respectively.
5. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 23, Effective implementation date of this article, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 35.
§ 11-18 AMUSEMENT DEVICES, AUTOMATIC § 11-22
10:29
Chapter 12
ANNUAL REPORT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town Meeting — See Ch. 154.
§ 12-1. Time frame for printing.
The Town shall provide for the printing of the annual report pursuant to
M.G.L. c. 40, § 49, on a fiscal-year basis within 90 days of the close of the
fiscal year.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 16
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District — See Ch. 68.
§ 16-1. Permit required.
No building shall be demolished in whole or in part in the Town of
Chelmsford without a permit from the Building Inspector.
§ 16-2. Procedure; delay; alternatives; emergencies; violations and
penalties. [Amended 10-20-2008 ATM by Art. 14]
Intent and purpose; definition.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to preserve and protect
from demolition historically significant buildings and structures
which reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural,
political, economic, and/or social history of the Town; to encourage
owners of such buildings or structures to explore and develop
alternatives to such demolition; to seek out persons or entities who
might be willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such
buildings or structures rather than demolish them; and thereby
to preserve the historic resources of the Town, and to make the
Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live, and so
promote the general welfare.
(1)
For purposes of the chapter, the term "demolition" shall mean
any act of pulling down, destroying, moving, removing or razing a
(2)
A.
§ 11-22 CHELMSFORD CODE § 16-2
12:30
building or structure or any portion thereof, including destruction
through willful neglect or arson.
Procedure.
Notice of intent to demolish: No demolition permit shall be issued
for any building or structure that was constructed 75 or more
years prior to the year of the application, other than in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. The property owner shall first
file an application for a demolition permit with the Inspector of
Buildings, and the Inspector of Buildings shall forward a copy of
such application within one week to the Historical Commission,
the Board of Selectmen, and the Planning Board. The application
shall be reviewed by the Historical Commission at its next regular
meeting. Such application shall be in the form provided and
established by the Inspector of Buildings in consultation with the
Historical Commission and shall include a copy of the demolition
plan, a description of the building or structure to be demolished,
the reasons for the demolition and the proposed reuse of the
property, including a written description or concept plan describing
the proposed reuse. If the property owner is unable to specify the
exact age of the building or structure, the application shall so state,
and shall set forth the best-known estimate of age and the basis for
such estimate.
(1)
Determination of significance: A building or structure which was
constructed 75 or more years prior to the year of the application
may be deemed to be significant if the Historical Commission, at a
public meeting, finds that the building or structure is significant to
the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of
the Town.
(2)
Nonapplicability: Upon determination by the Historical
Commission that the building or structure is not historically
significant, the Historical Commission shall submit a negative
finding to the property owner, and a copy thereof shall be furnished
to the Inspector of Buildings. Upon receipt of such notification, or
after the expiration of 120 days from the date of submission of the
demolition application to the Historical Commission, the Inspector
of Buildings may issue the demolition permit.
(3)
B.
Public hearing. Unless the Historical Commission has determined that
the building or structure is not historically significant, the Historical
Commission shall hold a public hearing to determine if the building
or structure is "preferably preserved." The Historical Commission shall
hold a public hearing within 60 days from the date of submission of the
demolition application to the Commission. The date of submission shall
be the date the application is received at a meeting of the Commission.
Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as described in MGL c.
40A, § 11. The Historical Commission, at the expense of the owner, shall
complete the newspaper publication and abutter notification. Within 30
C.
§ 16-2 ANNUAL REPORT § 16-2
12:31
days of the close of the public hearing, the Historical Commission shall
make one of the following determinations:
Preferably preserved: If the proposed demolition would be
detrimental to the architectural, cultural, political, economic or
social heritage or resources of the Town, then such building or
structure shall be considered preferably preserved.
(1)
Not preferably preserved: If the Commission finds that the building
or structure is not preferably preserved, or where less than a
complete demolition is being proposed, that the work to be done
will not materially diminish its historical significance, the Inspector
of Buildings may thereafter allow demolition in accordance with
applicable law. The failure of the Historical Commission to issue its
written determination within 30 days after the close of the hearing
shall be deemed to constitute a determination that the building or
structure is not considered preferably preserved.
(2)
Delay of demolition. If the Historical Commission determines that the
building or structure is preferably preserved, it may impose a
demolition delay of up to 12 months from the date of such
determination. Written notice of its determination and the period of
delay imposed shall be mailed promptly to the property owner, and
a copy thereof shall be furnished to the Inspector of Buildings, who
shall not issue a demolition permit during the period specified therein.
However, such permit may be issued prior to the end of such period if
the Historical Commission notifies the Inspector of Buildings that the
property owner: (i) has made a bona fide, reasonable and unsuccessful
effort to locate a purchaser for the building or structure who has agreed
to preserve, rehabilitate, restore or relocate same, or (ii) has agreed to
alternatives to demolition set forth in Subsection E.
D.
Alternatives to demolition. If the Historical Commission imposes a
demolition delay as set forth in Subsection D and/or if alternatives
to demolition are developed in or after the public hearing which are
acceptable to the owner, then the Historical Commission is hereby
empowered, in its discretion, to enter into an agreement with such
owner providing for such alternatives and a time period for
implementation of same. A copy of said agreement shall be filed with
the Inspector of Buildings and any other applicable Town department,
board or commission and thereafter no work shall be done on the
building or structure except in accordance with the terms of said
agreement unless and until a new application for a demolition permit is
filed and processed hereunder.
E.
Expiration of demolition delay. At the end of any period of demolition
delay as set forth in this chapter, including any alternatives agreed
upon pursuant to Subsection E, the Historical Commission shall notify
the Inspector of Buildings the period of delay has expired, and the
property owner shall be entitled to apply for all necessary demolition
F.
§ 16-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 16-2
12:32
§ 16-3. (Reserved)6
{END OF CHAPTER}
permits to allow the work to go forward as set forth in the demolition
permit, and pursuant to applicable law.
Emergency demolition. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or prevent
the Inspector of Buildings from ordering the immediate demolition
of any building or structure that is determined to be imminently
dangerous or unsafe to the public. The Inspector of Buildings shall file
a copy of any such order of emergency demolition with the Historical
Commission.
G.
Enforcement and remedies.
Enforcement: The Inspector of Buildings shall have the authority to
enforce this chapter in the manner described in § 195-100 of the
Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
Issuance of building permits: No building permit shall be issued
or be valid for any parcel or premises upon which an historically
significant building or structure, or property has been demolished
by an intentional or grossly negligent violation of this chapter, for a
period of up to three years after a completion of such demolition.
(2)
Multiple remedies: The remedies and enforcement procedures set
forth in this section may be applied separately or in conjunction
with one another.
(3)
H.
Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not more than $300 for each offense. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
I.
Request for enforcement. If the Inspector of Buildings is requested in
writing to enforce this chapter against any person allegedly in violation
of the same, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such
enforcement of any action or refusal to act, and the reasons therefor,
within 14 days of receipt of such request.
J.
Historic Districts Act. If any of the provisions of this chapter shall
conflict with the Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, the state statute
shall prevail.
K.
Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall
not render invalid any other section or provision of this chapter.
L.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 16-3, Violations and penalties, was repealed 4-25-2005 ATM by
Art. 21. See now § 16-2I.
§ 16-2 ANNUAL REPORT § 16-3
12:33
Chapter 19
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 20. Historic District — See Ch. 68.
§ 19-1. Establishment; appointment of members; membership;
terms of office.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee,
consisting of nine voting members, pursuant to the provisions of MGL c.
44B, § 5. The composition of the Committee, the appointing authority and
the terms of office for the Committee members shall be as follows
Membership.
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the
Commission;
(1)
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the
Commission;
(2)
(3) One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board;
The Public Works Director, whose responsibilities include the
duties of the Board of Park Commissioners, established under MGL
c. 45, § 2, or his designee;
(4)
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the
Authority;
(5)
(6) The Community Development Director;
One member of the Board of Selectmen, as designated by the Board
of Selectmen;
(7)
Two citizens of the Town of Chelmsford, to be appointed by the
Town Manager, who are neither a municipal employee of the Town
or an elected or appointed Town official, except that they may be
Town Meeting members.
(8)
A.
Each member of the Committee shall serve for a term of three years
or until the person no longer serves in the position or on the board or
committee as set forth above, whichever is earlier.
B.
Should any of the officers. and commissions, boards or committees
listed in this section no longer be in existence for whatever reason, the
Town Manager shall appoint a suitable person to serve in his or her
place.
C.
§ 16-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 19-1
19:34
§ 19-2. Duties.
§ 19-3. Conduct of meetings; approval of actions; cost estimates.
Any member of the Committee may be removed for cause by his or her
respective appointing authority after hearing.
D.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing municipal
boards, including the Conservation Commission, the Historical
Commission, the Planning Board, the Department of Public Works,
and the Housing Authority, or persons acting in those capacities or
performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study,
the Committee shall hold one annual public informational hearing, or
more, at its discretion, on the needs, possibilities and resources of the
Town regarding community preservation possibilities and resources,
notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two
weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
A.
The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations
to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of
open space, for the acquisition and preservation of historic resources,
for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational
use, for the creation, preservation and support of community housing
and for rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic
resources, land for recreational use and community housing that is
acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to
community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall
recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
B.
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendation to the Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside
for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with
community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that
specific purpose or to set aside for later spending funds for general
purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
C.
In every fiscal year, the Community Preservation Committee must
recommend either that the legislative body spend or set aside for later
spending not less than 10% of the annual revenues in the Community
Preservation Fund for:
(1) Open space (not including land for recreational use);
(2) Historic resources; and
(3) Community housing.
D.
§ 19-1 COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE § 19-3
19:35
§ 19-4. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the
Town Meeting, consistent with the provisions of MGL c. 44B.
§ 19-5. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section,
paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 19-6. When effective.
Provided that the Community Preservation Act, MGL c. 44B, is accepted at
the 2001 Annual Town election,7 this chapter shall take effect upon approval
by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth and after all requirements
of MGL c. 40, § 32, have been met. Each appointing authority shall have 30
days after approval by the Attorney General to make its appointments.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 20
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
ENERGY CONSERVATION: STRETCH ENERGY CODE
§ 25-1. Adoption.
The Town of Chelmsford has adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 120.AA
(i.e., Appendix 120.AA of the State Building Code or the "Stretch Energy
The Community Preservation Committee shall comply with the
provisions of the Open Meeting Law, MGL c. 39, § 23B. The Committee
shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a majority
of the members of the Community Preservation Committee.
A.
At the first meeting in each fiscal year, a chairman of the Community
Preservation Committee shall be elected by a majority vote.
B.
The Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by
majority vote.
C.
Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include the Committee's
anticipated costs.
D.
7. Editor's Note: The Community Preservation Act was accepted 2-26-2001 STM by Art. 1.
§ 19-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 25-1
19:36
Code"),8 as may be amended from time to time, in place of the provisions
set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00 and 93.00.
§ 25-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with
a more energy-efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set
forth under the State Building Code.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 29
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 29-1. Applicability.
This chapter governs all municipal employees. A municipal employee is a
person performing services for or holding an office, position, employment
or membership in a municipal agency, whether by election, appointment,
contract of hire or engagement, whether serving with or without
compensation, on a full, regular, part-time, intermittent or consulting basis,
but excluding elected members of a Town Meeting and members of a
charter commission established under Article LXXXIX (89) of the
amendments to the Constitution.
§ 29-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that municipal employees'
private financial interests and personal relationships do not conflict
with their public obligation to act objectively and with integrity. This
chapter is written to prevent municipal employees from becoming
involved in a situation which could result in or give the appearance
of unethical or illegal behavior. This chapter restricts what municipal
employees may do on the job, after hours and after leaving public
service.
A.
It is essential for the continued well-being of the Town of Chelmsford
that its citizens have full confidence in the integrity of its municipal
employees. The Town of Chelmsford desires to promote such
confidence by demanding the highest standards of ethical conduct
for each municipal employee. It is required that municipal employees
conduct themselves in such a way that their behavior, both in practice
and appearance, conforms to the highest standards of ethical conduct.
The Town of Chelmsford recognizes the Massachusetts Conflict of
Interest Law (MGL c. 268A) as the basis for setting the minimum
standard of ethical conduct for all municipal employees. It is considered
an integral component of this chapter and should be read in its entirety.
B.
8. Editor's Note: See now 780 CMR 115.AA (Massachusetts State Building Code, 8th edition).
§ 25-1 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-3
29:37
§ 29-3. Conduct of municipal employees.
This chapter provides that municipal employees for the Town of Chelmsford
will "pay their own way." Municipal employees must avoid conduct which
creates the impression that they will act with bias.
Municipal employees shall not engage in the most obvious kind of
corruption: bribery. Massachusetts law imposes criminal penalties, not
only on municipal employees who seek or receive payoffs or kickbacks
but also on anyone who bribes or attempts to bribe a public official for
any action or inaction.
A.
Municipal employees shall not request, accept or offer anything of
substantial value from or to anyone with whom the municipal employee
has had or is likely to have official dealings even if the motivation
for the gift is to express gratitude for a job well done or to foster
goodwill. The Town of Chelmsford deems "substantial value" to be $50
or more in any calendar year. Substantial value includes but is not
limited to additional compensation, waived fees, sporting event tickets,
golf outings, parties, meals, discounts, gift certificates, entertainment
and refreshments at testimonials, retirement functions and groundbreaking
and dedication ceremonies. Free or discounted services, such
as construction or accounting work, are considered gifts. The purchase
of property at less than full market value from any entity having matters
before any town board or agency is strictly prohibited.
B.
Municipal employees shall not solicit contributions, sell tickets or
otherwise seek or accept payment for a testimonial or retirement
function, or any function having a similar purpose, held for themselves,
for a member of their immediate family or another employee if the
contributor is a person or entity doing business with the Town of
Chelmsford and the admission price or payment exceeds the actual perperson
cost of the food and beverages served at the function. Municipal
employees shall not request or require any person or entity to sponsor
or contribute to any ground-breaking ceremony, dedication ceremony
or similar occasion. The Town of Chelmsford, if it deems the occasion
appropriate, shall plan and pay for the ceremony.
C.
Municipal employees shall not accept reimbursement for travel
expenses from any person or entity having business with or wishing
to do business with the Town of Chelmsford and with whom or with
which the municipal employee had or is likely to have official dealings.
Municipal employees shall not utilize private aircraft for travel,
whether business or pleasure, that is owned, leased or rented by
entities doing business with or wishing to do business with the Town of
Chelmsford and with which the municipal employee has had or is likely
to have official dealings. Travel expenses for municipal employees for
municipal business shall be paid by the town.
D.
Municipal employees shall not use the nonbusiness facilities of entities
having financial contracts with or wishing to have financial contracts
E.
§ 29-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 29-3
29:38
with the Town of Chelmsford and with which the municipal employee
has had or is likely to have official dealings. This includes but is not
limited to staying at vacation spots, lodges or condominiums.
Conflicts of interest.
Municipal employees are prohibited from taking action on any
"particular matter" as defined in MGL c. 268A which would affect
their own financial interest or the financial interest of:
Their immediate family (themselves, their spouse, children,
parents, brothers and sisters);
(a)
(b) Their partner(s);
A business organization in which they serve as an officer,
director, trustee, partner, silent partner or employee (including
a nonprofit organization); and
(c)
Any person or organization with whom or which they are
negotiating or have any arrangement concerning future
employment.
(d)
(1)
An exception is available to appointed municipal employees who
may act on a matter in which they, their family or their business
has a financial stake, provided that they receive written permission
from their appointing official prior to taking the action.
(2)
F.
Municipal employees shall not participate in any way in the hiring,
promotion, performance review or salary recommendation of any
immediate family member. An exception is available to appointed
municipal employees who may act on a budget affecting an immediate
family member's financial interest, provided that they receive written
permission from their appointing official prior to taking the action.
G.
Municipal employees shall not use their position to benefit from
municipal contracts and must avoid conduct which creates the public
perception that municipal employees have an inside track on obtaining
municipal contracts or jobs.
H.
Municipal employees shall not use or attempt to use their municipal
position to obtain unwarranted privileges for themselves or anyone
else. Municipal employees shall avoid conduct which creates the
impression that they can be improperly influenced or that they will
act with bias. Municipal employees are prohibited from misusing
confidential information obtained on the job and from accepting outside
employment which is inherently incompatible with their public position.
I.
Municipal employees shall not act as agent or attorney for a private
party before the town. There are exceptions which are covered under
MGL c. 268A, § 17.
J.
§ 29-3 ETHICS, CODE OF § 29-3
29:39
§ 29-4. Responsibilities of appointing authority.
Appointing authorities shall appoint only those persons who do not have
vested interests in any matter coming before that person's appointed body
which would violate or give the appearance of violating the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 29-5. Implementation.
All municipal employees are required to be familiar with the standards of
this chapter. A procedure for the proper orientation of each individual is
hereby established:
§ 29-6. Reports; violations and penalties.
Former municipal employees shall not derive unfair advantage by
misusing friendships formed or confidential information obtained while
serving the town.
K.
Municipal employees shall not use town property of any kind, either
directly or indirectly, for other than officially sanctioned activities,
except to the extent that said property is available to the public.
L.
The Town Manager and Superintendent of Schools shall jointly develop
a program to annually inform and educate all municipal employees
of the required standards of conduct. The Town Manager and the
Superintendent of Schools shall develop a program to inform and
educate all incoming municipal employees of said standards of conduct.
They shall include in their program, as a minimum, a procedure that
will produce for the town's records a signed document from each
municipal employee indicating that each individual has read this
chapter and is familiar with the requirements of MGL c. 268A.
A.
The Town Manager shall place the State Ethics Commission publication
entitled "A Practical Guide to the Conflict of Interest Law for Municipal
Employees" conspicuously in the Town Manager's and Town Clerk's
office and shall provide copies for placement in all public buildings for
the benefit of employees and the public.
B.
All citizens and municipal employees shall regularly be made aware
that if they believe a violation of this chapter has occurred or is
occurring, they should call or visit the State Ethics Commission's
enforcement staff, or they may speak with the Town Manager or the
Superintendent of Schools.
C.
The Town Manager and the Superintendent of Schools shall report
to the State Ethics Commission any suspected violations of the State
Conflict of Interest Law. The Town Manager and the Superintendent of
Schools shall report annually to their respective boards the educational
initiatives they have taken to comply with this chapter. They shall also
A.
§ 29-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 29-6
29:40
§ 29-7. Severability.
If any provisions of this chapter shall be held to be invalid, the validity of
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 35
FINANCE
§ 35-1. Annual budget process.
The Town Manager shall submit to the Finance Committee a proposed
budget and capital improvement program for the ensuing fiscal year with
an accompanying budget message and supporting documents as set forth in
Section 6-2 of the Chelmsford Home Rule Charter at least 90 days prior to
the spring session of the Annual Town Meeting.
§ 35-2. Fees.
§ 35-3. Collective bargaining items.
Any budget item presented at any Annual or Special Town Meeting for
salaries or the payment of any benefit or expense that is the subject of
collective bargaining shall accurately reflect the most recently negotiated
or agreed payment and shall not be inflated to reflect anticipated negotiated
contractual amounts.
§ 35-4. Capital Planning Committee. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by
Art. 31]
A committee to be known as the "Capital Planning Committee" shall be
established and shall be composed of the following Committee members:
the Town Accountant (nonvoting member), the Town Treasurer-Collector,
one member designated by the School Committee, one member designated
report the status of alleged violations brought to their attention, which
report shall only be statistical in nature.
When a violation of this chapter has occurred, administrative action as
is warranted shall be taken by the appropriate authority.
B.
All fees received by the Town Clerk and Town Treasurer-Collector by
virtue of their office shall be paid into the Town Treasury. [Amended
10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 31]
A.
The Town Clerk may, pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F, set fees and charges
for all items specified under MGL c. 262, § 34. The schedule of such fees
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the Town Clerk.
[Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 17]
B.
§ 29-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 35-4
29:41
by the Finance Committee, one member designated by the Board of Library
Trustees and two citizens of the Town of Chelmsford to be appointed by the
Board of Selectmen who are neither a municipal employee of the town nor
an elected or appointed town official, except that they may be Town Meeting
members. The Committee shall study proposed capital outlays having a
useful life of at least one year or the acquisition of land. The Committee
shall promulgate rules and regulations, make such investigations and hold
public hearings as it deems appropriate.
§ 35-5. Presentation of five-year forecast. [Added 4-24-2006 ATM by
Art. 23]
At the first session of the Fall Annual Town Meeting, the Town Manager
shall make an oral and visual presentation of the five-year financial forecast
that is required to be prepared annually under Section 6-4 of the Town
Charter. The Town Manager's presentation shall include an explanation of
the process used to develop the current fiscal year budget and the basis for
five-year financial projections.
§ 35-6. Departmental revolving funds. [Added 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 15]
Purpose. This section establishes and authorizes revolving funds for
use by Town departments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in
connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate
fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses
of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established
under and governed by MGL c. 44, § 53E1/2.
A.
Expenditure limitations. A department or agency head, board, or
committee or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies
from a revolving fund established and authorized by this section
without appropriation subject to the following limitations:
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are
paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
(1)
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of
the fund.
(2)
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the
amount authorized by Annual Town Meeting on or before July 1 of
that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that
is later approved during that fiscal year by the Board of Selectmen
and Finance Committee.
(3)
B.
Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund
established by this section shall be credited to the general fund.
C.
Procedures and reports. Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E1/2, and
this section, the laws, Charter provisions, bylaws, rules, regulations,
policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of Town
D.
§ 35-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 35-6
29:42
monies and the expenditure and payment of Town funds shall apply to
the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this section.
The Town Accountant shall include a statement on the collections
credited to the fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to
each fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular
report the Town Accountant provides the department, board,
committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
Authorized revolving funds. The table establishes:
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a Town department,
board, committee, agency or officer;
(1)
The department or agency head, board, committee or officer
authorized to spend from the fund;
(2)
The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with
the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall
be credited to each fund by the Town Accountant;
(3)
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may
be used;
(4)
(5) Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
(6) Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this section.
A B C D E F G
Revolving
Fund
Department,
Board,
Committee,
Agency, or
Officer
Authorized
to Spend
from Fund
Fees,
Charges
or Other
Receipts
Credited
to Fund
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from
Fund
Other
Requirements/
Reports
Ficscal
Years
Dog Pound
and
Licensing
Town Clerk Fees from
rabies
clinic,
pound and
adoption of
dogs
Improvement
of the dog
pound and
expenses for
licensing of
animals
FY 19 and
subsequent
years
Senior
Citizen Trip
Program
Council on
Aging
Fees
charged for
trips
Payment of
transportation
for
senior
citizen trips
FY 19 and
subsequent
years
(7)
E.
§ 35-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 35-6
29:43
Chapter 39
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
A B C D E F G
Revolving
Fund
Department,
Board,
Committee,
Agency, or
Officer
Authorized
to Spend
from Fund
Fees,
Charges
or Other
Receipts
Credited
to Fund
Program or
Activity
Expenses
Payable
from Fund
Restrictions
or
Conditions
on
Expenses
Payable
from
Fund
Other
Requirements/
Reports
Ficscal
Years
Senior
Citizen
Respite
Care
Program
Council on
Aging
Fees
charged for
the care of
seniors in
the
program
Payment of
personnel
and
expenses for
the adult
day-care
program
FY 19 and
subsequent
years
Police
Cruiser
Police
Department
Revenue
from the
sale of
used police
vehicles
Purchase of
communications
equipment
for newly
acquired
police
cruisers
FY 19 and
subsequent
years
Fire Safety
Equipment
Fire
Department
Revenue
from the
sale of
used fire
vehicles
Purchase of
life safety
equipment
for
firefighters
FY 19 and
subsequent
years
Weights
and
Measures
Inspections
Department
Fees for
the Sealer
of Weights
and
Measures
Inspections
Personnel
and
expenses
related to
the
inspections
under the
Sealer of
Weights and
Measures
program
FY 19 and
subsequent
years
{END OF CHAPTER}
§ 35-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 39-1
39:44
§ 39-1. Discharge on public or private property. [Amended 5-9-1974
ATM by Art. 42]
No person shall fire or discharge any firearms or explosives of any kind
within the limits of any highway, park or other public property, except with
the possession of written permission of the Board of Selectmen, or on any
private property, except with the possession of written consent of the owner
or legal occupant thereof; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to the lawful defense of life or property nor to any law enforcement
officer acting in the discharge of his or her duties. Any person violating this
section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50 for each offense.
§ 39-2. Storage of explosives. [Added 1954 ATM by Art. 105;
amended 1955 ATM by Art. 36]
Chapter 42
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Explosives — See Ch. 39. Hazardous materials — See Ch. 63.
§ 42-1. Purpose.
The following chapter is intended to provide the Fire Department with
authority to monitor and enforce fire safety and prevention measures within
the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 42-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM — Any notification made to the Fire Department that a situation
exists or may exist that requires a response.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall include in his or her annual
report and cause to be published in the Town Annual Report the
following information: amount of explosives, of all classes, stored in
magazines in the Town of Chelmsford.
A.
No person or corporation may store explosives in excess of 1,000
pounds unless the entire premises where the explosives are stored
shall be enclosed by a sufficient fence capable of keeping unauthorized
persons from said premises and sufficiently fireproof in construction
to prevent grass or brush fires entering such premises. [Added 1967
ATM by Art. 50; amended 1971 ATM by Art. 63]
{END OF CHAPTER}
B.
§ 39-1 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 42-2
39:45
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A combination of compatible initiating devices,
control panels and indicating appliances designed and installed to provide
an alarm signal in the event of a fire.
GARAGE — Any building wherein is kept or stored one or more motor
vehicles, including but not limited to a public or private garage, carport,
motor vehicle repair shop or paint shop, service station, lubritorium or any
building used for similar purposes.
MASTER BOX — A municipal fire alarm box that may also be operated by
remote means.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling that contains three or more living
quarters, including but not limited to hotels, motels, dormitories,
apartments, condominiums, lodging houses, boardinghouses and care
facilities.
SERVICE STATION — Any building or premises wherein or upon which
gasoline or other motor fuel is sold at retail.
SETBACK — The distance from a public or private way to the front of a
given building. A parking lot shall not be considered a public or private way
for purposes of this chapter.
STREET BOX — A municipal fire alarm box that is operated manually.
UNINTENTIONAL FIRE ALARM — An alarm caused by any of the following:
§ 42-3. Street numbers.
RESIDENTIAL GARAGE — A private building, or part thereof, having
a capacity of not more than three motor vehicles when not used for
commercial repair or servicing operations.
A.
SPECIAL GARAGE — A special structure limited in use to the parking
of motor vehicles.
B.
FULL SELF-SERVICE FACILITY — A service station where all the
pumps are self-service.
A.
SELF-SERVICE-TYPE BUSINESS — That type of business wherein the
licensed motor vehicle operator dispenses his or her own motor fuel.
B.
SPLIT-ISLAND FACILITY — A motor fuel dispensing installation where
part of the facility is used as self-service and part is used for attendant
service.
C.
A. Inadequate or improper maintenance of a private fire alarm system;
Working on or tampering with a fire alarm system without giving proper
notification to the Fire Department; or
B.
Failure to control dust, steam, smoke or other materials causing an
alarm.
C.
§ 42-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 42-3
39:46
§ 42-4. Owner/manager information.
The Board of Selectmen or its designee may determine and designate
numbers for all buildings abutting upon or adjacent to public and
private ways.
A.
No person shall neglect or refuse to affix on any building owned by him
or her the street number designated for him or her by said Board or its
designee, nor shall any person affix or suffer to remain on any building
owned or occupied by him or her a street number other than the one
designated by said Board or its designee.
B.
All numbers shall comply with the following schedule:
Setback*
(feet)
Minimum Number Size
(inches)
0 to 50 3
51 to 100 4
Greater than 100 6
NOTES:
*Defined in § 42-2.
C.
Street numbers shall be affixed in locations approved by the Fire Chief
or his or her designee, and where possible the following locations shall
be mandatory:
If a setback is less than 200 feet, the number shall be placed near
the front or main door of the building, provided that the door is
visible from a public or private way.
(1)
If a setback is greater than 200 feet or if the main or front door is
not visible from the public or private way, the street numbers must
be affixed to a sign posted near the driveway or entrance to the
property in such a manner so that the sign is visible year-round.
(2)
D.
If several occupancies share a single address, each doorway shall be
numbered with a street number and unit number. The unit number shall
include all units served by the marked doorway. The street numbers
shall comply with the schedule outlined in Subsection C, and in all cases
the unit numbers shall be two inches or higher.
E.
Street numbers shall be a color that contrasts with the background
upon which they are mounted. If a signboard is used for a background
it shall be a minimum of one square foot per digit. Street numbers may
be attached to a curbside delivery mailbox, provided that the mailbox
is located adjacent to the delivery driveway that accesses the property.
The numbers shall be three inches high on both sides of the mailbox.
[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 37]
F.
§ 42-3 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 42-4
39:47
§ 42-5. Master box or street box.
§ 42-6. Alarm installation; permit requirements; sprinkler systems
in general. [Amended 4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 28]
An owner of a multiple dwelling who does not reside therein and who
does not employ a manager or agent for such dwelling who resides
therein shall post and maintain or cause to be posted or maintained on
such dwelling, adjacent to the mailboxes for such dwelling or on the
exterior of such dwelling in a location visible to the public, a notice, not
less than 20 square inches in size, bearing his or her name, address and
telephone number or the name, address and telephone number of such
manager or agent.
A.
The owner of said multiple dwelling shall submit annually before
January 31 the address of the dwelling, the name of the dwelling, if
any, the name of the trust, association or organization, if any, which
manages or owns the dwelling and the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all owners and managers. Such information shall be
provided in a form approved by the Fire Department.
B.
Any owner of property applying for a tie-in to the municipal fire alarm
system shall first obtain a permit, on a form provided by the Fire
Department, prior to the installation of a master box or street box as
those terms are defined in § 42-2. The fee for each tie-in permit shall
be set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by
Art. 18]
A.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for
each offense. Each day that any violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
B.
The installation of all required or nonrequired fire protection systems,
fire alarm systems, the master box or any other transmitting device,
including modifications, alterations, additions or deletions to an
existing fire protection system, the master box or other transmitting
device, shall be governed by the provisions of MGL c. 148, the then
current edition of the State Building Code pursuant to 780 CMR,
including, without limitation, 780 CMR 9.00 et seq., entitled "Fire
Protection and Life Systems," the reference standards cited at 780 CMR
35.00 et seq., the Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention Regulations
cited at 527 CMR 24.00 et seq., entitled "Fire Warning Systems
Installed in Buildings Within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,"
and the appropriate sections of the then current editions of the
following National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") Standards:
NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code; NFPA 1221, Standards for the
Installation, Maintenance and Use of Emergency Services
Communications Systems; NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, and all
reference documents contained within said codes and any related rules
and regulations of the Town of Chelmsford Fire Department. All such
A.
§ 42-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 42-6
39:48
fire alarm systems shall be supervised in accordance with the then
current provisions of 780 CMR 907.14.
All new and existing buildings with sprinkler systems shall be
connected to the municipal fire alarm system via a master box
connection or shall use such fire alarm system which is supervised
utilizing any of the methods prescribed by 780 CMR 907.14 which is
obtained by contract with a private alarm company of the building
owner's choice for the purchase, lease, installation, maintenance and
servicing of such supervised fire alarm system at such buildings.
B.
As of the effective date of this bylaw, any property owner and/or
building owner must first obtain a permit, on a form provided by
the Fire Department, prior to installation of any fire alarm system or
equipment designed to summon the Fire Department, including the
master box or other transmitting device. The issuance of permits shall
be in compliance with MGL c. 148, § 10A. An application for any permits
shall also be accompanied by the following information:
The name, address and telephone number of the alarm user who
will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper
maintenance and operation of the fire alarm system and the
payment of fees assessed under this bylaw.
(1)
Signed certification from the alarm user and the user's designated
alarm business charged with selling, leasing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or
monitoring a fire alarm system at a building or property, stating:
The date of installation, conversion or takeover of the fire
alarm system, whichever is applicable;
(a)
The name, address, phone number, Massachusetts Alarm
Installation license number and the Massachusetts
Department of Public Safety registration number of the alarm
business performing the fire alarm system installation,
conversion or fire alarm system takeover and responsible for
providing repair service to the fire alarm system;
(b)
The name, address and phone number of the alarm business
monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing
alarm business;
(c)
That a set of written operating instructions for the fire alarm
system, including written guidelines on how to avoid
unintentional fire alarms, has been provided to the alarm user
by the alarm business; and
(d)
That the alarm business has trained the alarm user in proper
use of the fire alarm system, including instruction on to avoid
unintentional fire alarms;
(e)
(2)
C.
§ 42-6 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 42-6
39:49
§ 42-7. Unintentional fire alarms.
That the application shall contain the name, address and
telephone number of at least two other persons who are
authorized to respond to a signal transmitted by the fire alarm
system within 20 minutes under normal weather conditions
and who are authorized to gain access to the premises on
which the fire alarm system is installed;
(f)
Any other information that enhances the efficiency of
administering this bylaw.
(g)
The fire alarm system owner or user, or the alarm company contracting
for the servicing of the fire alarm system, shall be responsible for the
care and maintenance of the fire alarm system, the master box or other
transmitting device as required under this Chapter 42.
D.
The Fire Department will endeavor to insure the proper operation of
its alarm receiving equipment but accepts no liability for conditions
which prevent proper reception of signals from the fire alarm system
owner's or user's premises. Further, the Town of Chelmsford and its
departments, officers, agents and employees shall be under no
obligation whatsoever concerning the adequacy, operation or
maintenance of any supervised fire alarm system or alarm system
monitoring facilities of private contractors or within the Fire
Department.
E.
Whenever a fire alarm system or equipment is to be disconnected,
removed or altered, the owner or user shall notify the Fire Department
in accordance with the requirements of MGL c. 148, §§ 10A, 27A, and
28.
F.
No fire alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages or
signals directly to the Fire Department or through a dispatch center
for the Fire Department shall be worked on, tested or demonstrated
without first obtaining permission from the Fire Chief or his/her
designee in accordance with MGL c. 148, § 27A. An alarm transmitted
when such work is being performed without said permission will
constitute an unintentional fire alarm and shall be subject to the fines
assessment detailed in § 42-7.
G.
Any violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $200 for
each offense. Each day that any violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
H.
The owner of any building which has a fire alarm system shall only
be allowed three unintentional fire alarms, as that term is defined in
§ 42-2, per calendar year.
A.
After the third unintentional fire alarm the owner shall be fined $50 and
shall be fined $100 for each additional offense thereafter. Each day that
any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.9
B.
§ 42-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 42-8
39:50
§ 42-8. Rules and regulations.
The Fire Chief may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary to promulgate a
comprehensive fire safety code.
§ 42-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 42-10. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this chapter are severable, and if
any provisions of this chapter shall be declared unlawful by a valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.10
§ 42-11. Fire permits. [Added 10-29-1992 ATM by Art. 14]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Fire Chief or
his or her designee, and the Fire Chief shall, in addition to any other
remedy available, have full power to initiate noncriminal disposition
proceedings as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2 of the
Code of the Town of Chelmsford.
A.
Except for those sections specifying a greater penalty, any violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of $50. Each
day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
Permit for open burning.
A permit must be obtained through the Fire Department prior to
any open burning. Controlled fires for the sole purpose of cooking
are exempt.
(1)
The permit holder must follow the guidelines set forth in 310 CMR,
Department of Environmental Protection, which includes but is not
exclusive to the following:
Burning between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. only. Please note:
Fire must be completely extinguished by 4:00 p.m.
(a)
(b) Burning must be at least 75 feet from all dwellings.
Burning (with a permit) of the following is allowed: brush, cane
and forestry debris from other than commercial or industrial
land-clearing operations.
(c)
(2)
A.
9. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8, Operation of service stations, garages used for commercial
purposes, self-service stations including convenience stores, and Sec. 9, Tanks and
containers, which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted 10-21-1999 ATM by
Art. 37.
10.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 13, Transportation of flammable liquids by a cargo tank, which
immediately followed this section and was added 10-29-1992 ATM by Art. 14, was deleted
10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 37.
§ 42-8 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES § 42-11
39:51
Chapter 46
FORTUNE-TELLERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 81. Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 116.
§ 46-1. License required.
Burning of the following materials is prohibited: brush, trees,
cane and driftwood from commercial and/or institutional landclearing
operations, grass, hay, leaves, stumps and tires.
(d)
Stacking, placing or storing combustible materials such that
a prudent person would presume that it will be burned is
prohibited.
(e)
Permit holder must attend the fire until completely extinguished
and shall have available a water supply, such as pressurized water,
pump can or a garden-type hose of sufficient length to reach the
fire area. The fire must be completely extinguished before leaving
it unattended.
(3)
Violations. Any person who violates this section will be warned by a
written notice by the Fire Chief or his or her representative. A second
violation within any twelve-month period shall be punishable by a fine
of no more than $100 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
Severability. It is hereby declared that the provisions of this section
are severable, and if any provisions of this section shall be declared
unlawful by a valid judgment or decree of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this section.
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
No person shall tell fortunes for money unless a license therefor has
been granted by the Board of Selectmen.
A.
Licenses shall be granted only to applicants who have resided
continuously in the town for at least 12 months immediately preceding
the date of the application.
B.
C. Licenses issued under this chapter may not be transferred or assigned.
The fee for each license granted under this chapter shall be set
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art.
19]
D.
§ 42-11 CHELMSFORD CODE § 46-2
46:52
§ 46-2. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for each
offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 51
FUNDS
§ 46-2 FORTUNE-TELLERS § 46-2
46:53

ARTICLE I
Chelmsford Arts and Technology Education Fund
[Adopted 5-2-1996 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 51-1. Establishment; purpose. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
27]
The Town of Chelmsford Arts and Technology Education Fund is established
in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 60, § 3C, as amended by
Chapter 218 of the Acts of 2016, to provide supplemental educational
funding for local educational needs.
§ 51-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOCAL EDUCATIONAL NEEDS — The needs of those schools and students
that are under the jurisdiction of the local educational agency (LEA), which
is the Chelmsford public schools.
SUPPLEMENTAL EDUCATIONAL FUNDING — That which adds to,
enhances or continues the educational opportunities provided by the local
educational agency and funded by the Town of Chelmsford. Supplemental
funding will not take the place of funds requested in the Chelmsford School
Committee's annual budget request which support the essential curriculum
and programs of the Chelmsford public schools or be used to create new,
ongoing programs or reinstitute canceled programs that a future annual
budget of the Chelmsford public schools might be expected to support. All
requests for supplemental funding must support the mission and beliefs of
the Chelmsford public schools and be in accordance with Chelmsford School
Committee policy.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 27]
§ 51-3. Scope; title. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 27]
The Chelmsford Arts and Technology Education Fund will include the
subject areas concerning the liberal and fine arts and technology. Grant
requests shall be made through an application process for funding of
programs, events, supplies and/or equipment. (Funds are not intended for
stipends or salaries.) The Chelmsford Arts and Technology Education Fund
will be known hereafter and referred to as the "Chelmsford ATEF."
§ 51-4. Chelmsford ATEF Committee.
There will be established a Chelmsford ATEF Committee to administer
the Chelmsford ATEF and to authorize the expenditure of its funds.
A.
Members of the Chelmsford ATEF Committee will include the
Superintendent of Schools or his/her designee thereof, and eight
residents of the Town of Chelmsford that will include at least three
B.
§ 51-1 FORTUNE-TELLERS § 51-4
46:55
§ 51-5. Requests for funds. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 31;
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 27]
parents/grandparents/guardians of children presently enrolled in
Chelmsford public schools. [Amended 4-24-2006 ATM by Art. 26]
Appointment to three-year terms will be made in accordance with
the statute. Upon initial formation of the ATEF Committee, terms of
members will be arranged so that the terms of as nearly an equal
number of members as is possible shall expire each year.
C.
Meetings.
The Chelmsford ATEF Committee shall meet as many times as
deemed necessary and appropriate for the conduct of ATEF
Committee business. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 27]
(1)
Attendance at meetings of the Chelmsford ATEF Committee is
strongly encouraged. Absence from 50% of more of its meetings in
a given year will result in the dismissal of said appointment, and
there will be a new appointment for the remainder of the term.
(2)
A quorum for purposes of transacting business shall consist of five
members. Decisions will be based upon a vote of the majority of the
members present.
(3)
A Chairperson and a Secretary will be elected by the ATEF
Committee annually. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 27]
(4)
The Town Treasurer-Collector shall provide the ATEF Committee
with financial reports on the status of the Chelmsford ATEF.
[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 31; 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 27]
(5)
D.
Grant requests shall be presented in the format specified by the
Committee requesting funding from the Chelmsford ATEF. Applications
shall be available from January to March of each year. They shall be
postmarked or stamped no later than March 31 of the same year for
review by the ATEF Committee. The final awards shall be implemented
in the following fiscal year.
A.
Application for such funds may be made by a school council (as
established under MGL c. 71, § 59C) and by members of the
professional teaching staff employed by the Chelmsford public schools.
B.
The funds will be dispersed through the Town Treasurer-Collector after
the application, presentation and decision process have been
completed. The Chelmsford public schools shall create a budget line
item from which the approved funds may be withdrawn via proof of
purchase or purchase orders.
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
§ 51-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 51-5
46:56
Chapter 57
GRAFFITI
§ 57-1. Findings; duty of property owners.
Graffiti is hereby determined to constitute a public nuisance and be
injurious to neighborhood property and the public health, safety and
welfare. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation
owning any premises to permit, allow to remain or fail to remove any
unsightly condition commonly referred to as "graffiti."
§ 57-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized defacing, marring or damaging by the
spraying of paint or marking by paint, chalk, dye or similar substance on
any building, motor vehicle, bridge, rock, culvert, pole, sign or playground
which is in public view.
§ 57-3. Notice to remove.
Whenever the Chelmsford Police Department becomes aware of graffiti on
any structure or improvement within the town, it shall give notice to remove
any such graffiti therefrom. Such notice shall be sent registered mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of record in the Assessor's office and have
substantially the following form:
Notice to Remove Graffiti From Structure or Improvement To the
Owner Hereinafter Described
Your attention is hereby directed to the provisions of Chapter 57 of the
Code of the Town of Chelmsford, Massachusetts, on file in the office of the
Town Clerk in the town offices.
Pursuant to the provisions of said chapter, you are hereby notified that
graffiti exists on premises specifically described at
_____________________________ which injures neighboring property and the
public health, safety and welfare. You are therefore notified at once, and in
any such event within 30 days from the date of this notice, to remove said
unsightly conditions from the property and thereafter to keep said property
free therefrom.
{END OF CHAPTER}
§ 51-5 GRAFFITI § 57-3
57:57
Chapter 63
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 39.
Solid waste — See Ch. 137.
Waste automobile oil — See Ch. 201, Art. XII.
§ 57-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 57-3
63:58
ARTICLE I
Control and Management
[Adopted 5-3-1982 ATM by Art. 26]
§ 63-1. Purpose.
There are hereby adopted the following measures to provide adequate
safeguards from hazardous materials which pose substantial present or
potential hazards to public health, welfare and safety and to the
environment and to establish a program to provide for safe management of
all such hazardous materials.
§ 63-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 38]
In this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
DISPOSAL — The unlawful discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, incineration or placing of hazardous materials into or on any land
or water so that such hazardous materials or any constituent thereof may
enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any
waters, including groundwaters.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A substance, or combination of substances,
which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating
reversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, safety or welfare or to the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, used or disposed of or otherwise managed, however not
to include solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial
discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section 402
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1967, as amended, or source,
special nuclear or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954. Those substances considered to be hazardous materials shall
include but shall not be limited to substances considered to be toxic or
hazardous by the Division of Hazardous Waste of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts under the provision of MGL c. 21C.
STORAGE — The actual or intended containment of hazardous materials in
a safe manner so as to prevent unlawful disposal.
§ 63-3. Disposal prohibited.
The disposal of hazardous materials within the Town of Chelmsford is
hereby prohibited except at a hazardous waste disposal facility established
and maintained in accordance with applicable law. Occupancy of any
existing or new premises, other than residential dwellings, is hereby
prohibited except in conformance with the provisions of this article.
§ 63-4. Control standards.
§ 63-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 63-4
63:59
§ 63-5. Administration and enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Board of Health or
by a designated enforcement officer appointed annually by the Board of
Health.
All hazardous materials shall be properly stored within a building in
product-tight containers protected from corrosion, accidental damage
or vandalism and shall be used and handled in a manner which does not
constitute disposal. An inventory of such hazardous materials stored or
handled in quantities that could pose a present or potential hazard shall
be maintained and reconciled with purchase, use, sales and disposal
records at sufficient intervals to detect product loss. Subsurface fuel
and chemical storage facilities in compliance with Article II, Subsurface
Material Discharge and Fuel Storage, of this chapter and applicable
Massachusetts fire prevention regulations shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this standard.
A.
No hazardous materials shall be present in materials disposed on the
site. Waste materials composed in part or entirely of hazardous
materials shall be retained in product-tight containers for removal and
disposal by a hazardous waste licensee or as directed by the Board of
Health or its enforcement officer.
B.
Certificate of compliance.
New premises. Owners or occupants of new premises, other than
residential dwellings, for which a building permit is issued after the
effective date of this article shall obtain a certificate of compliance
prior to occupying the premises.
(1)
Existing premises. Owners or occupants of existing premises, other
than residential dwellings, shall obtain a certificate of compliance
before January 1, 1983, or upon any change in use or occupancy
requiring a certificate of use and occupancy under Section 119.0 of
the Massachusetts Building Code, whichever occurs first.
(2)
Requirements. The certificate of compliance shall be issued by the
Board of Health or by its enforcement officer upon demonstration
by the owner or occupant that the use and occupancy of the
premises are in conformance with the requirements of this article
or, in the case of existing premises not in compliance, shall specify
a compliance schedule which is reasonable with regard to the
public health threat involved and the difficulty of compliance.
(3)
A.
Compliance review. Application for an original certificate of compliance
shall be forwarded by the Board of Health or its enforcement officer
to the Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, Fire Department
and Water Department for determination that the proposed use meets
all control standards.
B.
§ 63-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 63-5
63:60
All information necessary to demonstrate compliance must be
submitted, including but not limited to the following:
A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels and other
potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the
premises in quantities that could pose a present or potential
hazard, accompanied by a description of measures to protect
from corrosion, accidental damage or vandalism, leakage or
any disposal, together with provisions to control any accidental
disposals; and
(a)
A description of hazardous materials to be generated,
indicating the type of storage and the method and place of
disposal.
(b)
(1)
Any information, record or particular part thereof obtained by
the Board of Health or its enforcement officer pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall, upon request, be kept confidential
and not considered to be public record when it is deemed by the
Board that such information, record or report relates to secret
processes or methods of manufacture or production or that such
information, record or report if made public would divulge a trade
secret. This subsection shall not prevent disclosure of any
information for an enforcement action.
(2)
The Board of Health or its enforcement officer shall act upon an
application within 30 days of a filing. Upon failure of the Board of
Health or its enforcement officer to act within said 30 days, the
certificate of compliance shall be deemed to be granted.
(3)
Renewal application. Application shall be made for renewal of the
certificate of compliance upon change in use or occupancy requiring
a certificate of use and occupancy under the Massachusetts Building
Code or upon significant change in materials used or stored on the
premises from those described in the original application.
C.
Report of spills and leaks. Any person having knowledge of a spill, leak
or other disposal of hazardous materials or violation of this article shall
report the same to the Board of Health or its enforcement officer within
two hours of detection.
D.
Enforcement. The Board of Health or its enforcement officer may,
according to law, enter upon any premises at any reasonable time to
inspect for compliance with the provisions of this article. Upon demand
by the owner or person in control of the premises, however, the Board
of Health or its enforcement officer shall obtain a warrant authorizing
such entry and inspection. Information necessary to demonstrate
compliance shall be submitted by the occupant of the premises at the
request of the Board of Health or its enforcement officer. If requested,
samples of hazardous materials shall be provided to the Board of Health
or its enforcement officer for testing. All records pertaining to
hazardous materials, disposal and removal shall be retained for no less
E.
§ 63-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 63-5
63:61
§ 63-6. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this article are severable, and if
any provisions of this article shall be declared unlawful by a valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this article.
than five years and shall be made available for review within 48 hours
of a request.
Violation. Upon determination by the Board of Health of a violation of
this article, the Board may issue such order as it deems appropriate to
remedy the violation. The order may include a compliance schedule for
those activities which the Board of Health deems reasonably necessary
to abate the violation.
F.
Penalty. Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $200 for
each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
G.
§ 63-5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 63-6
63:62
ARTICLE II
Subsurface Material Discharge and Fuel Storage
[Adopted 5-5-1986 ATM by Art. 15]
§ 63-7. Definitions.
In this article, the following terms have the following meanings:
DISCHARGE — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking,
incineration or placing of substance materials below any surface.
STORAGE — The actual or intended containment of subsurface materials.
SUBSURFACE MATERIAL — Any substance defined as:
§ 63-8. Subsurface material.
No subsurface material shall be discharged or stored within 1,200 feet of
any wells located within the town, if said wells supply the inhabitants of the
town with water, whether through an established water district or municipal
wells.
§ 63-9. Fuel. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 38]
No fuels shall be stored within 1,200 feet of any wells located within the
town, if said wells supply the inhabitants of the town with water, whether
through an established water district or municipal wells.
§ 63-10. Enforcement.
The Board of Health or its enforcement officer may, according to law, enter
upon any premises at any reasonable time to inspect for compliance with
the provisions of this article. Upon demand by the owner or person in
control of the premises, however, the Board of Health or its enforcement
officer shall obtain a warrant authorizing such entry and inspection.
Information necessary to demonstrate compliance shall be submitted by
the occupant of the premises at the request of the Board of Health or its
enforcement officer. If requested, samples of subsurfaces materials and/or
materials stored shall be provided to the Board of Health or its enforcement
officer for testing. All records pertaining to said materials, disposal and
A hazardous waste by any federal or state agency, by any federal or
state regulation or pursuant to Article I, Control and Management, of
this chapter;
A.
B. Septic wastes, whether or not pretreated;
C. Industrial wastes; and/or
Any other material found to be hazardous and/or dangerous to the
public health, welfare and safety and/or environment by the Board of
Health.
D.
§ 63-7 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 63-10
63:63
removal shall be retained for no less than five years and shall be made
available for review within 48 hours of a request.
§ 63-11. Order to remedy violation.
Upon determination by the Board of Health of a violation of this article, the
Board may issue such order as it deems appropriate to remedy the violation.
The order may include a compliance schedule for those activities which the
Board of Health deems reasonably necessary to abate the violation.
§ 63-12. Special permits, variances and building permits.
The Planning Board, Board of Appeals and Building Inspector shall be
prohibited from issuing any special permits, variances or building permits
in contravention of this article, and any said permits shall be deemed null
and void.
§ 63-13. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $300 for each
offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 63-14. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this article are severable, and if
any provisions of this article shall be declared unlawful by a valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this article.
{END OF CHAPTER}
§ 63-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 63-14
63:64
Chapter 68
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 68-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation and
protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings and places
significant in the history of the Town of Chelmsford or their architecture
through the maintenance and improvement of settings for such buildings
and places and the encouragement of design compatible therein.
§ 68-2. Historic District Commission established.
§ 68-3. Authority of Commission.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, the
authority of the Commission shall not extend to the review of the following
categories of building or structures or exterior architectural features:
There is hereby established under MGL c. 40C, as amended, a
Chelmsford Historic District Commission, with all the powers and
duties of an historic district commission under such statute. The
Commission shall consist of five members and two alternate members.
One of the five members shall be a resident or owner of property
in an historic district administered by the Commission. One of the
five members shall be chosen from two nominees submitted by the
Chelmsford Historical Commission. Other members shall be chosen in
accordance with the provisions of such statute.
A.
The initial appointments to the Commission shall be as follows: one
member appointed for a one-year term; two members appointed for
a two-year term each; two members appointed for a three-year term
each; one alternate member for a term of two years; and one alternate
member for a term of three years. The successors of members and
alternate members shall be appointed for terms of three years.
B.
A. The color of paint.
B. The color of materials used on roofs.
The reconstruction substantially similar in exterior design of a building,
structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by
fire, storm or other disaster, provided that such reconstruction is begun
within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
C.
§ 63-14 HISTORIC DISTRICT § 68-3
68:65
§ 68-4. Duties of Commission.
§ 68-5. Severability.
If any section, paragraph or part of this chapter is for any reason
determined invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full
force and effect.11
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 81
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 81-1. Definitions.
In this chapter the following terms have the following meanings:
LICENSE — Any and all licenses or permits issued by any Town of
Chelmsford board, division, officer or department, and shall include all
renewals and transfers.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Any Town of Chelmsford board, division, officer
or department with jurisdiction over the issuance of any license or permit.
§ 81-2. Denial, revocation or suspension for failure to pay taxes or
other charges.
D. Storm doors and windows and screen doors and windows.
The Commission shall review, from time to time, possible additional
historic districts and propose, as it deems appropriate, the
establishment of additional historic districts or changes in historic
districts. The Commission shall report on this activity in the town
annual report at least biennially.
A.
The Historic District Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for
the conduct of its business, not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Historic District Act, MGL c. 40C, as amended, and may, subject to
appropriation, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants
and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such purpose.
B.
The Town of Chelmsford board, division, officer or department with
jurisdiction over the issuance of any license shall have the authority
to deny any application for, or revoke or suspend, any license within
its jurisdiction for any person, partnership, corporation, trust, business
entity or enterprise who and/or which has neglected, refused or failed
A.
11.Editor's Note: The map of the Chelmsford Center Historic District and the boundary
description of the district are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 68-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 81-2
68:66
to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other
municipal charge.
The Treasurer-Collector or other municipal official responsible for
records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other
municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the "Treasurer-Collector,"
shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each department, board,
commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing
authority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and
transfers, a list of any person, partnership, corporation, trust, business
entity or enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a ninetyday
period and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending
application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before
the Appellate Tax Board. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 31;
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 26]
B.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or
permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the
Treasurer-Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other
matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity,
event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or
exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the
Treasurer-Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given
to the party and the Treasurer-Collector, as required by applicable
provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier
than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence
for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any
party. The Treasurer-Collector shall have the right to intervene in any
hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or
suspension. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Arts. 31 and 39]
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such
denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or
introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal
from such license denial, revocation or suspension.
(1)
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this
section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing
authority receives a certificate issued by the Treasurer-Collector
that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges
payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of said
certificate.
(2)
C.
§ 81-2 HISTORIC DISTRICT § 81-3
68:67
§ 81-3. Payment agreements.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
shall be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of
law.
§ 81-4. Waiver.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds that there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property
owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of the property
owner's immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or
activity conducted in or on said property.
§ 81-5. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open
burning, MGL c. 48, § 13; bicycle permits, MGL c. 85, § 11A; sales of articles
for charitable purposes, MGL c. 101, § 33; children work permits, MGL
c. 149, § 69; clubs and associations dispensing food or beverage licenses,
MGL c. 140, § 21E; dog licenses, MGL c. 140, § 137; fishing, hunting and
trapping license, MGL c. 131, § 12; marriage licenses, MGL c. 207, § 28; and
theatrical events and public exhibition permits, MGL c. 140, § 181.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 84
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 137. Unsolicited written material — See Ch. 168.
§ 84-1. Deposit of materials on public property.
No person shall throw posters, handbills, flyers, advertising sheets, waste
or rubbish in the public parks, streets or ways of the town.
§ 84-2. Handbills and flyers.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill or flyer upon any industrial, commercial, fraternal
or religious premises or any commercial handbill or flyer upon any private
§ 81-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 84-2
84:68
premises without the express permission of the owner or person in charge
of said premises.12
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 89
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 89-1. Prohibition of non-medical marijuana establishments.
Consistent with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, § 3(a)(2), all
types of non-medical "marijuana establishments" as defined in
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, § 1, including marijuana
cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers,
marijuana retailers or any other type of licensed marijuana-related
businesses, shall be prohibited within the Town of Chelmsford.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 96
NEWSRACKS
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEWSRACK — A vending machine used for the sale and/or distribution of
newspapers or similar printed material.
§ 96-2. Intent.
It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit or interfere with the
dissemination of information protected under the United States or state
constitutions, but simply to ensure that the location of newsracks protects
the public safety of the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 96-3. Location within public way.
The location of newsracks within a public way shall conform to the following
regulations. No newsrack shall be be located:
A. Within 100 feet of any school bus stop.
12.Editor's Note: A former paragraph dealing with the delivery of advertising or
informational material, which immediately followed this section and was added 5-16-1977
ATM by Art. 48, was deleted 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 40. See Ch. 168, Unsolicited written
material.
§ 84-2 NEWSRACKS § 96-3
96:69
§ 96-4. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply within 30 days of notification shall be subject to a fine of
$50 for each offense. Each day that such offense persists shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 96-5. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced by any police officer through the noncriminal
disposition procedures of Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2 of this Code.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 100
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 5.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
School buildings and grounds — See Ch. 129.
§ 100-1. Causing and permitting prohibited.
No person owning, leasing, or controlling a source of sound shall willfully,
negligently, or through failure to provide necessary equipment, service or
maintenance or to take necessary precautions cause, suffer, allow, or permit
unnecessary emissions from said source of sound that may cause noise.
§ 100-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall pertain to, but shall not be limited to outdoor soundamplifying
equipment, prolonged unattended sounding of burglar alarms,
motor vehicle trucks idling for more than five minutes, construction and
demolition equipment which characteristically emit sound but may be fitted
and accommodated with equipment such as enclosures to suppress sound
or may be operated in a manner so as to suppress sound, suppressible and
preventable industrial and commercial sources of sound, and other manmade
sounds that cause noise.
Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, fire or police alarm box or other
emergency facility.
B.
In such a manner as to obstruct the clear movement of pedestrians on
a sidewalk.
C.
D. On a public way on which parking is prohibited.
§ 96-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 100-3
100:70
§ 100-3. Special restrictions for outdoor sound-amplifying
equipment.
§ 100-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to sounds emitted during and associated with:
§ 100-5. Enforcement authority. [Art. 15 (part), ATM 1987: By-Laws
Art. XIII (part).]
The Police Department, Fire Department, Board of Health officials, Building
Commissioner or Inspector are hereby authorized to enforce this chapter.
§ 100-6. Penalties for offenses.
The penalty for any violations of this chapter shall be $50 for the first
offense, $100 for the second offense and $200 for subsequent offenses.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated within 100 yards of
hospitals, nursing homes, public housing for the elderly, schools, and
churches without prior approval from the Police Chief or his or her
designee.
A.
The volume of the sound shall be controlled so that it will not be
audible for a distance in excess of 300 feet from the sound-amplifying
equipment and so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous,
jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons.
B.
Parades, public gatherings, or sporting events, for which permits have
been issued;
A.
B. Emergency police, fire, and ambulance vehicles;
C. Police, fire, DPW, and civil and national defense activities;
Domestic equipment, such as lawn mowers and power saws, between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. weekdays and between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Sundays;
D.
E. Places of amusement, parks and recreation areas;
F. Idling of school buses;
G. Emergency public utility repair;
H. Snow removal equipment;
§ 100-3 NOISE § 100-6
100:71
Chapter 106
OFFICERS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 29.
§ 106-1. Finance Committee.
The Town Moderator shall appoint a Finance Committee which shall be
composed of seven members, each of whom shall serve for a term of not
more than three years from the date of appointment.
§ 106-2. Personnel Board.
There shall be a Personnel Board consisting of five members, four of
whom shall be known as "public members" and shall be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. In the beginning, two of these shall be
appointed for a term of one year and two shall be appointed for a term
of two years. Thereafter, each public member shall be appointed for a
term of two years. Each term shall expire at the end of the appropriate
fiscal year. [Amended 5-3-2007 ATM by Art. 16]
A.
The fifth member, to be known as the "personnel member," shall be
elected by town employees who are subject to the personnel system
and whose names appear on the town payroll list for the Wednesday
prior to the election or who otherwise are identified as eligible voters.
Each voter must be 18 years of age or over on the day of the election.
The term of office shall be for two years and shall expire on July 1
of each odd-numbered year. The election of the personnel member
shall be secret and shall be supervised by a board of three election
officers appointed by the Town Manager. The election shall be held in
June to be effective in July. Special elections shall be held to fill the
unexpired term of a personnel member who resigns before the term
has expired. All elections shall be held between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. on a weekday selected by the above-mentioned board of
three election officers. Each permanent full-time employee or part-time
regular employee with a work schedule of 20 or more hours per week
will be granted one vote. All other eligible voters will be granted 1/2
vote each.
B.
At the first meeting of each fiscal year at which all Personnel Board
members are present, a Chairperson of the Personnel Board shall be
elected by a majority vote.
C.
All members of the Personnel Board shall be registered voters of the
Town of Chelmsford.
D.
§ 100-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 106-2
100:72
§ 106-3. Treasurer-Collector. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 31]
The collector of taxes shall be the Town Treasurer-Collector. The Town
Treasurer-Collector, within the time limits prescribed by law for the
collection of accounts due the town, shall collect all accounts due the
town, except those set forth in MGL c. 41, § 38A, as amended. Said Town
Treasurer-Collector may settle and adjust any such accounts upon such
terms as he or she thinks for the best interests of the town, or he or she
may cause legal proceedings to be commenced in his or her name as Town
Treasurer-Collector for the collection of any such accounts and may employ
counsel for that purpose. The costs of said legal proceedings, including
counsel fees, shall be charged to and paid by the Treasurer-Collector from
the Treasurer-Collector's expense account. All bills for accounts due the
town shall state that all checks, drafts or money orders shall be made
payable to or to the order of the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 106-4. Contracts. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 26]
§ 106-5. Agent for suits.
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to act as agent of the town in any
suit or suits which may arise, with authority to settle and adjust claims or
demands for or against the town and to employ counsel whenever in its
judgment it is necessary.
No public member of the Personnel Board shall be an employee of
the town or hold office, whether appointed or elected. The personnel
member of the Personnel Board shall not be an elected official or
appointed department head but may otherwise be an employee who is
subject to this section.
E.
F. Members of the Personnel Board shall serve without compensation.
The Personnel Board shall meet regularly as necessary to consider such
business as may be presented by town officials, town employees or
others.
G.
At any meeting of the Personnel Board, action by a majority of those
Board members shall be binding upon the Personnel Board. At least
three members of the Board shall be present in order to constitute a
legal meeting.
H.
No officer or board of the town shall make any contract on behalf of the
town in which such officer or any member of such board is directly or
indirectly financially interested, except by competitive contracts.
A.
Any Town officer or board authorized by the General Laws or the Town
Charter or bylaws to enter into contracts for the procurement of goods
or services is hereby authorized, pursuant to MGL c. 30B, § 12, to enter
into such contracts for terms not to exceed five years, unless a longer
term is specifically authorized by a vote of Town Meeting.
B.
§ 106-2 NOISE § 106-6
100:73
§ 106-6. Revocation of appointment.
§ 106-7. Agricultural Commission. [Added 4-27-2009 ATM by Art.
18]
Whenever an appointment to an uncompensated town office is revoked,
the appointing authority shall cause a written notice of that action,
along with a statement of the specific reason or reasons therefor, to be
sent within 48 hours by registered mail to the affected individual at his
or her last known address.
A.
This requirement shall apply to revocation only and not to a decision
against reappointment at the expiration of a fixed term.
B.
There shall be an Agricultural Commission to represent the Chelmsford
farming community and related interests. Said Commission shall serve
as facilitators for encouraging the pursuit or agriculture in Chelmsford.
and shall promote agricultural-based economic opportunities in Town.
A.
Said Commission, once appointed, shall develop a work plan to guide its
activities. Such activities include, but are not limited to, the following:
Serve as facilitators for encouraging the pursuit of agriculture in
Chelmsford;
(1)
(2) Promote agricultural-based economic opportunities in Town;
Act as mediators, advocates, educators, and/or negotiators on
farming issues;
(3)
(4) Work for the preservation of prime agricultural lands; and
Pursue all initiatives appropriate to creating a sustainable
agricultural community.
(5)
B.
The duties and responsibilities of the Commission shall include, but not
be limited to:
Advising the Town Manager in matters related to the care and
usage of Town-owned agricultural properties.
(1)
Advising the Board of Selectmen, Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Appeals, Conservation Commission, Board of Health, and other
local organizations, on projects and activities, including
acquisitions and other transactions, involving agricultural lands in
Town.
(2)
Engaging in projects and activities to promote the business of
farming activities and traditions and farmland protection in Town,
including programs and community events.
(3)
C.
The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Board
of Selectmen. In the beginning, two members shall be appointed for
a term of three years, two members shall be appointed for a term of
D.
§ 106-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 106-7
100:74
Chapter 113
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 5.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 8.
Animals — See Ch. 11.
Firearms and explosives — See Ch. 39.
Littering — See Ch. 84.
Noise — See Ch. 100.
§ 113-1. Noise; defacement of property; trespassing; removal of
trees or plants; disturbing meetings. [Amended 1967 ATM by Art.
51]
No person or persons shall congregate noisily in or about the streets, stores
or public places of the town or disturb the public quiet by the unauthorized
ringing of bells or blowing of horns unnecessarily or deface, pull down or
injure any building, fence or sign or other structure in the town or trespass
on any property or wrongfully remove therefrom any tree, plant, shrub, fruit
or vegetable or create any disturbance of or in any lawful meeting of the
citizens of this town.
§ 113-2. Loitering. [Amended 1967 ATM by Art. 51]
two years, and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year.
Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a term of three years.
Each term shall expire at the end of the appropriate fiscal year.
{END OF CHAPTER}
No person shall stand or loiter in or on any street, sidewalk or public
place in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of travelers
thereon, nor shall any person on such street, sidewalk or public place,
after being directed by a police officer to move on and disperse, on
the same or subsequent day, reassemble to loiter or remain so as to
obstruct the free passage of travelers or motor vehicles.
A.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the town to order any
persons offending against the provisions of the preceding subsection
to move on and disperse and, if the persons so ordered or requested
do not forthwith obey, to remove them or to arrest and cause them
to be brought before the Justice of the District Court of Lowell and a
complaint made against the provision of the preceding subsection.
B.
The penalty for any violation of this section shall be $50 for a first
offense and $100 for subsequent offenses. [Amended 10-21-1999
ATM by Art. 42]
C.
§ 106-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 113-3
113:75
§ 113-3. Swimming and bathing. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
42]
No person shall swim or bathe in any public or exposed place in a nude
condition. The penalty for any violation of this section shall be a fine of $50.
§ 113-4. Disorderly conduct.
§ 113-5. Peeping persons. [Added 1951 STM by Art. 1]
Chapter 116
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fortune-tellers — See Ch. 46.
Noise — See Ch. 100.
Unsolicited written material — See Ch. 168.
No person shall behave in any indecent or disorderly manner or use
profane, indecent, threatening or insulting language in any public place
or on any sidewalk or street of the town or near any house to the
annoyance or disturbance of any other person.
A.
The penalty for any violation of this section shall be a fine of $100.
[Added 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 42]
B.
No person, except an officer of the law in the performance of his or
her official duties, shall enter upon the premises of another with the
intention of peeping into the windows or other openings of a building
or spying upon, in any manner, any person or persons therein.
A.
The penalty for any violation of this section shall be a fine of $50.
[Added 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 42]
{END OF CHAPTER}
B.
§ 113-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 113-5
116:76
ARTICLE I
Roadside Sales
[Adopted 5-19-1977 ATM by Art. 49; amended in its entirety
5-21-1979 ATM by Art. 47]
§ 116-1. License required; exception.
No person shall engage in the roadside sale of flowers, blankets,
paintings, gifts, fish, food, rugs or trees without first obtaining a license
issued by the Board of Selectmen, and said license shall be
conspicuously displayed by the vendor.
A.
Any person having a usual place of business within the town may
conduct the aforesaid activities on the same premises in connection
with and accessory to his or her primary business without obtaining
said license.
B.
§ 116-1 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES § 116-1
116:77

ARTICLE II
Auctions and Sales
[Adopted 5-13-1985 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 116-2. Use of public buildings.
All auctions and sales in public buildings in the Town of Chelmsford are
hereby prohibited except for the purpose of town business or such other
business as may be deemed proper or necessary by the committee, board or
officer having charge of said public building.
§ 116-2 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES § 116-2
116:79

ARTICLE III
Solicitors
[Adopted 10-1-1990 ATM by Art. 8]
§ 116-3. Registration required.
§ 116-4. Permit and identification badge.
§ 116-5. Hours of operation.
There shall be no door-to-door solicitation or selling before 9:00 a.m. or
after 6:00 p.m.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit orders or subscriptions
for goods or services, or to sell goods or services door to door, in the
town without first having registered with the Police Department. The
registrant shall provide proof of identification, his or her signature, the
name of his or her employer, the type of products or services which he
or she is soliciting and such other information as may be requested by
the Police Department. Each person soliciting in the town on behalf of a
corporation, business or other for-profit organization shall be required
to register with the Police Department.
A.
Each person shall pay to the Police Department at the time of
registration an annual registration fee set pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22F,
to the extent permitted by law. [Amended 10-17-2005 ATM by Art.
20]
B.
Each person who pays the fee provided herein shall be furnished a
permit indicating that he or she has registered and showing the dates
covered by such registration.
A.
Each person shall at all times while soliciting in the town carry upon his
or her person the registration permit, and the same shall be exhibited
by such person whenever required to do so by any police officer or by
any person solicited.
B.
In addition to the permit, the town shall issue an identification badge to
every person registered hereunder. Permittees shall wear their badges
in such a manner that the badges may be easily read while transacting
business. If a badge becomes damaged or obscured, the permittee
shall return it to the town and receive another badge. Badges issued
hereunder shall conspicuously state that the Town of Chelmsford does
not endorse the goods or services being solicited.
C.
Permits and identification badges shall be used only by the person to
whom they were issued and may not be transferred or extended to
include any other person.
D.
§ 116-3 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES § 116-6
116:81
§ 116-6. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the
Chief of Police for any of the following reasons:
§ 116-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $200.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit.
B. Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of soliciting.
Conducting the business of soliciting contrary to the conditions
specified in this article.
C.
Conducting the business of soliciting in such manner as to violate any
of the laws or regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or
the Town of Chelmsford.
D.
§ 116-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 116-7
116:82
ARTICLE IV
Restricted Vendor Areas
[Adopted 5-8-1995 ATM by Art. 23]
§ 116-8. Designation.
For the purpose of public safety, no person shall offer for sale or sell
any articles on the public ways or town-owned property designated on
plans approved by the Board of Selectmen during the following periods:
(1) The annual Independence Day celebration.
(2) Veterans memorial services.
(3) The annual winterfest.
(4) Winter prelude.
(5) Other events approved by the Board of Selectmen.
A.
The Board of Selectmen shall review each special event seeking to fall
under this article with the sponsor(s) to determine whether a restricted
area shall be designated for the event. Should a restricted area be
needed, the plan of the proposed area shall be submitted to the Board
of Selectmen for approval a minimum of one month prior to the event.
B.
This article shall not prohibit hawkers, peddlers or vendors from selling
their products on the public ways of the town during any period not
designated above or in any area outside the area designated on the
plans referred to above.
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
§ 116-8 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES § 116-8
116:83
Chapter 119
POLES AND WIRES
§ 119-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the definitions of "person," poles and overhead
wires and associated overhead structures" and "utility" shall be the same
definitions as those set forth in MGL c. 166, § 22A.
§ 119-2. Prohibiting installation of new poles and overhead wires.
§ 119-3. Removal of existing poles and overhead wires.
No utility shall install or construct, except by way of replacement
or upgrading of existing facilities, any poles and overhead wires and
associated overhead structures upon, along or across any public way
within the parts of the town listed in §§ 119-2B and 119-3A of this
chapter. Any poles and overhead wires and associated overhead
structures upon, along overhead wires and associated overhead
structures installed or constructed in violation of this chapter shall be
immediately removed by the utility responsible therefor.
A.
This chapter applies to the following parts of town:
Any public way approved by the Planning Board after the effective
date of this chapter unless waived by the Planning Board pursuant
to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.13
(1)
Any way in which the wires and utility facilities are underground as
of the effective date of this chapter.
(2)
B.
Any person who installs or constructs any poles and overhead wires and
associated overhead structures which are in violation of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than
$5,000 for each consecutive fifteen-day period during which the failure
continues.
C.
This chapter implements MGL c. 166, § 22C and shall be construed in a
manner consistent with the definitions in MGL c. 166, § 22A.
D.
Any utility presently owning or operating poles or overhead wires
and associated overhead structures within the Town of Chelmsford
shall remove said poles or overhead wires and associated overhead
structures. Said removal shall occur in the area known as Chelmsford
Center extending from Larcom Square through the Center, around the
Common and north to the intersection of Chelmsford and Fletcher
Streets as shown on a plan on file with the Town Clerk entitled
"Chelmsford Center Utility Depression Area," dated March 15, 1999.
A.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 116-8 CHELMSFORD CODE § 119-3
116:84
Any utility that fails to remove any poles or overhead wires and
associated overhead structures required to be removed pursuant to
§ 119-3A of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$ 1,000 and not more than $5,000 for each fifteen-day period during
which such failure continues; provided, however, that no utility shall
have been deemed to have violated this chapter, provided that:
If replacement facilities for poles or overhead wires and associated
overhead structures required to be removed will be needed in
order for a utility to continue its service, the utility shall, within
60 days of the effective date of this chapter, petition the Board of
Selectmen of the Town of Chelmsford, pursuant to MGL c. 166,
§ 22, for permission to install, erect or construct under the public
ways of the Town of Chelmsford replacement facilities for such
poles or overhead wires and associated structures; and
(1)
The utility shall file with the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Chelmsford a plan (which shall be consistent with § 119-3A of this
chapter) for removal of poles or overhead wires and associated
overhead structures and, if needed, for their replacement with
underground facilities. The removal described on the plan may be
implemented in phases, as may from time to time be determined
by the Board of Selectmen. In determining if the plan shall be
implemented in phases, the Board of Selectmen shall consider the
following factors, among other relevant factors: the total cost of
completing the work under the plan; the amount of funds collected
by the utility from its customers in the Town of Chelmsford in
relation to the total cost of completing the work under the plan;
and the progress the utility is making towards completing the work
under the plan. Any phasing of the implementation of the plan shall
not constitute an amendment of the plan. In determining whether
to undertake the removal shown on the plan in phases, the Board
of Selectmen shall consult with the utility. The decision regarding
phasing shall be in the sole discretion of the Board of Selectmen;
and [Amended 10-20-2008 ATM by Art. 11]
(2)
In each calendar year beginning with the calendar year next
following the effective date of this chapter and until all such poles
or overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall have
been removed, any utility shall, in carrying out its plan, allocate
and expend for the direct cost of demolition and construction (over
and above the reasonable value of salvage) an amount which shall
not be less than 2% of its gross revenues derived during the next
preceding calendar year from its customers in the Town of
Chelmsford; and
(3)
The utility shall, on or before the last day of March in each year,
file with the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Chelmsford a
statement signed under the penalties of perjury, by its Treasurer,
setting forth in detail the amounts spent by the utility during
the immediately preceding calendar year in carrying out its plan;
(4)
B.
§ 119-3 PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES § 119-3
116:85
the purposes for which such expenditures were made; the gross
revenues derived from its customers in the Town of Chelmsford
during the immediately preceding calendar year; provided,
however, that no utility which enters a cooperative agreement
under MGL c. 166, § 22 shall be deemed to have violated this
chapter during the term such payments are to be made, so long as
said utility shall not be in default of said cooperative agreement.
Commencing with the calendar year beginning January 1, 2009,
the funds collected by the utility from its customers in the Town
of Chelmsford shall be placed by the utility in a separate interestbearing
account. The interest accrued on such funds shall remain
with the account and shall be available for and used by the utility
in furtherance of the completion of the plan described in § 119-3A
and § 119-3B(2). All funds collected by utility as a surcharge prior
to January 1, 2009, shall be transferred as of January 1, 2009, to
the interest-bearing account. Commencing with the statement due
for the calendar year 2008, the utility shall include in its statement
under § 119-3B(4) the following information regarding the interest
for the preceding calendar year: the number of customers in the
Town of Chelmsford from whom the funds are collected; the name
and address of the financial institution or other entity where the
interest-bearing account is located; the amount of interest accrued
to the account during the immediately preceding calendar year for
which the statement is being provided. [Added 10-20-2008 ATM
by Art. 11]
(5)
The statement required under § 119-3B(4) shall not qualify as
"setting forth in detail" the required information unless the
statement includes the following information: [Added 10-20-2008
ATM by Art. 11]
The number of customers in the Town of Chelmsford from
whom the surcharge has been collected during the
immediately preceding calendar year;
(a)
The amount of the surcharge collected from the customers
in the Town of Chelmsford during the immediately preceding
calendar year;
(b)
The amount of the interest accrued on the surcharge collected
from the customers in the Town of Chelmsford during the
immediately preceding calendar year;
(c)
The address of the financial institution or other entity where
the interest-bearing account is located;
(d)
The amount of the interest accrued to the account during the
immediately preceding calendar year for which the statement
is being provided;
(e)
(6)
§ 119-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 119-3
116:86
Chapter 124
RECREATION VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 100.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 113.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 174.
The specific purpose and amount for each cost incurred or
disbursement made over $100 regarding implementation of
the plan;
(f)
The name, street mailing address and electronic mail address,
if available, of each vendor or other entity to whom a payment
over $100 was made regarding implementation of the plan;
and
(g)
The amount of funds remaining in the interest-bearing account
as of December 31 of the preceding calendar year.
(h)
The Board of Selectmen may temporarily or permanently suspend
the amount collected from the utility's customers in the Town of
Chelmsford under § 119-3B(3) above, upon the following: [Added
10-20-2008 ATM by Art. 11]
The Board of Selectmen gives notice of and holds a public
hearing regarding consideration of such suspension.
(a)
The notice of the public hearing is published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town and posted on a Town bulletin
board and on the Town's website at least 14 days before the
date of the hearing.
(b)
The notice of public hearing is sent by return receipt requested
mail at least 14 days before the date of the hearing to the
utility for which the suspension is being considered.
(c)
After hearing, the Board of Selectmen finds that:
The utility has collected sufficient funds from the
customers in the Town of Chelmsford to carry out the plan
described in § 119-3A and § 119-3B(2); or
[1]
The utility has collected sufficient funds from its
customers in the Town of Chelmsford to fund the phase of
the plan described in § 119-3A and § 119-3B(2).
{END OF CHAPTER}
[2]
(d)
(7)
§ 119-3 RECREATION VEHICLES § 124-1
124:87
§ 124-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, welfare,
and safety of the inhabitants of the Town of Chelmsford by reducing the
noise, environmental impacts and other adverse effects associated with the
unrestricted operation of recreation vehicles. This chapter is intended to
be consistent with the provisions of MGL c. 90B, §§ 20 through 35 and 323
CMR 3.01 et seq., as amended.
§ 124-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING — A building designed and occupied as the living quarters of
one or more individuals.
OPERATE — To ride in or on and control the operation of, or maintain, suffer
or permit the operation of, or to push a recreation vehicle, or, in the case
of a person who has custody of a minor between the ages of 10 and 14,
to knowingly permit or suffer the operation of a recreation vehicle by such
minor between the ages of 10 and 14 without direct supervision by a person
18 years old or older, and, when acting as a supervising person under MGL
c. 90B, § 26, to knowingly permit a person supervised to violate any state
law or Town bylaw regulating operations.
OWNER — A person, other than a lien holder, having the property or title to
a recreation vehicle entitled to the use or possession thereof.
RECREATION VEHICLE — Any vehicle designed or modified for use over
unimproved terrain if used for recreation or pleasure off a public way as
defined in MGL c. 90, and all legally registered motor vehicles when used
off a way, as defined under MGL c. 90. This definition shall include vehicles
designated recreation vehicles under MGL c. 90B, including vehicles
commonly known as "dirt bikes" and "all-terrain vehicles" (or "ATVs") and
"snowmobiles." Vehicles used for agriculture, forestry, lumbering or
construction shall be excluded from this definition when used for such
purpose.
§ 124-3. Restrictions on operation of recreation vehicles.
Age limit: No person under 14 years of age shall operate a recreation
vehicle except as provided below:
A person between the ages of 12 and 14 years old may operate a
recreation vehicle wearing a helmet and if directly supervised (as
defined in 323 CMR 3.02) by a person 18 years old or older;
(1)
A person between the ages of 10 and 12 years may operate a
recreation vehicle wearing a helmet and if directly supervised (as
defined in 323 CMR 3.02) by a person 18 years old or older and the
vehicle is operated on land on which the operator is domiciled; or
(2)
A.
§ 124-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 124-3
124:88
§ 124-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 124-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Chelmsford Police
Department.
END OF CHAPTER
A person under 14 years of age may operate a recreation vehicle
in a sanctioned race, rally or organized event which has been
authorized or approved by the appropriate local authority.
(3)
No person under 10 years of age shall operate a recreation vehicle
under any circumstances.
(4)
Distance from dwelling: No person shall operate a recreation vehicle
on any public or private land within 150 feet of a dwelling without the
permission of the owner of such dwelling, such owner's agent, or such
owner's lessee, except in cases of emergency, when directly departing
or returning to such residence or when operating on the property of
another for which permission has been granted. Such permission may
be granted to an individual, association, or other organization, for the
benefit of members thereof.
B.
Noise: No recreation vehicle shall be operated which makes an unusual
or excessive noise or which emits obnoxious fumes.
C.
Muffler requirement: No person shall use a muffler cut-out, by-pass,
straight pipe or similar device on a recreation vehicle.
D.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined as set forth below, or, alternatively, such violation may be enforced
in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D.
A.
Fines imposed pursuant to this section shall be assessed as follows:
(1) First offense: $100.
(2) Second offense: $250.
(3) Third offense: $300.
Fourth offense: confiscation of recreation vehicle by the
Chelmsford Police Department, pursuant to state-law authority.
(4)
B.
§ 124-3 RECREATION VEHICLES § 124-5
124:89
Chapter 127
RIGHT TO FARM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Community Preservation Committee — See
Ch. 19.
Trees — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
§ 127-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
§ 127-2. Definitions.
FARM — Shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water
bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial agriculture, or
accessory thereto.
FARMING — Shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to state with emphasis the right
to farm accorded to all citizens of the commonwealth under Article 97,
of the Constitution,14 and all state statutes and regulations thereunder
including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph 1; c. 90,
§ 9; c. 111, § 125A; and c. 128, § 1A. We the citizens of the Town of
Chelmsford restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's
authority conferred by Article 8915 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of Chelmsford by allowing agricultural uses and related
activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town
agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the
Town.
B.
Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over
roads within the Town;
A.
Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators
and disease organism of plants and animals;
B.
C. Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
D. Composting of farm and non-farm compostable materials;
14.Editor's Note: See Art. XCVII of the Amendments to the Constitution.
15.Editor's Note: See Art. LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution.
§ 124-5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 127-2
124:90
FARMING or AGRICULTURE or their derivatives — Shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
§ 127-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of
Chelmsford. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on
holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the
attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally
accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever
impact may be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture
is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood,
community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this
bylaw are intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agri-tourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or services of
the farm;
E.
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the
operation of a farmer's market or farm stand including signage thereto;
F.
Maintenance, repair, sale and storage of seasonal equipment, or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used
expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management, or
sale of the agricultural products; and on-farm relocation of earth and
the clearing of ground for farming operations;
G.
Burning of brush in a controlled and safe manner after issuance and
receipt of a permit issued from the Chelmsford Fire Department that
such burning shall satisfy all of the conditions of the regulations and
guidelines of the Chelmsford Fire Department and as set forth in 310
CMR 7.07(3)(b) and (c).
H.
A. Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
B. Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural,
aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities;
C.
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any
other forestry or lumbering operations;
D.
E. Raising of livestock including horses;
F. Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus,
ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and
other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes,
including bees and fur-bearing animals.
G.
§ 127-2 RECREATION VEHICLES § 127-3
124:91
and farming operations and activities conducted in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices. Keeping and raising of poultry,
swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such
as llamas and camels), and other domesticated animals for food and other
agricultural purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals, shall not be
governed by local animal fee bylaw. Moreover, nothing in this Right To Farm
Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing
any land use regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute,
regulation, or local zoning law.
§ 127-4. Disclosure notification.
On an annual basis notification will be printed in two local newspapers:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage
the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production
of food, and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and
ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or
occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within
a town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include,
but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Buyers
or occupants are also informed that the location of property within the
Town may be impacted by commercial agricultural operations including
the ability to access water services for such property under certain
circumstances."
§ 127-5. Resolution of disputes.
§ 127-6. Severability.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The Town
of Chelmsford hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be severable.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance
with the Board of Selectmen, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the
Board of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing
of the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue
any other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Board of Selectmen may forward a copy of
the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall
review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its
recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreedupon
time frame.
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution
of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Board of
Health within an agreed-upon time frame.
B.
§ 127-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 127-6
124:92
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 129
SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 8. Graffiti — See Ch. 57.
§ 129-1. Certain activities prohibited.
The use of school grounds for the following activities is prohibited except
where the user receives written authorization from the Superintendent or
his or her designee:
§ 129-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
43]
The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be a fine of $25.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Operation of any uninsured or unregistered motorized vehicle,
including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles,
minibikes, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles.
A.
Racing of motor vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, minibikes, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles.
B.
Operation of any motor vehicles, including but not limited to
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, minibikes, snowmobiles and allterrain
vehicles, off the driveways and parking areas.
C.
D. Repair and maintenance of any vehicle.
E. Horseback riding.
F. Camping.
G. Golfing.
H. Powered model airplane or rocket activities.
I. Skateboarding.
J. Any non-school-related use of school grounds while school is in session.
§ 127-6 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 129-2
129:93
Chapter 130
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic District — See Ch. 68.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 142.
Trees — See Ch. 161.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 130-1. Purpose.
This bylaw is adopted pursuant to the Town's Home Rule authority under
Section 8 of Article 89 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts
Constitution and MGL c. 40, § 15C. The purpose of this bylaw is to protect
the scenic quality and character of certain public ways in the Town by
regulating the cutting or removal of trees, the tearing down or destruction
of stone walls and the construction of any new driveway or private way
or the alteration of any existing driveway or private way insofar as such
alteration takes place within the right-of-way when such work involves the
cutting down of trees or the destruction of stone walls, within designated
scenic roads, including any such activities which would not otherwise be
subject to Planning Board consent under MGL c. 40, § 15C. This bylaw is
intended to ensure that;
§ 130-2. Definitions.
CUTTING OR REMOVAL OF TREES — The removal of one or more trees,
regardless of whether or not repair, maintenance, reconstruction or paving
work is involved, having a diameter of six inches or greater measured four
feet above ground level, and the trimming of any major branches or the
cutting of roots within or along the boundary of a right of-way. It shall not,
however, pertain to any plant appearing on the Massachusetts Prohibited
Plant List as prepared and maintained by the Massachusetts Department of
Agricultural Resources, dated January 1, 2006, or as subsequently revised.
REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, RECONSTRUCTION, OR PAVING WORK — Any
work within the right-of-way by any person or agency, public or private, and
the construction of any new driveway or private way or the alteration of
any existing driveway or private way insofar as such alteration takes place
within the right-of-way when such work involves the cutting down of trees
or the destruction of stone walls.
Ways will be recommended for designation as a scenic road on stated
criteria.
A.
Ways so designated will not be altered without following proper
procedures and without adherence to proper considerations; and
B.
Ways so designated will not be altered by the decision of any person,
organization, or agency without the consent of the Planning Board.
C.
§ 129-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 130-2
129:94
ROAD — A right-of-way or any way used and maintained as a public way.
SCENIC ROAD — Any road so designated by the Town under MGL c. 40,
§ 15C.
TEARING DOWN OR DESTRUCTION OF STONE WALLS — The destruction
of more than five feet of stone wall, whether or not contiguous, within or
along the boundary of a right-of-way regardless of whether or not repair,
maintenance, reconstruction or paving work is involved.
§ 130-3. Criteria for designation as scenic road.
The Planning Board, Conservation Commission, or Historical Commission
shall, in determining which roads or portions of roads should be
recommended as scenic roads, consider the following criteria:
§ 130-4. Designation as scenic road.
§ 130-5. Scenic road permit.
A. Roads bordered by trees of exceptional quality;
B. Roads bordered by stone walls;
Roads bordered by any other natural or man-made features of aesthetic
or historical value;
C.
Roads for which alteration is being planned or is likely to be planned in
the future.
D.
Adoption of new scenic roads shall be in accordance with the MGL c.
40, § 15C.
A.
The Planning Board shall take the following steps within 30 days after
a road(s) has been designated a scenic road:
Notify all municipal departments that may take any action with
respect to the road(s);
(1)
(2) Notify the Massachusetts Department of Transportation;
Publish in a paper having circulation within the Town notice that
the road(s) have been so designated.
(3)
B.
Filing. Any person, organization, state, or municipal agency seeking
the written consent of the Planning Board regarding the cutting or
removal of trees, the tearing down or destruction of stone walls and
the construction of any new driveway or private way or the alteration
of any existing driveway or private way insofar as such alteration takes
place within the right-of-way when such work involves the cutting down
of trees or the destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof, shall file
a written request with the Planning Board together with the following:
A.
§ 130-2 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 130-5
129:95
§ 130-6. Considerations.
The Planning Board's decision on any application for proposed action
affecting scenic roads shall be based on consideration of the following:
Text of a legal notice identifying the location of the proposed action
in terms enabling the readers to locate the area with reasonable
accuracy and a description of the proposed changes to trees, stone
walls, natural surroundings, man-made objects or features;
(1)
(2) A statement of the purpose(s) for such changes;
A list of owners of properties, as certified by the Board of
Assessors, located in whole or in part within 300 feet of the
proposed action;
(3)
A fee, as established by the Planning Board, to cover the cost of
advertising, notification, and administration;
(4)
Any further explanatory material useful to adequately inform the
Planning Board.
(5)
Notice. The Planning Board shall, as required by statute, give notice
of its public hearing by advertising twice in two consecutive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the area. The public hearing
may coincide with the hearing(s) for proposed construction of homes
or other buildings. Copies of the notice of public hearing shall also be
sent to the Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, Historical
Commission, Director of Public Works, Tree Warden, and owners of
property as appearing on the most recent property listing of the Board
of Assessors within 300 feet of the proposed action.
B.
Time of notice. Publication of the required notice shall be completed
least seven days prior to the date of the public hearing.
C.
Time of hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within
30 days of the receiving the hearing request.
D.
Timing of decision. The Planning Board shall make a decision on the
request within 21 days of the closing of the public hearing.
E.
Public Shade Tree Law. Whenever possible, the notices and hearings
required under this bylaw shall be filed and held in conjunction with
those of the Tree Warden acting under MGL c. 87. The consent of
the Planning Board to a proposed action shall not be regarded as
inferring consent by the Tree Warden, or vice versa. The Planning
Board decision shall contain a condition that no work should be done
until all applicable provisions of said Chapter 87 (Public Shade Tree
Law) have been complied with.
F.
A. Preservation of natural resources;
B. Environmental values;
§ 130-5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 130-6
129:96
§ 130-7. Actions exempt from hearing requirements.
§ 130-8. General.
The Planning Board may adopt more detailed regulations for carrying out
the provisions hereunder.
§ 130-9. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector or designee shall be the enforcing authority. Without
waiving any other enforcement authority, violations of the Scenic Road
bylaw may be subject to noncriminal disposition, in accordance with Article
II, § 1-2, of the Town Code. In addition, the property owner or whoever is
responsible for the violation shall be required within a reasonable amount
of time but not less than 60 days to:
§ 130-10. Approved scenic roads. [Amended 10-16-2017 by ATM,
Art. 18]
C. Scenic and aesthetic characteristics;
D. Historical values;
E. Public safety;
F. Compensatory actions proposed, such as replacement of trees or walls;
G. Other sound planning considerations.
Tree removal. The Tree Warden may take immediate action without
hearing to remove trees or branches of any size that in his opinion
present a danger to the public. This would include trees or limbs which
threaten public utilities such as power lines. Action taken under this
section still requires compliance with § 130-5.
A.
Stone wall removal. No hearing is required if in the opinion of the
Director of Public Works or designee the removal of up to 15 feet of
stone wall for a driveway, or up to six feet for a walkway, is warranted.
No hearing is required for temporary removal of a portion of stone wall
not to exceed 10 feet in length, or drainage emergency repairs per
the Director of Public Works' determination, provided that the wall is
restored to its original condition within 60 days of the removal.
B.
Restore any altered stone walls to the condition they were in prior to
the alterations; and
A.
Plant new trees of similar species to those which may have been cut or
removed; or
B.
Implement other mitigating measures to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board.
C.
§ 130-6 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 130-10
129:97
Chapter 132
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health regulations — See Ch. 201.
§ 132-1. Maintenance of wastewater and sewage disposal systems.
To ensure compliance with the requirements of the Board of Health, every
owner, agent or occupant of premises on which there is a private
wastewater or sewage disposal system shall keep such system in proper
operational order and shall provide a reasonable means of access for
inspection and pumping. Residential properties shall have such system
pumped when necessary. All commercial, industrial and other
nonresidential establishments shall have their systems pumped every two
years. Such pumping shall be made by private operators duly licensed by
the Board of Health. More frequent pumpings may be ordered as deemed
necessary by the Board of Health for the proper operation of the subsurface
septic system.
The following list of roads have been designated as scenic roads
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 15C:
Byam Road from Robin Hill Road to Acton Road
Garrison Road from Littleton Road to Hunt Road
Crooked Spring Road from School Street to Meadowbrook Road
Worthen Street in its entirety
Crosby Lane in its entirety
High Street from Acton Road to Locust Road
Parker Road from Concord Road to Acton Road
Robin Hill Road in its entirety
Mill Road from Boston Road to the former Old Billerica Road * entire
length of Mill Road
Main Street from Lovett Lane to the Westford line
School Street from Graniteville Road to Main Street
A.
A map of the approved scenic roads, dated November 29, 2011, is on
file with the Planning Board.16
{END OF CHAPTER}
B.
16.Editor's Note: Said map was also amended 10-16-2017 by ATM, Art. 18.
§ 130-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 132-2
129:98
§ 132-2. Connection to public sewer.
The owners of all dwellings, buildings and other structures used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other related use abutting on any
public or private way, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may be located a public sanitary sewer of the town shall be required,
at their expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect
such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the Sewer
Commission regulations within one year from the date of official notice by
the Sewer Commission; provided, however, that the Board of Health may
order any person to connect with the public sewer at any time if it is deemed
to be in the best interest of the town, upon giving 30 days' notice to do so.
§ 132-3. Grinder pumps. [Added 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 25]
The preferred method of discharge of sewage from an individual
building or group of buildings to the Town's sewer system is gravity
flow. Grinder pumps shall be approved only after alternatives for
gravity service connections have been thoroughly considered and, in
the opinion of the Town of Chelmsford Department of Public Works,
such alternatives cannot reasonably discharge to the Town's sewer
system by gravity flow. Grinder pumps shall only be used in accordance
with regulations established by the Town of Chelmsford Department of
Public Works. [Amended 10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 7]
A.
Licensed drain layers shall submit required documentation to the
Department of Public Works, apply for a sewer connection permit and
install the grinder system. The owner shall be responsible for all of the
costs related to the connection to the Town's sewer system. [Amended
10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 7]
B.
Grinder pumps remain the private property of the homeowner. Existing
single- or two-family residential grinder pumps, installed controls and
new single- or two-family DPW-approved residential grinder pumps and
installed controls shall be maintained, repaired or replaced by the Town
of Chelmsford at the election of the Department of Public Works. The
Town of Chelmsford shall not be responsible for the maintenance or
repair of grinder pumps or systems servicing commercial properties
and residential properties comprised of three or more units. [Amended
10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 7]
C.
Items that may cause damage to the Town's sewer system or grinder
pump system shall not be introduced into any sewer system either
directly or through a drain or waste disposal, including: [Amended
10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 7]
(1) Glass, metal or plastic.
(2) Diapers, sanitary napkins, tampons or baby wipes.
(3) Socks, rags or clothes.
D.
§ 132-2 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 132-3
129:99
Chapter 137
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 63.
Littering — See Ch. 84.
Unsolicited written material — See Ch. 168.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 180.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 201, Art. V.
Residential refuse collection — See Ch. 201,
Art. XI.
Waste automobile oil — See Ch. 201, Art. XII.
§ 137-1. Dumping. [Amended 5-1-1989 ATM by Art. 34]
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other solid waste,
as defined in MGL c. 16, § 18, on either public or private property other than
an area approved and licensed by the Board of Health or the Department
of Environmental Quality Engineering. Violators of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of $300 for each offense and shall be required to
remove the illegally dumped refuse and dispose of it in accordance with
town, state and federal regulations. Any violator shall be responsible for all
costs and expenses incurred in the removal and disposal of said waste. Said
penalties shall be cumulative with fines and penalties under any federal or
state criminal or civil statute.
§ 137-2. Recycling. [Added 5-6-1974 ATM by Art. 25; amended
5-16-1977 ATM by Art. 32; 5-16-1977 ATM by Art. 34; 5-21-1979
ATM by Art. 48; 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 22; 5-3-2007 ATM by Art.
17]
Restricted material: To insure compliance with the state solid waste facility
regulation, 310 CMR 19.017, which prohibits the disposal as trash of certain
recyclable materials, it shall be unlawful to have the following materials
disposed of in, or collected with the trash. The Town shall direct its
contracted waste hauler, which is obligated to comply with all state and
(4) Explosives or flammable material.
(5) Lubricating oils or grease.
(6) Strong chemicals or gasoline.
(7) Seafood shells or kitty litter.
The property owner shall be responsible for any and all costs to repair
and/or replace a grinder pump as a result of improper disposal of
materials into the sewer system.
{END OF CHAPTER}
E.
§ 132-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 137-2
129:100
local laws, not to collect any such visible recyclable materials with the trash.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the contracted recycling
hauler to remove any such recyclable materials placed out for collection
for the contracted recycling hauler. Violation of this subsection shall be
punishable by a fine of $25 for the first offense and subsequent offenses
$100.
§ 137-3. Municipal waste collection. [Added 6-11-1990 ATM by Art.
14]
Glass containers: glass bottles and jars, excluding light bulbs, Pyrex
cookware, plate glass, drinking glasses, windows, windshields and
ceramics;
A.
Metal containers: aluminum, steel or bimetal beverage and food
containers;
B.
Recyclable paper: all paper, cardboard, and paperboard products (e.g.,
office paper, newspaper, unwaxed cardboard and cereal boxes),
excluding tissue paper, paper towel, paper plates, cups and other lowgrade
paper products which become unusable to paper mills as a result
of normal intended use;
C.
Single resin narrow-necked plastic: all narrow-necked plastic
containers of any resin type. Narrow-necked containers are those for
which the diameter of the opening is smaller than the diameter of the
base (e.g., a soda bottle is narrow-necked but a yogurt container is not);
D.
Whole tires: unshredded motor vehicle tires, meaning tires which have
not been cut, sliced or ground into four or more pieces such that the
circular form of the tire has been eliminated;
E.
Yard waste and leaves: grass clippings, weeds, garden materials, shrub
trimmings and brush one inch or less in diameter, deciduous and
coniferous leaves;
F.
Cathode ray tubes (CRTs): any intact, broken, or processed glass tube
used to provide the visual display in televisions, computer monitors and
certain scientific instruments such as oscilloscopes (310 CMR 19.006);
G.
Lead-acid batteries: lead-acid batteries used in motor vehicles or
stationary applications; and
H.
White goods: large appliances, including refrigerators, freezers,
dishwashers, clothes washers and dryers, gas or electric ovens and
ranges and hot water heaters (310 CMR 19.0006).
I.
All residents, excepting those in structures or complexes with five or
more dwelling units, shall use the town-provided solid waste collection
services unless the town is provided with proper documentation that
solid waste is being disposed of in accordance with all applicable
municipal, state and federal laws. It shall be unlawful for any resident
A.
§ 137-2 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 137-3
129:101
§ 137-4. Town programs. [Added 10-28-1991 ATM by Art. 12]
to use town-provided solid waste collection services without paying the
applicable fee for such services.
Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $100 for each
offense.
B.
The Town of Chelmsford shall continue its program of curbside pickup
and disposal of solid household waste through the use of a private
contractor or contractors.
A.
The Town of Chelmsford shall continue a program that encourages all
residents to recycle specified items.
B.
The Town of Chelmsford shall continue its program for the disposal of
household hazardous waste and related items.
C.
Funding for the above programs shall be through the appropriation of
funds by an Annual or Special Town Meeting and/or the establishment
of an annual or other periodic user or subscriber fee or charge.
In the event that funding for any or all solid waste programs is
derived from a Proposition 21/2 override, then those funds shall
be exclusively used for such services for the fiscal year initially
authorized for and all future years. All such solid waste programs
shall include service to all single-family residences and all
multifamily complexes. [Added 4-27-1992 STM by Art. 2]
The Town Manager shall, when presenting a budget to Town
Meeting, specifically account for such funds.
(a)
In the event that Town Meeting shall fail to appropriate all or
any part of the funds for such services, the unused amount of
the proposition override shall not be raised nor shall it be used
for any other purpose.
(b)
(1)
Any and all funds received by the town from the sale of materials
collected and/or marketed through any of the solid waste programs
shall be used only for the purposes contained in this section.
[Added 4-27-1992 STM by Art. 2]
(2)
In the event that a user or subscriber fee or charge is established,
said funds will be accounted for and maintained in a programspecific
enterprise fund or account. Such fund shall be
administered by the Town Accountant in accordance with
applicable state laws, rules and regulations concerning this type of
account.
(3)
Notwithstanding the above, the Manager may negotiate
contractual terms whereby the town's selected contractor manages
and administers the annual fee for the collection, transportation
and/or disposal or marketing of solid wastes and recyclables, in
(4)
D.
§ 137-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 137-4
129:102
which event fees may be made directly to the contractor and shall
be accounted for under the terms of the contract. [Added
4-27-1992 STM by Art. 3]
No program shall significantly subsidize another program, except as
follows:
Billing. In the event that an annual user or subscriber fee is
established for household solid waste, the incidental cost of billing
and payment processing for other programs shall be borne by
the household solid waste program, provided that such billing and
payment processing is included as part of the household solid
waste program's billing and payment schedule.
(1)
Administration of programs. In the event that an annual user or
subscriber fee is established for household solid waste, the cost of
administering the various nonhousehold solid waste programs shall
be borne by the solid waste program. In the event that the actual
or projected costs of administering these other nonhousehold solid
waste programs exceeds 20% of the total cost of administration,
the town shall either fund such excess amount through an increase
in nonhousehold solid waste fees or other appropriation.
(2)
Equipment. Equipment used to administer, support and manage the
solid waste program may be utilized by other departments of the
town. Said use shall be under the direction of the Town Manager.
(3)
E.
The Board of Health shall regulate and license trash haulers in
accordance with the state laws. Said regulations shall provide for an
annual or multi-year licensing period that runs concurrently with the
annual user fee, if such a fee or charge is made.17
F.
The Town Manager shall be responsible for the establishment and
overall management of the various programs provided for in this
section. The Board of Health shall be responsible for providing overall
direction and enforcement of those areas of any of the programs that
are assigned to it by state law, local bylaw, the Board of Selectmen or
the Town Manager.
G.
The Town Manager shall, based upon information provided to him or
her by the Town Finance Director, Town Accountant and other sources,
recommend to the Board of Selectmen the amount of the annual or
other periodic user fee and/or charge. The Board of Selectmen shall
establish this fee and/or charge prior to the Annual Spring Town
Meeting. The Town Manager shall, when presenting his or her budget
to the Annual Spring Town Meeting or any other Town Meeting, include
in his or her budget a provision allowing for the appropriation of funds
from general town funds for any of the programs included in this
section. The Town Manager shall implement such changes and adjust
any fees and/or other charges accordingly.
H.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 201, Health Regulations, Art. XI, Residential Refuse Collection.
§ 137-4 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 137-4
129:103
All user and other fees assessed and/or charged under the terms of this
section shall be against the assessed owner of the property. In the event
that a property owner shall fail to pay a fee or charge made under this
section, the Town Manager shall be authorized to suspend the service
that has not been paid for. The Town Manager shall give the property
owner 10 days' notice by first class mail of the action to be taken. The
Town Manager shall notify the Board of Health of the proposed action.
I.
A property owner may elect to use an alternate trash hauler to comply
with the terms of this section and requirements of the Board of Health
for the disposal of household trash, provided that the alternate trash
hauler has been licensed by the Board of Health and appropriate
documentation is provided to the Town Manager within 30 days of
the start of the annual or other service period established by the
Town Manager. In the event that a property owner fails to provide
the appropriate documentation, it shall be presumed that the property
owner is participating in the town programs. The Town Manager shall
have the authority to establish appropriate rules and regulations for
the implementation of this provision and the apportionment of fees and/
or charges based upon partial year use. The Town Manager shall be
authorized to establish rules and regulations that allow for abatements
and payment deferral based on hardship or other similar
circumstances.
J.
In the event that a property owner wishes to appeal a decision of the
Town Manager, the Board of Selectmen, upon written request by the
property owner, shall hear such appeal and modify the Town Manager's
decision, provided that such decision shall be based upon the terms of
this section and applicable laws, rules and regulations as they pertain
to the programs included in this section. An affirmative vote of three
members of the Board of Selectmen shall be required to alter a decision
of the Town Manager.
K.
In the event that the programs shall be totally funded by general funds
available to the town and that no user fee or other charge shall be
required in a given fiscal year, the nonfinancial assets of the program
shall be given to the town at no cost or charge. Any surplus of funds in
the enterprise account shall be returned to the users as a credit against
their real estate taxes and/or other fees and betterments by the Town
Treasurer-Collector. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 31]
L.
Interpretation and implementation of the terms this section shall be
made by the Town Manager. This section shall go into effect at the
earliest date permissible by applicable state law. All funds collected for
the current year's programs shall be handled in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
M.
The Town Manager shall, within 120 days of the adoption of this
section, prepare and make available the rules and regulations
implementing the various programs included in this section.
N.
§ 137-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 137-4
129:104
Chapter 142
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 84.
Newsracks — See Ch. 96.
Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 116.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 174.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
Traffic rules and orders — See Ch. 203.
{END OF CHAPTER}
§ 137-4 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 137-4
129:105

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 1926 ATM]
§ 142-1. Throwing snowballs or other missiles; obstructing public
ways.
No person shall play ball or throw snowballs, balls, stones or other missiles
within or upon any streets or public ways of the Town or play at any games
obstructing free passage of the same.
§ 142-2. Pasturing of animals on public ways.
No person shall pasture any cattle, horses or other animals, either with or
without a keeper, upon any street or way in the Town.
§ 142-3. Use of public ways under repair.
No person shall ride, drive or cause to be driven any horse or vehicle
over that part of the street which is being mended, repaired or paved if a
watchperson or signs prohibiting passage are placed.
§ 142-4. Coasting. [Amended 1973 ATM by Art. 57]
No person shall coast or slide on any sled or other vehicle in or about any
public street or way in the Town unless the Selectmen shall have designated
such street or way as one upon which coasting or sliding is permitted.
§ 142-5. Riding animals on public ways. [Added 1954 ATM by Art.
90]
All persons shall be prohibited from riding or driving any animal on a public
way in the Town of Chelmsford after sunset or before sunrise without having
some suitable reflectors or lights attached to rider, driver, animal or vehicle
which are clearly visible to a motorist or pedestrian for a distance of at least
100 feet. The penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $20.
§ 142-6. Discharge of water to public ways or sidewalks; discharges
to storm sewer system. [Added 1973 ATM by Art. 54; amended
4-26-2010 ATM by Art. 13]
No water shall be intentionally discharged onto or into any public ways
or sidewalks of the Town so as to cause a dangerous and/or defective
condition.
A.
Discharges to the municipal storm sewer system.
Definitions.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Chelmsford
Department of Public Works (DPW), its employees, or agents
designated to enforce this bylaw.
(1)
B.
§ 142-1 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-6
129:107
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — An activity, procedure,
restraint, or structural improvement that helps to reduce the
quantity or improve the quality of stormwater runoff.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as may be amended from time to time.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition, from any source
of any pollutant, or combination of pollutants, into the municipal
storm sewer system or into the waters of the United States or
commonwealth.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or
conveyance which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal
storm sewer system, including without limitation, sewage, process
wastewater, or wash water, and any connections from indoor
drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was
previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the effective
date of this bylaw.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the
municipal storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of
stormwater, except as exempted in Subsection B(6). The term does
not include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES Stormwater
Discharge Permit or a Surface Water Discharge Permit, or resulting
from fire-fighting activities exempted pursuant to Subsection
B(6)(a) of this bylaw.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above
the ground that prevents water from infiltrating into the underlying
soil. Impervious surface includes without limitation, roads, paved
parking lots, sidewalks, and rooftops.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM or MUNICIPAL STORM
SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage system, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains):
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county,
parish, district, association or other public body (created by
or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal
of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes,
including special districts under state law such as a sewer
district, flood control district, or drainage district, or similar
entity or an Indian tribe or an authorized tribal organization of
a designated and approved management agency under Section
208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;
(a)
(b) Designated or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
§ 142-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-6
129:108
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly
with the commonwealth that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal
storm sewer system not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company,
trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or political
subdivision of the commonwealth or the federal government, to the
extent permitted by law and any officer, employee, or agent of such
person.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural,
industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent,
or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint source,
that is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works
or waters of the commonwealth. Pollutants shall include without
limitation:
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water, which during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any material, intermediate product, finished
product, or waste product.
(c) Which is not a combined sewer;
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW)
as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
(d)
(a) Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
(b) Oil and other automotive fluids;
(c) Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, ordinances, accumulations, and floatables;
(d)
(e) Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
(f)
(g) Dissolved and particulate metals;
(h) Animal wastes;
Rock, sand, salt, and soils with the exception of winter salting
and sanding;
(i)
(j) Construction wastes and residues; and
(k) Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 142-6 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-6
129:109
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished
by precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface
water through the soil.
STORMWATER — Rainfall runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface
water runoff and drainage. Runoff shall mean rainfall or snowmelt
water flowing over the ground surface.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314
CMR 3.00 that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material
which because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical,
corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive
characteristics, either separately or in combination with any
substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat
to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment. Toxic
or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste;
acid and alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous
under MGL c. 21C and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR
30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which
water flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or
underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the
jurisdiction of the commonwealth, including, without limitations,
rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries,
wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or
cesspool overflow and process wastewater.
Applicability. This bylaw shall apply to flows entering the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
(2)
Responsibility for administration. The DPW shall administer,
implement and enforce this bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties
imposed upon the DPW may be delegated in writing by the DPW to
employees or agents of the DPW.
(3)
Regulations. The DPW may promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purposes of this bylaw. Failure by the DPW to
promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of
suspending or invalidating this bylaw.
(4)
Prohibited activities.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or
allow to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater
(a)
(5)
§ 142-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-6
129:110
discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4), into a stormwater BMP on public or private property,
into a watercourse or into the waters of the commonwealth.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow,
maintain or continue any illicit connection to the municipal
storm sewer system, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the
time of connection.
(b)
Obstruction of municipal storm sewer system. No person shall
obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or
out of the municipal storm sewer system without prior written
approval from the DPW.
(c)
Exemptions.
(a) Discharge or flow resulting from fire-fighting activities.
The following nonstormwater discharges or flows are exempt
from the prohibition of non-stormwaters provided that the
source is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to the
municipal storm sewer system.
[1] Waterline flushing.
[2] Flow from potable water sources.
[3] Springs.
[4] Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands.
[5] Diverted stream flow.
[6] Rising groundwater.
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40
CFR 35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater.
[7]
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, or air-conditioning condensation.
[8]
[9] Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering.
[10]Water from individual residential car washing.
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less
than one ppm chlorine) provided the water is allowed
to stand for one week prior to draining and the pool is
drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance or
erosion.
[11]
[12]Discharge from street sweeping.
(b)
(6)
§ 142-6 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-6
129:111
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the
DPW prior to the time of the test.
[13]
Non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES
permit or a Surface Water Discharge Permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order administered under the authority of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection,
provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
applicable laws and regulations. [Amended 10-18-2010
ATM by Art. 20]
[14]
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received
from the DPW as necessary to protect public health, safety,
and welfare, or the environment.
[15]
Emergency suspension of storm sewer system access. The DPW
may suspend municipal storm sewer system access to any person
or property without prior written notice when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of pollutants
that presents imminent risk of harm to public health, safety, or
welfare, or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply
with an emergency suspension order, the DPW may take all
reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health,
safety, welfare or the environment.
(7)
Notification of spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of local
law, as soon as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation, has
information of or suspects a release of materials at that facility
or operation resulting in, or which may result in discharge of
pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
containment and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous materials, the reporting person shall notify the DPW
no later than the next business day. The reporting person shall
provide to the DPW written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile
or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter.
If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or
industrial facility, the facility owner or operator shall retain on site
a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such reports shall be retained for at least three
years from the date of the spill.
(8)
Enforcement. The DPW, or its authorized agent, shall enforce this
bylaw, resultant regulations, orders, violation notices, and
enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies
for such violations.
(9)
§ 142-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-6
129:112
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw,
regulation, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the
DPW may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction restraining the person from activities that would
create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
(a)
Orders.
The DPW or its authorized agent may issue a written order
to enforce the provisions of this bylaw or the regulations
hereunder, at the expense of the violator or property
owner which may include:
Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the
MS4;
[a]
[b] Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist; and
[c]
Remediation of contamination in connection
therewith.
[d]
[1]
If the enforcing agent determines that abatement or
remediation of contamination is required, the order shall
set forth a deadline by which such abatement or
remediation must be completed. Said order shall further
advise that should the violator or property owner fail to
abate or perform remediation within the specified
deadlines, the Town of Chelmsford may, at its option,
undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
[2]
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to
abate the violation or to perform remediation, the violator
and the property owner will be notified of the costs
incurred by the Town of Chelmsford, including
administrative costs. The violator or property owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis
of costs with the DPW within 30 days of receipt of the
notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due is not
received by the expiration of the time in which to file a
protest or within 30 days following a decision of the DPW
affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of
a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become
a special assessment against the property owner and shall
constitute a lien on the owner's property for the amount
of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid
costs at the statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57
after the 31st day at which the costs first become due.
[3]
(b)
§ 142-6 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-6
129:113
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this
bylaw, regulation, order or permit issued hereunder, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $300 per offense. Each
day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(c)
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal
prosecution or civil action, the Town of Chelmsford may elect
to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in
MGL c. 40, § 21D, in which case the DPW or authorized agent
of the Town shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the
first violation shall be a written warning and/or a fine of $100.
The penalty for the second violation shall be a fine of $200. The
penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be a fine
of $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(d)
Entry to perform duties under this bylaw. To the extent
permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other
party in control of the property, the DPW, its agents, officers,
and employees may enter upon privately owned property for
the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw and
regulations and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as the DPW deems
reasonably necessary.
(e)
Appeals. The decisions or orders of the DPW shall be final.
Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(f)
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this bylaw are
not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law.
(g)
Transitional provisions. Residential property owners shall have 180
days from the effective date of this bylaw to comply with its
provisions.
(10)
§ 142-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-6
129:114
ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted 5-9-1974 ATM by Art. 34]
§ 142-7. Permit required; applicability. [Amended 6-8-1976 ATM by
Art. 43; 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 142-8. Issuance of permit; time frame for completion of work.
§ 142-9. Conformance with other rules and regulations.
The owners of the utility and/or utility company or others, as described in
§ 142-7, shall exercise this permit subject to all the rules and regulations
made from time to time by the State Department of Public Safety,
Department of Public Works and Department of Public Utilities, and nothing
in this permit shall be construed as authorizing any installations or
maintenance thereof except in strict conformity with all federal, state and
municipal laws, ordinances, articles and regulations.
No person or individual, corporation or other type of entity shall open
a trench in, or disturb the surface of, any existing street or way, or
any proposed way or street in a proposed subdivision, for any of the
following purposes, but not restricted thereto, until a permit therefor is
granted by the Board of Selectmen or its designee and the Director of
the Department of Public Works, except in an emergency as determined
by the Director of the Department of Public Works: installing, repairing
and/or maintaining any duct, conduit, sleeve, pipe or other structure
to be used for distribution or transmission of wastewater or sewage,
surface water or stormwater, potable water, a brook or watercourse,
gas, oil or any of its by-products in any form, electrical power or service
or telephone or telegraph service.
A.
B. This article does not apply to the placing or replacing of poles.
Permits will be issued only in accordance with this article to the owners
of the utility or the utility company by whom the utility installation is
wanted, or others as described in § 142-7, or to their duly authorized
agents only. No permit shall be issued to the contractor.
A.
All work covered by the permit shall commence within one month of
the date of the issuance of the permit and be pursued diligently until
completed. Time of completion shall be stated in the permit, and upon
expiration of said time a new permit will have to be issued under
conditions and terms as required by this article and its amendments
in effect at the renewal date. For the purpose of this article, a cable
television company or corporation shall be considered a utility.
B.
§ 142-7 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-10
129:115
§ 142-10. Permit to be kept on site. [Amended 6-8-1976 ATM by Art.
43; 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
No work shall begin or continue in any street or way unless the permit,
legally and duly issued, or a duplicate copy, is on the site of the work and
shall be shown to any police officer or other authorized municipal person
upon request thereby. A legally and duly issued permit shall be a permit
which states the name and business address of the applicant, a specific date
of issuance, a specific date of completion and a general description of the
work to be done that is signed by not fewer than three Selectmen, or their
designee, and the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 142-11. Application for permit; approval of application and work.
[Amended 6-8-1976 ATM by Art. 43; 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
All applications for any permit shall be in quadruplicate. All applications and
work to be done under any permit issued must meet with the approval of
the Selectmen majority or its designee and the Director of the Department
of Public Works, or a unanimous vote of the Selectmen.
§ 142-12. Relocation of existing pipe or other structures.
If, during the progress of the work to be done under the initial permit,
any existing duct, conduit, sleeve, pipe or other structure used for the
distribution or transmission of wastewater or sewage, surface water or
stormwater, potable water, a brook or watercourse, gas, oil or any of its byproducts
in any form, electrical power or service or telephone or telegraph
service is encountered and must be relocated and/or modified in any way
so that the work will function properly and as intended upon completion, a
separate legally and duly issued permit must be obtained for each proposed
relocation and/or modification.
§ 142-13. Application fee. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 44;
4-29-2002 ATM by Art. 13; 10-17-2005 ATM by Art. 21]
All applications for any permit shall be accompanied by a certified check
payable to the Town of Chelmsford in the amount of $5 per linear foot,
with a minimum fee set by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to MGL c. 40,
§ 22F. If work is to be done on more than one way or street, a separate
legally and duly issued permit must be obtained for each way or street.
Permits required under § 142-12 and the first renewal of any legally and
duly issued permit are not subject to the application fee as provided for in
this section. Failure of work to commence within one month of the date of
issuance automatically voids the permit and will result in forfeiture of 10%
of the application fee to the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 142-14. Outstanding permits. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art.
18]
All outstanding permits issued by the Board of Selectmen, Director of
the Department of Public Works or any other Town governmental board,
§ 142-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-14
129:116
committee or body which has and/or had authorization to issue permits to
open a trench in, or to disturb the surface of, any existing and/or proposed
way or street that have not been exercised, either in whole or in part, prior
to this article being adopted by the Town and filed with the Secretary of
State and/or Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to be
effective shall be void.
§ 142-15. Performance of work. [Added 5-1-1989 ATM by Art. 21;
amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
All construction work performed under this article shall be performed by a
contractor licensed by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 142-16. Insurance; performance bond. [Added 5-1-1989 ATM by
Art. 21; amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 142-17. Revocation of contractor's license. [Added 5-1-1989 ATM
by Art. 21; amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
Violations of the provisions of this article shall result in the revocation, by
the Director of the Department of Public Works, of the contractor's license
to perform work in the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 142-18. Plans to accompany application. [Amended 5-1-1989 ATM
by Art. 21; 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
Contractors licensed to perform work under this article shall carry
comprehensive public liability with minimum limits as follows:
(1) Bodily injuries: $100,000 per person and $300,000 aggregate.
(2) Property damage: $100,000 per occurrence.
A.
The contractor shall deliver a current certificate of insurance to the
Director of the Department of Public Works before performing work
under this article and shall post a performance bond of $5,000 with
the Town securing work to be performed within the public right-ofway.
On projects where the Director of the Department of Public Works
determines that the cost of construction is $10,000 or greater, the
contractor shall post a performance bond payable to the Town securing
100% of the construction cost. The bond shall be released upon
approval of the work by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
B.
Unless specifically waived by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, all applications for a permit under this article shall be
accompanied with the following:
A separate sheet, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, for each street or
way to be included within the proposed work, said sheet to show
a plan view, with North point, and profile of the street or way at
a horizontal scale of 40 feet to an inch and a vertical scale of four
feet to an inch, with existing center-line grades in fine solid lines,
(1)
A.
§ 142-14 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-18
129:117
with existing elevations, derived from actual field survey, at fiftyfoot
stations shown by figures.
Said plan view of the proposed work and installation shall
show the location of the work in reference to existing utilities
and structures, i.e., sanitary sewers, storm sewers and drains,
water mains, any locatable utility installations and their
appurtenances, easements, property and street right-of-way
lines, bounds and/or property markers and other necessary
physical features, such as curblines, sidewalks, water gates,
gas gates, utility poles and trees of diameter greater than six
inches.
(a)
Said profile of the proposed work and installation shall show
the location of the work in reference to existing utilities and
structures, i.e., sanitary sewers, storm sewers and drains,
water mains, any locatable utility installations and their
appurtenances.
(b)
Both plan view and profile shall extend at least 250 feet beyond
the end limits of the proposed work and installation. All
information pertaining to existing lines and utilities shall be
shown in fine lines, and all proposed work shall be shown in
heavy lines. The plan view shall be on the upper portion of the
sheet and the profile on the lower portion of the sheet.
(c)
Offset lines and/or ties from locatable or relocatable points must be
shown, e.g., bound points and property lines.
(2)
Cross sections and/or details of proposed conduits, structures, etc.,
must be shown. Details and dimensions of outsized structures,
including manholes and vaults, must be shown. All outsized
structures, including manholes and vaults, must be shown. All
cross sections and details must be drawn to scale on a separate
sheet, 24 inches by 36 inches in size.
(3)
All vertical control shall be based on the Town of Chelmsford
datum.
(4)
All horizontal control shall be based on the Town of Chelmsford
coordinate system.
(5)
Construction standards as hereinafter detailed must be visually
detailed and/or inscribed on the plan view and/or profile.
(6)
Each sheet shall have a border of 1 1/2 inches on the left and a
border of 1/2 inch along the remainder of the sheet. The lower
right-hand corner of each sheet shall contain the name of the street
or way, the type of proposed utility installation, the name and
address of the applicant for the permit, the date, scale, name and
address of the surveyor, the name and address of the engineer and
the sheet number in a block four inches by six inches in size. If the
(7)
§ 142-18 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-18
129:118
proposed work and installation involves more than 5,000 linear feet
of street or way, a title sheet, 24 inches by 36 inches in size, shall
be the first sheet of the plans, with a locus plan of the work at a
scale of 2,000 feet to an inch.
Names of all abutters to the street or way proposed for the work
shall be shown on each plan as they appear in the most recent tax
list.
(8)
Each sheet of the plans shall be signed and stamped by a registered
land surveyor and registered professional engineer with seals of
registration for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Those
portions of the plan representing engineering design shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer.
(9)
A letter-size locus plan of the work, at a scale of 2,000 feet to an
inch, in quadruplicate, must accompany the permit application.
(10)
Eight prints, dark line on white background, of sheets shall be
submitted with the application.
(11)
If deemed necessary by the Selectmen, the Department of Public Works
Director or their duly authorized representative, a baseline or center
line of construction for both vertical and horizontal control of the work
will be established prior to construction by a registered land surveyor.
This baseline or center line will be shown on final construction plans.
No variation from the baseline or center line of construction shall be
made unless written permission is given by the Selectmen, Director of
the Department of Public Works or their duly authorized representative.
All plans are to be submitted to the Selectmen and the Director of the
Department of Public Works for review prior to issuance of the permit.
B.
When the proposed location of installation is in the sidewalk area or in
any other location where accuracy of bounds, bound points, property
markers, etc., may be jeopardized, the Director of the Department
of Public Works shall require that a registered land surveyor locate
and properly reference tie all such points prior to construction. Upon
completion of all construction, the bounds, bound points, property
markers, etc., will then be checked against the reference ties, and
any variation of said points will be duly recorded by the registered
land surveyor. A legible copy of all field notes and ties recorded by
the registered land surveyor, upon completion of his or her work,
shall become the property of the Department of Public Works Director.
Original field notes are to be available for examination by duly
authorized representatives of the Director of the Department of Public
Works upon request.
C.
§ 142-18 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-19
129:119
§ 142-19. Town to be notified prior to start of construction.
[Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
Written notification of one week prior to commencing construction will be
required. This notification shall be sent to the Department of Public Works
Director and Police Chief and shall contain the name, address and telephone
number of the contractor or party who or which is to perform the work as
well as the telephone number for emergency calls which may arise when
the contractor is absent from the work site.
§ 142-20. Work hours. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 142-21. Photographs.
All work to be performed hereunder shall be done between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; provided, however, that different work hours
for the performance of such work may be agreed upon or required for
good cause by the Director of the Department of Public Works, and said
requirement shall be stated in writing at the time of issuance of the
permit.
A.
No Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday work will be allowed unless an
emergency or accommodation situation arises and permission is given
by the Director of the Department of Public Works. Said permission may
be granted orally; however, a written confirmation that such permission
has been granted shall be made by the Director of the Department of
Public Works as soon as practicable thereafter.
B.
In regard to Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday work, the Director of
the Department of Public Works shall determine whether an emergency
or accommodation situation exists. "Emergency" is an unforeseen
combination of circumstances which calls for an immediate action, a
pressing necessity.
C.
No excavation, trenching, etc., shall be allowed in any street or way,
accepted or unaccepted, or proposed way or street between November
15 and April 1, except in the case of an emergency, which shall be
determined by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
D.
If required by the Selectmen and/or the Director of the Department of
Public Works, a sufficient number of photographs must be taken prior to
the excavation to serve as reference to ensure restoration of designated
areas to their former condition. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art.
18]
A.
The required photographs within the work limits shall be taken prior
to the commencement of the work and shall be of a size, type, quality
and number as determined by the Director of the Department of Public
Works. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
B.
All expenses incurred by the requirements of this section shall be borne
by the permittee.
C.
§ 142-19 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-22
129:120
§ 142-22. Inspector.
§ 142-23. Maintenance of traffic flow; safety precautions.
A full-time inspector shall be assigned to each trench opening or
excavation site in any way or street, accepted or unaccepted, or
proposed way or street by the Director of the Department of Public
Works. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
A.
The inspector's duties will be as determined by the Director of the
Department of Public Works. In general, the inspector will be the
Town's agent who will ensure compliance of the work with the
provisions of this article. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
B.
The inspector will file daily written reports with the Director of the
Department of Public Works and a copy to the Selectmen and will be
responsible for reporting any violations of the provisions of this article
in said daily written reports. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
C.
Safety and the use of proper construction methods and/or techniques
are not the responsibility of the inspector.
D.
Failure of the Director of the Department of Public Works to assign an
inspector to a trench opening or excavation site in any way or street,
accepted or unaccepted, or proposed way or street does not in any way
relieve the permittee of the responsibility of full compliance with the
provisions of this article. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
E.
The fee and incidental expenses of the inspector shall be borne by
the permittee and payable, by check or money order, to the Town
of Chelmsford. These fees and those included in § 142-13 shall be
deposited in a revolving fund maintained for the purpose of paying the
expenses relative to inspections. [Amended 4-28-1997 ATM by Art.
15]
F.
The permittee is solely responsible for notifying the Director of the
Department of Public Works, in writing, of any scheduled testing of any
work under permit at least 48 continuous hours prior to the time of
the scheduled test. Failure of the permittee to do so could result, if
deemed necessary by the Director of the Department of Public Works,
in the retesting of those portions of the work for which the testing was
unobserved by the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or
her duly authorized representative. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by
Art. 18]
G.
The permittee shall so prosecute his or her work that traffic, both
pedestrian and vehicular, will be maintained over and through the work
with a maximum of safety and convenience.
A.
Every opening made in a street or way, accepted or unaccepted, or
proposed street or way shall be enclosed with sufficient barriers,
sufficiently lighted at night and posted with necessary signs, to guard
B.
§ 142-22 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-23
129:121
the public against all accidents from the beginning to the completion
of the work. The responsibility of maintaining sufficient safety features
around the work is solely that of the permittee and in no way the
responsibility of the Town of Chelmsford.
Uniformed police shall be present to maintain two-way traffic in the
roadway during the hours work is being done under the permit.
At least one week prior to commencing construction, the permittee
shall give written notification with all pertinent information
regarding the work to the Police Chief so that the Police Chief may
prepare a roster of police officers assigned to the excavation site.
(1)
If, in his or her opinion and judgment, the Police Chief deems
necessary the assigning of more than one police officer to the
excavation site, the Police Chief may do so in the best interest of
public safety.
(2)
The permittee may request a waiver of the requirement for
uniformed police at the excavation site in writing to the Police
Chief, who must evaluate the request for a waiver and reply to the
permittee, in writing, within five days of receipt of the request for
waiver.
If the Police Chief grants the waiver and at some future time
during the progress of the work the Police Chief visits the
excavation site and deems necessary that a uniformed police
officer be present to maintain two-way traffic in the roadway,
the Police Chief may immediately rescind, suspend or modify
this waiver.
(a)
A request for a waiver does not relieve the permittee in any
way of the responsibility of having uniformed police at the
excavation site until said waiver has been granted, in writing,
by the Police Chief.
(b)
(3)
The fee and incidental expenses of the uniformed police assigned
to the excavation site shall be borne by the permittee and payable,
by check or money order, to the Town of Chelmsford.
(4)
C.
Pavement, fire hydrants, catch basins and sidewalk areas shall be kept
reasonably clear of excavated materials. Pedestrians must be able to
walk by, or a boardwalk must be constructed over any excavation
authorized hereunder.
D.
Proper access at all times should be maintained to both public and
private property, with all driveways and streets to be opened at night. In
cases where necessity deems a roadway trench be kept open overnight,
express written permission from the Director of the Department of
Public Works and written notification to the Police and Fire
Departments will be necessary. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art.
18]
E.
§ 142-23 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-23
129:122
§ 142-24. Construction standards.
Any snow or ice condition that may occur during construction must
be properly controlled through sanding and/or salting or plowing to
points 250 feet beyond either end limit of the construction area, unless
otherwise decided by the Director of the Department of Public Works
or his or her duly authorized representative. [Amended 10-15-1990
ATM by Art. 18]
F.
The permittee shall be responsible for instructing all employees in
the principles of first aid and safety and in the specific operational
procedure necessary to prevent accidents. The permittee shall provide
for the availability and maintenance of adequate first aid supplies at the
excavation site at all times.
G.
Grassed areas. Any grassed areas, where entered and disturbed, either
public or private, shall be properly compacted as hereinafter described
and loamed to a minimum depth of six inches, seeded and fertilized. The
permittee is responsible for maintaining these areas until a satisfactory
crop of grass has been grown to the satisfaction of the Director of the
Department of Public Works. The seed shall be sown only between the
periods from April 15 to June 1 and from August 15 to October 15 or as
directed by the Director of the Department of Public Works. [Amended
10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
A.
Trees. The issuance of the permit does not authorize the trimming or
removal of any trees or shrubs. The necessary removal of any tree
shall be under the supervision of the Tree Warden or his or her duly
authorized representative. Hand digging shall be required around the
roots of trees and shrubs.
B.
Fences. Any fence requiring removal for satisfactory prosecution of the
work shall be removed and then reset by the permittee. Any materials
removed shall be utilized in the fence reset, except that, where
necessary, new posts and bases shall be furnished by the permittee. Any
materials damaged or lost during or subsequent to the removal shall be
replaced by the permittee at his or her own expense. All new materials
required shall be equal in quality and design to the materials in the
present fence.
C.
Saw cutting of pavement. Where required by the Director of the
Department of Public Works, the roadway and/or sidewalk pavement
are to be saw cut to neat, true lines as directed. All newly resurfaced
roadways shall be saw cut. Such cutting shall be to a depth below the
pavement as to prevent tearing of the surface when the excavation is
begun. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
D.
Maximum trench opening. The excavation is to be kept as neat as
existing conditions permit, and not more than 150 feet shall be left open
at any time during working hours and not more than 20 feet of trench
shall be left open overnight without written permission of the Director
E.
§ 142-23 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-24
129:123
of the Department of Public Works. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by
Art. 18]
Roadway dust control. The permittee shall furnish and apply calcium
chloride as a dust-control material at all locations where directed by
the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her duly
authorized representative. Calcium chloride shall be uniformly applied
either by hand methods or by approved spreading devices at a rate
of no more than one pound per square yard. [Amended 10-15-1990
ATM by Art. 18]
F.
Unsuitable material. All excavated material is to be discarded unless
otherwise suitable, and if not suitable shall be replaced with the
following material acceptable to the Department of Public Works
Director or equivalent, namely, one-half-inch to three-fourths-inch
crushed processed gravel for the bed and also above the item placed
in the excavation for a depth not less than six inches below the
bottommost portion of the item and for a depth not less than six
inches above the topmost portion of the item to be standard. Any
excavated materials not required or not suitable for backfilling shall be
removed from the site of the work and disposed of by the permittee.
The permittee will not be allowed to store excess excavated material
on the public highways. All excavated material which is not to be
used in a reasonable amount of time, as determined by the Director
of the Department of Public Works or his or her duly authorized
representative, for backfilling shall be hauled away and stored until
such time as the material is to be used for backfilling by the permittee.
[Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
G.
Disposal of discarded materials. The permittee shall be held responsible
for all discarded materials, rubbish and debris that are dumped or fall
within the limits of the project. Such materials shall be removed from
the site and disposed of at the permittee's expense.
H.
Backfill material. The backfill material used shall be of a quality
satisfactory to the Director of the Department of Public Works and
shall be free from large or frozen lumps, wood, organic matter and
other extraneous material and shall contain no boulders or broken
ledge greater than 1/2 cubic yard. All stones, boulders or broken ledge
greater than one cubic foot in size must be a minimum of 1 1/2 feet
above the topmost portion of the item placed in the excavation and a
minimum of two feet below the pavement surface grade. [Amended
10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
I.
Sheeting. Lumber sheeting shall be installed where trench excavation
would cause failure to adjacent pavement. Unless otherwise directed,
sheeting shall be driven to such depth as to be two feet below normal
excavation. The sheeting shall be securely and satisfactorily braced
to withstand all pressures to which it may be subjected and shall be
sufficiently tight to prevent any flow of water or material into the work
space. Upon completion of the work, sheeting shall be driven down or
J.
§ 142-24 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-24
129:124
cut off 18 inches below pavement grade and left in place, or as directed
by the Director of the Department of Public Works. No sheeting may
be left so as to create a possible hazard to the safety of the public,
obstruction to flow of water or a hindrance to traffic of any kind.
[Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
Compaction of backfill. Backfill shall be uniformly distributed in
successive layers, each layer being thoroughly compacted before the
succeeding layer is placed. The entire width of the trench shall be
mechanically or hand tamped in six-inch lifts a minimum of two feet
above the utility installation and mechanically tamped the remainder of
the fill in lift depths not greater than two feet.
K.
Grading, rolling and finishing. [Amended 5-1-1989 ATM by Art. 21]
The word "approved" as appearing in this section shall mean
conforming to Massachusetts Department of Public Works
specifications, as amended.
(1)
The trench in the street must be filled and temporarily resurfaced
on the same day it is opened unless otherwise directed by the
Director of the Department of Public Works or his or her designee.
The trench shall be backfilled with approved excavated materials
to within 19 1/2 inches of the top. Eighteen inches shall consist of
approved gravel (State Department of Public Works Specification
M1.03.0 Type B), and the remaining 1 1/2 inches shall consist
of temporary bituminous surface. Road surface shall be precut
to avoid damaging surfaces surrounding the trench. [Amended
10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
If the temporary road surface is not placed the first day, then
as soon as directed by the Director of the Department of Public
Works the gravel subbase shall be excavated to the required
grade in order to place 1 1/2 inches of temporary bituminous
surface. The temporary pavement shall be placed and raked to
a uniform surface and rolled to the required thickness and to
a grade that will match the existing bituminous road surface.
The permittee shall maintain the temporary surfacing and shall
promptly fill with similar material any depressions and holes
that may occur so as to keep the surfacing in a safe and
satisfactory condition for traffic.
(a)
Temporary resurfacing must be a minimum of 1 1/2 inches
compacted thickness and may consist of either so-called "cold
patch" or plant-mixed hot asphalt aggregate, all as produced
in accordance with the standard specifications of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works. The bituminous
concrete surface shall not be placed until the expiration of 30
days from the date of completion of the temporary surface. The
temporary subbase shall be excavated to the grade required
(b)
(2)
L.
§ 142-24 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-24
129:125
by this article prior to placement of the bituminous concrete
surface.
Restoration of permanent paving. [Amended 5-1-1989 ATM by Art.
21; 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18; 4-28-1997 ATM by Art. 17]
The permittee shall remove and dispose of, in accordance with
acceptable construction standards, all excavated material before
proceeding with the remainder of the work and shall thoroughly
compact the surface of the subbase. Any broken or irregular edges
of existing pavements shall be cut away in straight lines as directed
by the Director of the Department of Public Works, leaving a solid
vertical face.
(1)
The bituminous concrete base and top shall be laid and rolled in
two courses. The binder (base course) shall not be less than the
existing roadway base course and shall not be less than two inches
in depth, and the top course shall be 1 1/2 inches in depth. The
minimum total thickness of both courses, measured after rolling,
shall be 3 1/2 inches.
(2)
The base course of the permanent pavement shall be placed and
carefully raked to minimum surface and thoroughly rolled to the
required thickness. Before placing the base course of the
permanent pavement, the edge of the original bituminous surfacing
shall receive an application of approved asphalt emulsion so that
the new pavement material may be properly bonded to the existing
pavement. All seams shall be sealed with an approved emulsified
liquid asphalt and sand. The top course of the permanent paving
shall be placed to a grade that will match the existing bituminous
surface after rolling. The permanent paving shall not overlap the
existing pavement and shall not have to be applied with a
mechanical spreader unless otherwise directed by the Director of
the Department of Public Works.
(3)
The permittee shall furnish, place, grade and compact bituminous
concrete pavement of Class I, Type I-1, as shown and specified
in the latest Massachusetts State Department of Public Works
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges. Unless
otherwise approved by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, a full width overlay will be required if greater than 50%
of the roadway pavement width will be disturbed. In these cases,
pavement overlay shall consist of 1 1/2 inches of dense-graded
bituminous concrete and shall extend at least 30 feet beyond the
street opening. Excavations shall be made in open cut. Tunneling
will be allowed by special permission of the Director of the
Department of Public Works. All excavations and trenches shall be
braced and sheathed when necessary as required by Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) specifications.
(4)
M.
§ 142-24 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-24
129:126
Street openings shall be maintained by the permittee for a period
of five years from the date of completion, except for work that
requires a curb-to-curb overlay, in which case the maintenance
period shall be two years. No additional permits shall be issued to
the permittee or contractor who has any outstanding unmaintained
street openings. After new full-width permanent surface is laid,
street surface openings shall be prohibited for a period of five years
for all roads, except in cases where a variance is obtained pursuant
to § 142-30 of this article. The list of streets as classified by the
Director of the Department of Public Works shall be kept on file at
the Department of Public Works. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by
Art. 44; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 25]
(5)
All permanent pavement markings, including but not limited to
crosswalks, traffic and center lines, that are obliterated or
damaged during construction shall be repainted by or under the
direction of the Director of the Department of Public Works at the
expense of the permittee.
(6)
Reinforced concrete pavement replacement. If reinforced concrete
pavement is encountered during the work, it shall be replaced in
accordance with acceptable construction standards or as directed by
the Director of the Department of Public Works.
N.
Bituminous concrete sidewalk replacement. When work is performed in
sidewalk areas, the entire sidewalk shall be replaced as follows. The
entire trench area shall be thoroughly compacted to a point nine inches
below the finish grade. Six inches of compacted processed gravel
subbase shall then be placed. Forms shall be installed where deemed
necessary to assist in securing proper alignment and adequate
compaction of the base and surface courses. Bituminous concrete Type
I shall then be laid in two courses to a depth of three inches, each
course consisting of 1 1/2 inches. The walk shall have a pitch of 3/16
of an inch per foot of width to provide for proper drainage toward the
gutter. The surface of each course shall be rolled with a self-propelled
tandem roller weighing not less than 1 1/2 tons and not more than five
tons. In places not accessible to a power roller, compaction shall be
obtained by means of hand tampers weighing not less than 50 pounds
and having a tamping face not exceeding 100 square inches.
O.
Concrete sidewalk replacement. Cement concrete sidewalks shall be
repaired by making a new concrete block or blocks through the trench
passes. Preformed expansion joints, when deemed necessary, will be
installed against buildings, walls, steps, foundations or existing
concrete blocks. The new cement concrete square shall consist of
entrained Class A (3500 pounds per square inch) mix. All concrete
must be cured by covering all material in accordance with acceptable
construction standards or as directed by the Director of the Department
of Public Works. All walks shall be laid over a minimum of 12 inches of
well-compacted gravel. Cement concrete shall be treated with silicone
P.
§ 142-24 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-24
129:127
§ 142-25. Damage to private property.
Liability for damage to private property abutting the construction and
caused by the permittee, his or her agents or servants shall be borne solely
by the permittee performing the work.
§ 142-26. Indemnification of Town. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by
Art. 18]
The issuance of the permit to an individual, utility or the utility company
and/or its agents or others as described in § 142-7 of this article shall
constitute an agreement with the Town of Chelmsford whereby the utility or
the utility company and/or its agents, an individual or others shall indemnify
and save harmless the Town of Chelmsford against all claims for damages
for injuries to persons or property and against all costs, suits, expenses
or linseed oil sealer for salt damage prevention. [Amended 5-1-1989
ATM by Art. 21; 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
Bituminous concrete berm. The construction requirements, dimensions
and cross section of bituminous concrete berm shall be as directed
by the Director of the Department of Public Works. [Amended
10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
Q.
Curb. When work is performed adjacent to granite curbing, extreme
care is to be taken to ensure that curbing remains undisturbed both
horizontally and vertically. Curbing which has been chipped, marred
or cracked during construction shall be replaced when so directed by
the Director of the Department of Public Works. Disturbed curbing
shall be reset to line and grade by accepted methods. The permittee
shall be held responsible for any settlement or horizontal movement
of granite curb due to washout or trench settlement after completion
of construction for a period of time acceptable to the Director of the
Department of Public Works. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
R.
Time limit for sidewalk paving. Sidewalk repaving and/or replacement
must follow as close behind installation as conditions permit. Excessive
linear footage of sidewalk left unrepaired will not be allowed.
S.
Disturbing existing utilities. The permittee shall exercise special care
during excavation to avoid injury to underground structures, such as
water or gas mains, pipes, conduits, manholes, catch basins, etc. When
necessary the permittee shall cooperate with representatives of public
service companies in order to avoid damage to their structures by
furnishing and erecting suitable supports, props, shoring and other
means of protection. The permittee shall be liable for repair of any
damage to such utilities, either public or private, to the satisfaction of
the Director of the Department of Public Works. The construction and/
or reconstruction of any Town of Chelmsford catch basin or manhole
shall be in accordance with the Town of Chelmsford standards.
[Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
T.
§ 142-24 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-26
129:128
and losses occasioned by or arising from entering streets and/or ways and
from occupancy and use of said streets and/or ways and further agree to
pay all costs and damages which may be recovered against the Town of
Chelmsford by reason of entering said streets and/or ways and on account
of occupancy of said premises and shall further be required to provide
insurance therefor, unless otherwise determined by the Selectmen and
Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 142-27. Enforcement; order to comply.
§ 142-28. Hearings. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
If an examination of the work reveals that it does not comply with or
violates the provisions of this article, the Selectmen and/or the Director
of the Department of Public Works shall notify and order, in writing, the
permittee and its duly authorized supervisor at the work site, who shall
take such appropriate measures as necessary to assure compliance
with the provisions of this article. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM by
Art. 18]
A.
If a further examination of the work, not less than 48 continuous hours
after the issuance of orders, reveals that no positive action and/or
appropriate measures are or were being taken by the permittee or its
duly authorized supervisor at the work site to assure compliance with
the provisions of this article, the Selectmen and/or the Director of the
Department of Public Works shall rescind, suspend or modify, through
the imposition of conditions, the permit. [Amended 10-15-1990 ATM
by Art. 18]
B.
Every order issued to enforce the provisions of this article shall be in
writing and shall be served on the permittee and its duly authorized
supervisor at the work site and/or all persons responsible for the
violation of this article.
C.
Every order issued to enforce the provisions of this article shall include
a statement of the violation or defect, shall allot a reasonable time
for any action necessary to effect compliance and may suggest action
which, if taken, will effect compliance with this article.
D.
Any person to whom any order to comply with the provisions of this
article is issued or any person who objects to the issuance of a variance
may request a hearing before the Selectmen and the Department of
Public Works Director or their designee by filing a written application
within 10 days of the receipt of the order or within 10 days of the filing
of the notice of the granting of the variance.
A.
Upon receipt of written application, the Selectmen, the Director of the
Department of Public Works or their designee shall establish a time and
place for such hearing and inform the petitioner thereof in writing. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the day on
which the application was filed.
B.
§ 142-26 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-28
129:129
§ 142-29. Violations and penalties.
§ 142-30. Variances.
§ 142-31. Severability.
Each of these sections shall be construed as separate, to the end that if
any section of paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other sections
of this article shall continue in full force.
At the hearing the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be
heard and to show why the order or variance should be modified or
withdrawn.
C.
After the hearing, the Selectmen and the Director of the Department
of Public Works shall sustain, modify or withdraw the order or variance
and may rescind, suspend or modify, through the imposition of
conditions, the permit and shall inform the petitioner, in writing, of the
decision.
D.
Every notice, order and other record prepared by the Selectmen and/
or the Director of the Department of Public Works or their designee
in connection with the hearing shall be entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Director of the Department of Public Works.
E.
Any permittee who violates or refuses to comply with any provision of
this article and orders hereunder promulgated shall forfeit and pay to
the use of the Town of Chelmsford a sum of $50 for each violation.
A.
Each day, or portion of a day, that any violation is allowed to continue
shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
B.
The Selectmen and the Director of the Department of Public Works,
upon their own initiative or upon application to them by any individual,
utility or others as described in § 142-7, after due notice and public
hearing, may vary any provision of this article as they deem necessary
with respect to any particular case when, in their opinion, the
enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice or cause undue
hardship, provided that their decision shall not conflict with the spirit
of this article. The burden of proof of the manifest injustice or causes
of hardship shall be the responsibility of the applicant. [Amended
10-15-1990 ATM by Art. 18]
A.
Variances, when granted, shall be in writing and shall be effective for
not more than one year. Notice of the grant of a variance shall be filed
with the Town Clerk within 10 days after the variance has been granted.
B.
§ 142-28 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-32
129:130
§ 142-32. Municipal departments. [Amended 5-1-1989 ATM by Art.
21]
Municipal departments of the Town of Chelmsford shall be exempt from the
fees associated with this article but shall conform to all other aspects of this
article.
§ 142-33. Inconsistent bylaws repealed.
All provisions of the bylaws of the Town of Chelmsford, as amended, which
are not inconsistent with this article shall continue in effect, but all
provisions of said bylaws inconsistent are repealed.
§ 142-32 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-33
129:131

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice
[Adopted 5-6-1991 ATM by Art. 24]
§ 142-34. Deposit on public ways and fire hydrants.
No person shall pile, push, throw, shovel or by any other method or means
cause snow to be deposited or placed on any public roadway or sidewalk or
fire hydrant or other similar device in the Town so as to impede, obstruct
or interrupt or otherwise adversely affect the unrestricted flow of traffic, or
conceal any fire hydrant or other similar device, or the safe travel of any
pedestrian on such roadway or sidewalk.
§ 142-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by
Art. 19]
Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50
for each violation. Each instance or new day shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 142-34 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-35
129:133

ARTICLE IV
Utility Poles
[Adopted 10-20-1997 ATM by Art. 11]
§ 142-36. Location restricted; exception.
No public or private organization or utility company shall place or allow
more than one pole to exist within five feet of another utility pole on any
public or private way within the Town of Chelmsford without the permission
of the Board of Selectmen, which may contain conditions. There is excepted
from this provision the temporary emergency replacement of a damaged
utility pole.
§ 142-37. Order to remove, relocate or alter.
Following a public hearing, the Selectmen may issue an order for the
removal, relocation or alteration of any utility pole or poles in excess of
one at any given location, upon the determination that more than one
utility pole at any given location presents a nuisance, hazard or threat
to the public safety, welfare or convenience to the inhabitants of the
Town.
A.
Any organization or utility company which owns or is responsible for a
utility pole or poles subject to any order issued by the Selectmen shall
fully comply with the terms and conditions of any such order within
180 days of the date of its issuance unless such period is extended
by the Selectmen in their sole and absolute discretion. In the event of
noncompliance with the terms of any order issued by the Selectmen,
the Selectmen may take whatever enforcement action they deem
appropriate, including, without limitation:
The imposition of a fine of $300 per day for each day of
noncompliance;
(1)
The application for an injunction restraining the continued
existence of any such pole or poles subject to such order; and
(2)
Any other penalties, impositions or relief as the Selectmen may
deem necessary.
(3)
B.
§ 142-36 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-37
129:135

ARTICLE V
Vision Obstructions
[Added 10-16-2000 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 142-38. Use restrictions.
In order to provide an unobstructed sight distance for motorists, nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to block vision of operators of motor vehicles between a height of 2 1/2
and 10 feet above grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded
by the street lines of said real estate and a line joining points 20 feet along
said street lines from the point of intersection of said street lines. Buildings
existing as of the effective date of this article are exempt from this article.
§ 142-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this provision and after being notified by the
Board of Selectmen in writing of such violation, permits such violation to
continue for 30 days after receipt of said notice, may be punished by a
fine of $50. For the purposes of this section, each successive day during
which any violations committed or continued shall be deemed a separate
offense. Violations of this provision may be enforced through noncriminal
disposition, in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Article II, § 1-2 of
the Chelmsford General By-Laws. The Board of Selectmen or its designee,
Chelmsford police officers and the Director of the Department of Public
Works may enforce this section.
{END OF CHAPTER}
§ 142-38 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 142-39
129:137
Chapter 144
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY
§ 142-39 CHELMSFORD CODE § 142-39
129:138
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)
§ 144-1. through § 144-5. (Reserved)
§ 144-1 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 144-1
129:139

ARTICLE II
Polystyrene in Food Establishments
[Adopted 10-15-2018 ATM by Art. 22]
§ 144-5.1. Purpose and intent.
This bylaw is enacted for the purpose of eliminating the distribution of
polystyrene containers by all food establishments in the Town of
Chelmsford:
§ 144-5.2. Effective date.
This bylaw shall take effect July 1, 2019.
§ 144-5.3. Definitions.
DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVICE CONTAINER — Shall mean single-use
disposable products for serving or transporting prepared, ready-to-consume
food or beverages, including, without limitation, take-out foods and/or
leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared by a food establishment.
This includes, but is not limited to plates, cups, bowls, trays, hinged or
lidded containers, cups, lids, straws, and utensils. It does not include singleuse
disposable packaging for unprepared foods.
Whereas, the Town has a duty to protect the health of its citizens and
the natural environment.
A.
Whereas, Styrofoam is the brand name for polystyrene (Dow Chemical
Co.), a synthetic plastic that biodegrades so slowly (hundreds of years)
it is considered to be nonbiodegradable.
B.
Whereas, expanded polystyrene containers are not part of the Town's
regular recycling program.
C.
Whereas, styrene, the key ingredient in expanded polystyrene, was
recently added to the National Toxicology Program's list of carcinogens
(United States Department of Health and Human Services). Styrene
can leach from polystyrene containers into food and beverages. It has
become a major component of plastic debris in the ocean and animals
often mistake it for food. It is also hazardous to marine life, transferring
toxic chemicals to the food chain.
D.
Whereas, several communities in Massachusetts have banned
disposable food service containers, including Amherst, Brookline, Great
Barrington, Nantucket, Somerville, South Hadley, Williamstown as well
as major cities such as Los Angeles, Chicago, Miami Beach, New York
City, Portland, and Seattle. This bylaw is patterned after similar ones
enacted in Massachusetts.
E.
Whereas, appropriate alternative products are readily available from
vendors and are already being used by many of our businesses.
F.
§ 144-5.1 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 144-5.3
129:141
EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE — Shall mean blown polystyrene (polystyrene
that has been expanded or blown using a gaseous blowing agent into a
solid foam) and expanded and extruded forms, which are thermoplastic
petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by
any number of techniques, including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer
spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding,
and extrusion blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). The term also
includes clear or solid polystyrene, which is also known as "oriented,"
or referenced in this bylaw as "rigid polystyrene." Rigid polystyrene is
generally used to make clear clamshell containers, lids, and cutlery.
FINEABLE OFFENSE — Is defined as a knowing common use of item or
items restricted by the bylaw. Common use refers to item or items that are
part of one's normal or daily use.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption, as further defined in 105 CMR 590.002. Any establishment
requiring a permit to operate in accordance with the State Food Code,
105 CMR 590.000, et seq., shall be considered a food establishment for
purposes of this bylaw.
PREPARED FOOD — Shall mean any food or beverage prepared on the food
establishment's premises using any cooking or food preparation technique.
Prepared food does not include any raw uncooked meat, fish or eggs unless
provided for consumption without further food preparation. Prepared food
may be eaten on or off the food establishment's premises.
TOWN FACILITY — Shall mean any building, structure, land, or recreational
area owned, leased, or operated by the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 144-5.4. Prohibitions.
Except as provided herein, food establishments are prohibited from
dispensing prepared food and drink in disposable food service
containers made from expanded polystyrene. All food establishments
are strongly encouraged to use reusable food service containers and
cutlery, and when possible biodegradable, compostable alternatives.
Compostable materials must meet ASTM (American Society of the
International Association for Testing and Materials) Standards for
compostability.
A.
Town departments or agencies shall not purchase or use disposable
food service containers made from expanded polystyrene while in the
performance of official Town duties.
B.
Individuals, contractors, vendors, or other entities shall not use
disposable food service containers made from expanded polystyrene in
a Town facility or Town property while acting or performing under a
Town contract, lease, license, permit, grant, or other agreement.
C.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit someone from purchasing or using
said containers for personal use, nor shall it prohibit any individual
D.
§ 144-5.3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 144-5.4
129:142
§ 144-5.5. Variance.
§ 144-5.6. Enforcement, penalties and fines.
from purchasing or using said containers for a private function or when
serving food on property owned by that person.
Any food establishment or Town Department and its agencies may make
a written application to the Board of Health for a variance from this
bylaw.
A.
Every application for a variance is subject to a public hearing. Notice
of the hearing shall be posted as part of a public notice of the Board
of Health meeting at which the application will be considered. Notice
shall be posted no less than 48 hours before the meeting.
B.
By vote of a majority of its full authorized membership, the Board of
Health may grant a variance in cases where a suitable biodegradable,
compostable, reusable or recyclable alternative does not exist for a
specific usage, and/or enforcement of this bylaw would cause undue
hardship to that food establishment or Town Department.
C.
A variance may be granted for up to six months and extended for like
periods upon submission of a renewal application.
D.
E. Any variance granted by the Board shall be in writing.
A copy of the variance granted under this section shall be available for
public inspection on the premises for which it is issued.
F.
Enforcement. The Board of Health or its designee shall have primary
responsibility for enforcement of this bylaw. This shall include:
establishment of regulations or administrative procedures, inspections,
and issuance of citations for violations.
A.
Penalty for violation.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw shall be punished
as follows: first offense: $100; second offense: $200; third and
subsequent offenses: $300 for each offense.
(1)
Offenses occurring within two years of the date of first reported
offense will be considered as subsequent offenses. Each day or
portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing
contained herein shall preclude the Board of Health from seeking
equitable relief to enforce this bylaw.
(2)
B.
Noncriminal disposition. In addition to the procedure for enforcement
as described above, the provisions of this bylaw may also be enforced
by noncriminal disposition, as provided in Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40, § 21D. The penalty for such violation shall be $25 for the
first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $100 for the third and each
subsequent offense.
C.
§ 144-5.4 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 144-5.6
129:143
§ 144-6. (Reserved)
Hearing to suspend or revoke license or permit. The Board of Health,
after a hearing conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth
in 105 CMR 590.14 and CMR 590.15, may suspend or revoke the
license or permit for any establishment failing to comply with this
bylaw.
D.
§ 144-5.6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 144-6
129:144
ARTICLE III
Retail Use of Single-Use Plastic Beverage Straws and Stirrers
[Adopted 10-15-2018 ATM by Art. 23]
§ 144-6.1. Purpose and intent.
This bylaw is enacted for the purpose of eliminating the distribution of
single-use plastic straws and stirrers by all business establishments in
the Town of Chelmsford, except upon request. The production and use
of single-use plastic straws and stirrers have significant impacts on the
environment, including, but not limited to: contributing to pollution of the
land environment; creating a burden to solid waste collection and recycling
facilities; entering storm drains that lead to waterways leading to the
ocean causing the potential death of marine animals through ingestion;
and requiring the use of millions of barrels of crude oil nationally for their
manufacture.
§ 144-6.2. Definitions.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Means the following businesses as defined
in § 195-108 of the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw: a retail store; supermarket;
general department store; restaurant; and take-out restaurant, serving
liquid, slurry, frozen, semi-frozen, or other forms of beverages to the public
for consumption, not including nursing homes or nursing care or assisted
living facilities or doctors or nurses or emergency medical technicians
providing straws to patients.
TOWN-SPONSORED EVENT — Means any event organized or sponsored by
the Town of Chelmsford or any department of the Town of Chelmsford.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE STRAW — Means a tube made predominantly of
plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such
as corn or other plant sources, for transferring a beverage from its
container to the mouth of the drinker. "Plastic beverage straw" includes
compostable and biodegradable petroleum or biologically based polymer
straws, but does not include straws that are made from nonplastic
materials, such as, but not limited to, paper, sugar cane, and bamboo.
PLASTIC STIRRER — Means a device that is used to mix beverages,
intended for only one-time use, and made predominantly of plastic derived
from either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other
plant source. "Plastic stirrer" includes compostable and biodegradable
petroleum or biologically based polymer stirrers, but does not include
stirrers that are made from nonplastic materials, such as, but not limited to,
paper, sugar cane, and bamboo.
§ 144-6.3. Use regulations.
Effective July 1, 2019, plastic beverage straws and plastic stirrers shall
not be used or dispensed or sold except upon request in conjunction
with the serving by business establishments or at any town-sponsored
A.
§ 144-6.1 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS § 144-6.3
129:145
§ 144-6.4. Enforcement.
event of liquid, slurry, frozen, semi-frozen, or other forms of beverages
to the public for consumption.
Nothing in this bylaw prohibits the sale of plastic straws by
supermarkets and general department stores in packages not in
conjunction with the service of liquid, slurry, frozen, semi-frozen, or
other forms of beverages to the public for consumption.
B.
Nothing in this bylaw prohibits customers from using their own straws
of any material for personal use in any business establishment.
C.
The Board of Health or its designee is hereby designated and
authorized as the officer charged with the enforcement of this bylaw.
A.
Penalty for violation.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw shall be punished
as follows: first offense: $100; second offense: $200; third and
subsequent offenses: $300 for each offense.
(1)
Offenses occurring within two years of the date of first reported
offense will be considered as subsequent offenses. Each day or
portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing
contained herein shall preclude the Board of Health from seeking
equitable relief to enforce this bylaw.
(2)
B.
Noncriminal disposition. In addition to the procedure for enforcement
as described above, the provisions of this bylaw may also be enforced
by noncriminal disposition, as provided in Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40, § 21D. The penalty for such violation shall be $25 for the
first offense, $50 for the second offense, and $100 for the third and each
subsequent offense.
C.
Hearing to suspend or revoke food service permit. The Board of Health,
after a hearing conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth
in 105 CMR 590.14 and 590.15, may suspend or revoke the food service
permit for any business establishment failing to comply with this bylaw.
D.
§ 144-6.3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 144-6.4
129:146
Chapter 146
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 146-1. Enclosure required.
Any constructed pool located above or below the ground, whether portable
or fixed, used or capable of being used for swimming, wading or bathing
purposes and having a depth of at least two feet and a capacity of at least
200 cubic feet in volume shall be subject to the following requirements:
Chapter 154
TOWN MEETING
§ 154-1. Annual election.
The annual election shall be held on the first Tuesday of April.
§ 154-2. Warrant articles.
Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded at all
times, whether or not filled with water, by a fence or wall not less than
four feet in height, unless the pool wall itself is four feet or more above
grade at all points.
A.
Every such fence, wall, door or gate shall be constructed so as not to
have openings, holes or gaps larger than two inches in a horizontal
dimension and four inches in a vertical dimension or shall be otherwise
designed, constructed and maintained to be nonclimbable by small
children. The wire sizes for all fences and doors fabricated with wire
mesh shall not be less than No. 16 wire. The gates or door openings
in the fence shall be at least of the same height and construction as
the fence or wall and shall be equipped with a self-closing and selflatching
device located at least four feet above the underlying ground
and inaccessible from the outside to small children. Every gate or door
shall be kept locked at all times when the swimming pool enclosure is
not in use.
B.
All ladders used to gain access to aboveground pools shall be removed
or placed so as not to allow entrance by small children when the pool
is not in use. No permanent ladders may be attached to aboveground
pools on the outside unless the pool is surrounded by a separate fence
as specified above.
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
Submission deadline. All warrant articles shall be in the hands of the
Board of Selectmen no later than the first Monday in January for the
Town Meeting to be held in April and the first Monday in August for
the Town Meeting to be held in October. The Board of Selectmen may
A.
§ 144-6.4 SWIMMING POOLS § 154-2
146:147
§ 154-3. Time of meetings.
§ 154-4. Motions.
waive this requirement if deemed in the best interest of the Town or as
required by statute.
Publication. The warrant article shall be included in the Finance
Committee report which shall be made available to Town Meeting
members and the public not less than one week before either Town
Meeting. The warrant articles for any Special Town Meeting shall be
made available to the Town Meeting members not less than 14 days
before the Special Town Meeting. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by
Art. 24]
B.
The Representative Annual Town Meetings shall be held on the last
Monday in April and on the third Monday in October in each year.
Adjourned sessions of any Town Meeting shall be scheduled for only
a Monday or Thursday, unless an alternate date is approved by a twothirds
vote of the Town Meeting representatives present and voting.
The April Town Meeting is expected to be primarily concerned with the
determination of matters involving the expenditure and commitment
of Town funds, including but not limited to the adoption of an annual
operating budget for all Town agencies. [Amended 10-21-1991 ATM
by Art. 3]
A.
The Board of Selectmen may, in any manner provided under the laws of
the commonwealth or the Charter, for the purpose of acting upon the
legislative business of the Town in an orderly and expeditious manner,
call the Representative Town Meeting into session at other times by the
issuance of warrants therefor.
B.
Order of precedence of motions. At all sessions of Town Meeting, the
following motions shall be recognized and shall have precedence in the
order in which they are arranged in this subsection:
Order of Precedence of Motions
[Amended 10-24-1996 ATM by Arts. 27, 28 and 29]
Motion Privileged Debatable
Can be
Amended
Can be
Reconsidered
Vote
Required
Adjourn (unqualified) Yes No No No Majority
Adjourn at or to a
certain time
Yes Yes Yes No Majority
Recess Yes No Yes No Majority
Question of privilege,
order of information
Yes* No No No None
Take out of order Yes Yes No No Majority
Reconsider Yes Yes No Yes Majority
A.
§ 154-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 154-4
146:148
Order of Precedence of Motions
[Amended 10-24-1996 ATM by Arts. 27, 28 and 29]
Motion Privileged Debatable
Can be
Amended
Can be
Reconsidered
Vote
Required
Lay on or take from the
table
No No No No Majority
Previous question No No No No 2/3
Limit or extend debate No No No Yes 2/3
Postpone to a certain
time
No Yes Yes No Majority
Commit, recommit or
refer
No Yes Yes Yes Majority
Amend No Yes Once Yes Majority
Main motion No Yes Yes Yes Majority
NOTES:
*The privileged motions marked by an asterisk may interrupt the speaker.
The above table of motions in order of their precedence must be
included in the Finance Committee report for each of the Annual Town
Meetings. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 25]
B.
The following listing of common motions, classified according to their
objectives, must be included in the Finance Committee report for the
Annual Town Meetings: [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 25]
Common Motions Classified According to Their Objectives
To modify or amend (a) Amend
(b) Commit or refer
To defer action (a) Postpone to a certain time
(b) Lay on the table
(c) Commit or refer
To suppress or limit debate (a) Previous question (to close
debate now) (2/3 vote)
(b) Limit debate (2/3 vote)
To suppress the question (a) Previous question (2/3 vote) and
reject question
(b) Lay on the table
To consider a question a
second time
(a) Take from the table
(b) Reconsider
C.
§ 154-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 154-4
146:149
§ 154-5. Amendments.
§ 154-6. Reports.
§ 154-7. Appropriations.
§ 154-8. Attorneys and Town Counsel.
Reconsideration. A motion at any adjourned Town Meeting for
reconsideration or rescinding of any action taken at a previous session
of the adjourned Town Meeting shall not be entertained or allowed by
the Town Moderator.
D.
Any article appearing in the warrant and considered at any Town
Meeting may be amended and any portion thereof may be deleted or
added to by a vote of the Town Meeting members; provided, however,
that in said notice the words "or act in relation thereto" or "do anything
pertaining thereto" or words of similar import appear at the end of said
article.
A.
An amended amendment cannot be amended, and no motion or
proposition of a subject different from that under consideration shall be
entertained under color of an amendment.
B.
Amendment of bylaws. Town bylaws may be amended or rescinded
by a majority vote of those present and voting at any Town Meeting,
provided that the proposed action was published in the warrant of that
Town Meeting, and further provided that any such amendment is in
compliance with the Charter.
C.
When the report of a committee is placed in the hands of the Town
Moderator it shall be deemed to be received, and a vote to accept
the report shall discharge the committee unless the report is one of
progress and not final, in which case the committee continues to serve
unless the Town Meeting members vote to discharge the same.
A.
All reports, resolutions, motions or amendments submitted to the Town
Meeting for consideration involving the expenditure of money shall be
presented, in writing, to the Town Moderator.
B.
No money shall be transferred at a Special Town Meeting except by a
majority vote of those present and voting.
A.
All motions on articles involving bond or note issues shall require a twothirds
vote of those present and voting.
B.
Appropriations at Special Town Meetings. No money shall be
appropriated at a Special Town Meeting except by a two-thirds vote of
the voters present and voting.
C.
§ 154-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 154-8
146:150
§ 154-9. Dates proposed for continuance of meeting. [Added
10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
Dates and times proposed for continuance of the Town Meeting shall be
announced when the warrant is posted.
§ 154-10. End of session. [Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
No warrant article may be introduced for consideration after 11:00 p.m.
without a majority vote of Town Meeting representatives present and voting
to allow such consideration.
§ 154-11. Lobbying. [Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
Distribution of material and lobbying on warrant articles or issues not
related to warrant articles being considered at that Town Meeting will be
prohibited within an area of 100 feet outside the entrance to the building
housing the meeting. An area will be established inside the building but
outside the meeting place where one individual from each group supporting
or opposing an issue may distribute material or discuss the issue. Handout
material should be dated and signed by the organization or individuals
preparing the material.
§ 154-12. Voting. [Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2; amended
5-1-1997 ATM by Art. 28; 4-25-2011 ATM by Art. 16]
Attorneys speaking. Any person who is employed as an attorney by
another interested in any matter under discussion at a Town Meeting
shall disclose the fact of his or her employment before speaking thereof.
A.
Town Counsel. The Board of Selectmen shall assure that the guidance
of the Town Counsel is available both to the Town Moderator and to the
body at all Town Meetings whenever practical.
B.
Voting process. Voice votes shall not be used. The Moderator shall take
all votes by a raising of hands or use of an electronic tally and display
system, except as may otherwise be voted by Town Meeting under
§ 154-16.
A.
Electronic tally and display system. Votes taken by an electronic tally
and display system shall be visible to the Town Meeting members and
any members of the public present at the meeting. The display shall
show each Town Meeting member’s name; precinct; "yes," "no" or
"abstain" vote; and a tally of all votes.
B.
Matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute. In matters requiring a
two-thirds vote by statute, the Moderator may declare the vote based
upon the raising of hands. If seven or more members of Town Meeting
question the vote, the Moderator shall count the vote. If an electronic
tally and display system is used, the tally shall constitute a counted
vote; if such a vote is questioned by seven or more members of Town
C.
§ 154-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 154-12
146:151
§ 154-13. Presentations. [Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
§ 154-14. Recommendations by Selectmen and Finance Committee.
[Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
The Selectmen and Finance Committee shall have an opportunity to state
their position on each article and are encouraged to state their reasons
for their position. The Finance Committee is not required to speak on a
nonfinancial article.
Meeting, the Moderator shall manually tally the electronically recorded
votes.
Record of votes taken by electronic tally. The Town Clerk shall make
available in the Town Clerk’s office and on the Town’s website within a
reasonable time after a session in which a vote(s) was taken by the use
of an electronic tally and display system a list, organized by precinct,
which shall disclose how each Town Meeting member voted.
D.
Regulations. After a public hearing, the Moderator, in consultation with
the Board of Selectmen and Town Clerk, shall be authorized to adopt
regulations for the purpose of facilitating implementation of this bylaw
and ensuring the security and integrity of the voting process.
E.
When Town property or assets are to be purchased or sold, the name of
the purchaser or seller, if known, must be disclosed by the sponsor.
A.
The sponsor of any warrant article shall speak initially to explain the
article.
B.
Zoning bylaw presentations by the sponsor must show a map denoting
the existing zoning and the proposed changed zoning, including
definitions of zones and explanations of changes.
C.
All sponsors of bylaw changes must show the language of the existing
bylaw and the language of the change and an explanation of the change
in the presentation.
D.
All recurring operating budget articles regularly presented at the
Spring Annual Town Meeting to defray Town expenses for the upcoming
fiscal year must be presented showing the following: dollars budgeted
and expended for the last two years and for the current year, proposed
budget dollars and the revenue generated by the department
requesting the budget.
E.
Visual aids used in any presentation must be large enough to be viewed
from the back of the hall or handouts shall be distributed.18
F.
18.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding a question and answer period of the
sponsor of an article, which immediately followed, was repealed 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 28.
§ 154-12 CHELMSFORD CODE § 154-15
146:152
§ 154-15. Rules of decorum. [Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
The Moderator may distribute additional rules of debate or decorum not
controverting any bylaw or statute to help guide debate of issues before the
Town Meeting.
§ 154-16. Roll call ballot. [Added 10-21-1991 ATM by Art. 2]
A main motion on any article shall be voted upon by roll call ballot if 40
Town Meeting representatives so vote at the end of debate of that main
motion and before a motion under the next article.
§ 154-17. Pledge of Allegiance. [Added 4-28-2003 ATM by Art. 1]
Each session of Town Meeting shall begin with the recitation of the United
States Pledge of Allegiance.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 158
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 195. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
§ 158-1. Permits required. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 45]
No house trailer space or trailer camp shall be allowed in a residential or
farming district or in any business or industrial area for a period of more
than 30 days unless permits are granted by the Board of Appeals and the
Board of Health. A Police Department permit must be obtained within 48
hours of the date of arrival of such trailer. Any trailer that is to be used
permanently at a particular location must have running water and a sewage
disposal system approved by the Board of Health.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 161
TREES
§ 161-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent of this bylaw to sustain environmental health, enhance
the economic well-being and maintain the quality of life for the citizens
of the Town of Chelmsford. Public trees make an important contribution
§ 154-15 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 161-1
158:153
to the character and heritage of Chelmsford's neighborhoods. This bylaw
establishes policy for ensuring the health and longevity of the Town's trees.
§ 161-2. Tree Warden.
The care and management of public trees shall be the responsibility of the
Tree Warden, or that official's designee. The Tree Warden is responsible
for planting, maintaining and removing trees from streets, parks and other
designated public places in accordance with MGL c. 87, § 2.
§ 161-3. Public shade trees.
It shall be the policy of the Town of Chelmsford to encourage the
conservation of public shade trees (as defined in MGL c. 87, § 1) and
to establish a planned program of replacement on a one-for-one basis of
all public shade trees removed due to disease, death, public nuisance,
construction or safety. The Tree Warden shall determine the type and size
of the replacement tree. While the goal under this policy is to have a public
shade tree replanted in the same location as the removed tree, it may be
replanted in an alternate location at the discretion of the Tree Warden if
necessary.
§ 161-4. Tree Replacement, Establishment and Enhancement
(TREE) Committee.
There shall be a Tree Replacement, Establishment and Enhancement
(TREE) Committee to facilitate and encourage the long-term health of
Chelmsford's public trees.
A.
Said Committee, once appointed, shall develop and administer a
comprehensive tree management program to guide the Town and the
Committee's activities. Such activities include, but are not limited to,
the following:
Facilitating and encouraging the long-term health of Chelmsford's
public trees and promoting native tree species;
(1)
(2) Performing tree surveys, inventories, and evaluations;
Creating manuals or guidance for planting, maintaining and
removing trees from streets, parks and other designated public
places;
(3)
Developing best management practices for urban forestry and
silvicultural work;
(4)
Working in conjunction with the Tree Warden to seek grants or
other assistance concerning the preservation and maintenance of
trees in Town; and
(5)
Performing public education and coordination with civic groups to
promote Arbor Day and other special events related to public trees.
(6)
B.
§ 161-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 161-4
158:154
§ 161-5. Private tree planting.
All contractors, builders, companies, corporations or individuals who or
which promote the construction of multiple houses, housing units or
developments or the erection of three or more houses in a given area shall
be required to plant one tree for each lot and two trees for every corner
lot. Such planting shall be done before the street is paved and must be in
accordance with the specifications as prescribed by the Tree Warden.
§ 161-6. Willow trees.
Any willow tree found growing within 50 feet of any portion of a Townmaintained
drainage system or within 50 feet of any drainage easement,
whether granted to the Town by specific deed or included on a definitive
plan submitted pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Control Law,19
is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any
such willow tree to grow or remain in any such location. It shall be the duty
of the Tree Warden to serve, or cause to be served, notice upon the owner
of any premises on which willow trees are permitted to grow in violation of
the provisions of this section and demand abatement of this nuisance within
30 days.
{END OF CHAPTER}
The duties and responsibilities of the Commission shall include, but not
be limited to:
(1) Writing and updating an annual community forestry work plan;
Advising the Town Manager in matters related to the care and
management of Town-owned properties that contain public trees;
(2)
Advising the Board of Selectmen, Department of Public Works,
Conservation Commission, and other local organizations on
projects and activities involving public trees in Town;
(3)
Advising the Tree Warden on planting, maintaining and removing
trees from streets, parks and other appropriate public places; and
(4)
Engaging in projects and activities that promote sustainable
forestry and the long-term health of public trees in Town, including
programs and community events.
(5)
C.
The Committee shall consist of five members appointed by the Town
Manager. In the beginning, two members shall be appointed for a term
of three years, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years,
and one member shall be appointed for a term of one year. Thereafter,
each member shall be appointed for a term of three years. Each term
shall expire at the end of the appropriate fiscal year.
D.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 161-4 TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS § 161-6
158:155
Chapter 168
UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 84. Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 116.
§ 168-1. Delivery after written notice prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to deliver or cause to be
delivered, except through the services of the United States Postal Service,
any unsolicited written materials to any residential dwelling or business
located within the town after written notice has been sent to said person
or corporation by the owner, lessee or tenant of said residential dwelling or
business that said written materials should not be delivered to that address.
The required notice shall be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, to any
residence or usual place of business of the person or corporation delivering
or causing to be delivered said unsolicited written material. Any delivery
of unsolicited materials after the mailing of said written notice shall be
deemed a nuisance, and placing said materials on private property within
the town after said notice shall be deemed littering the property and shall
be punished by a fine of $100 for each offense.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Chapter 174
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 158.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 180.
Traffic rules and orders — See Ch. 203.
§ 174-1. Defacement of traffic signs.
Any person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes
with any official traffic sign, signal or marking shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding $20 for each and every offense.
§ 174-2. (Reserved)20
20.Editor's Note: Former § 174-2, Closing of Pond Street, added 4-26-1956 STM by Art. 3, was
repealed 5-3-2007 ATM by Art. 15.
§ 161-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 174-3
168:156
§ 174-3. Vehicles on Freeman Lake. [Added 5-12-1977 STM by Art.
3; amended 4-26-1978 ATM by Art. 28; 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 46]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a marine or recreational
vehicle powered by an engine, including snowmobiles, on any portion of
Freeman Lake at any time.
§ 174-4. Leaving vehicles in private ways or fire lanes. [Added
5-21-1979 ATM by Art. 62]
It shall be unlawful to leave any motor vehicle unattended within the
limits of any private way furnishing means of access for fire apparatus
to any building.
A.
Fire lanes. [Amended 5-5-1986 ATM by Art. 28]
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a motor vehicle in any
fire lane, such fire lane to be designated by the Chief of the Fire
Department and to be posted as such. Said fire lane shall be not
less than 18 feet wide for all buildings in any shopping center,
bowling alley, theater, nursing home, office building or other public
building.
(1)
The establishment of fire lanes as set forth above shall be at the
sole discretion of the Chief of the Fire Department, and fire lanes
shall run from the wall of the building or any overhang of the
building or any sidewalk adjacent thereto. Any fire lane in excess
of 18 feet wide shall have the approval of the property owner or
person in control of such property.
(2)
The Chief of the Fire Department shall notify all record owners of
the designation of fire lanes.
(3)
The record owner of each building, upon notification of the
designation of a fire lane by the Chief of the Fire Department, shall
provide markings and signs that comply with specifications and
plans approved by the Fire Chief. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by
Art. 46]
(4)
B.
The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic
duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed
and towed away by commercial towing service, at the sole expense of
the owner of said motor vehicle, any motor vehicle left unattended or
parked in any designated fire lane or within the limits of any private
way furnishing means of access for fire apparatus to any building.
Motor vehicles so towed away shall be stored in a safe place and
restored to the owner or operator thereof upon payment by the owner
or operator of the expenses incurred in said removal and storage.
C.
Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of $25. [Amended
10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 46]
D.
§ 174-3 UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIAL § 174-4
168:157
§ 174-5. Handicapped parking. [Added 5-13-1985 ATM by Art. 32]
In the absence of the operator of any motor vehicle violating any
provision of this section, it shall be deemed prima facie evidence that
the registered owner of such vehicle was the operator. [Added
5-5-1980 STM by Art. 14]
E.
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a parking space reserved
and designated for use by vehicles of handicapped persons, whether
located on public or private ways or properties, unless authorized
to do so by the terms of this section or the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
A fine of $200 shall be imposed for the unauthorized parking of a
motor vehicle in a space reserved and designated for use by vehicles
of handicapped persons, pursuant to the authority of MGL c. 40, § 21.
[Amended 4-29-1993 ATM by Art. 30; 4-26-2010 ATM by Art. 16]
B.
The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic
duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed
and towed away by commercial towing service, at the sole expense of
the owner of said motor vehicle, any motor vehicle left unattended or
parked in a parking space reserved and designated for use by a vehicle
of a handicapped person, unless said vehicle shall be designated as a
vehicle of a handicapped person. Motor vehicles so towed away shall
be stored in a safe place and restored to the owner or operator thereof
upon payment by the owner or operator of the expenses incurred in said
removal and storage.
C.
Number of spaces to be provided.
The person or body that has lawful control of a public or private
way or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking
areas for businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums,
sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, residential
dwellings or for any other place where the public has a right of
access as invitees or licensees shall reserve parking spaces in said
off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated by a
handicapped person whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license
plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, according to the following
formula:
Total Number of Spaces Number of Handicapped
Spaces
More than 15 but not more
than 25
1
More than 25 but not more
than 40
5% of such spaces but not fewer
than 2
More than 40 but not more
than 100
4% of such spaces but not fewer
than 3
(1)
D.
§ 174-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 174-5
168:158
Total Number of Spaces Number of Handicapped
Spaces
More than 100 but not more
than 200
3% of such spaces but not fewer
than 4
More than 200 but not more
than 500
2% of such spaces but not fewer
than 6
More than 500 but not more
than 1,000
1 and 1/2% of such spaces but not
fewer than 10
More than 1,000 but not more
than 2,000
1% of such spaces but not fewer
than 15
More than 2,000 but less than
5,000
3/4 of 1% of such spaces but not
fewer than 20
More than 5,000 1/2 of 1% of such spaces but not
less than 30
Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions of
Subsection D(1) shall be:
Identified by the use of above-grade signs with white lettering
against a blue background bearing the words "Handicapped
parking; special plate required. Unauthorized vehicles may be
removed at owner's expense";
(a)
(b) As near as possible to a building entrance or walkway;
Adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods
permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person; and
(c)
Twelve feet wide or two eight-foot-wide areas with four feet of
crosshatch between them.
(d)
(2)
Violation of Subsection D shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, General Penalty. [Amended 10-21-1999
ATM by Art. 46]
E.
In the absence of the operator of any motor vehicle violating any
provisions of this section, it shall be deemed that the registered owner
of such vehicle was the operator.
F.
Any motor vehicle bearing a handicapped parking permit or motor
vehicle registration plate designating the vehicle as one used by a
handicapped person shall be authorized to park in a designated
handicapped parking space. The Chief of Police, his or her designee or
the Town Clerk may issue a temporary handicapped parking permit to
any person upon application with supporting medical affidavit signed
by a licensed physician designating the applicant as physically
handicapped. Said temporary permit shall be issued with an expiration
date not to exceed 180 days from the date of issue and shall be
displayed in the front right windshield of any vehicle parked in a
G.
§ 174-5 UNSOLICITED WRITTEN MATERIAL § 174-5
168:159
§ 174-6. Obstruction of fire lanes, handicap parking spaces,
crosshatches or sidewalks. [Added 10-15-2001 ATM by Art. 16]
Chapter 180
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 174. Traffic rules and orders — See Ch. 203.
§ 180-1. Storage restricted. [Amended 12-3-1990 STM by Art. 2]
Except as may be provided herein, not more than one unregistered motor
vehicle shall be placed, stored or kept on property, except property used
for business or industrial purposes. No unregistered motor vehicle shall be
stored, placed or kept on a paper street or private way. All privately owned
unregistered motor vehicles shall be stored, placed and kept on private
property.
§ 180-2. Permit.
designated handicapped parking space. [Amended 4-29-1993 ATM
by Art. 30]
The unauthorized use of a temporary permit shall be punishable by a
fine of $100. [Amended 4-29-1993 ATM by Art. 30]
H.
Each day that any violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
I.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or otherwise adversely affect the
unrestricted flow of traffic or safe travel of any pedestrian in any fire
lane, handicap parking space, exterior accessible route (as defined in
CMR 521, Sec. 5.5) or sidewalks within the Town of Chelmsford. The
depositing or displaying of goods, snow, wares, or other items shall
constitute an obstruction of the designated areas.
A.
Individuals, business or property owners responsible for any such
obstruction shall be subject to a fine of $100 for said violation for the
first offense. Subsequent violations within one year of the first offense
shall be subject to a fine of $200.
{END OF CHAPTER}
B.
Subject to the conditions herein set forth, the Board of Selectmen may
issue a permit authorizing an applicant to place, store or keep more
than one such motor vehicle on such property.
A.
§ 174-5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 180-2
180:160
§ 180-3. Applicability.
This chapter does not apply to:
§ 180-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any such permit may be issued by the Board of Selectmen only after
said Board has:
Held a public hearing on the application therefor, 14 days' notice of
the time, place and subject matter of which has been given at the
expense of the applicant by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town and by registered or certified mail to the last
known address of all owners of land abutting upon the property in
question as appearing upon the Assessor's most recent tax list; and
(1)
Determined that the presence of more than one such motor vehicle
on such property:
Will not constitute a danger to the safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the town; and
(a)
Will not create or continue a condition detrimental and
injurious to the neighborhood in which the property in question
is located.
(b)
(2)
B.
Each such permit that may be issued by said Board:
Shall be issued as a personal privilege of the applicant and not as a
grant attached to and running with the land;
(1)
Shall include a reasonable time limit, but not for a period longer
than one year; and
(2)
May specify a location on the property where such motor vehicle or
vehicles will not be exposed to the view of abutting residents or the
general public.
(3)
C.
A. Motor vehicles in enclosed buildings; or
Motor vehicles on property where the principal business use is a farm,
garden or nursery, provided that such motor vehicle is necessary to the
operation of such business.
B.
The enforcing authority under this chapter shall be the Chelmsford
Police Department.
A.
The enforcing authority shall give written notice of any violation of
this chapter to the person committing the violation. Thirty days after
receipt of such notice of violation, the person receiving the notice shall
be liable to a penalty of $50 for each separate offense. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.21 [Amended
10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 47]
B.
§ 180-2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 180-4
180:161
Chapter 185
WATER WITHDRAWAL (COMMERCIAL)
§ 185-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to recognize that contamination of any pond,
stream, surface or subsurface water in the Town of Chelmsford is a
possibility when water is withdrawn for commercial use. This would pose a
hazard to the inhabitants of the Town, as well as the natural environment
and habitat. This bylaw is to protect such water resources from
contamination and damages.
§ 185-2. Water withdrawal prohibited.
§ 185-3. Exceptions.
§ 185-4. Additional regulations.
§ 185-5. Enforcement.
{END OF CHAPTER}
The extraction or withdrawal of water for commercial purposes from
any pond, stream, river, watercourse, surface or subsurface water
within the Town into a tank vehicle, or into any tank contained in or on
a vehicle, is prohibited.
A.
This bylaw shall not apply to the withdrawal of water for municipal fire
apparatuses
A.
This bylaw shall not apply to the withdrawal of water for commercial
purposes from hydrants under the supervision/regulation of the
Chelmsford Water Districts, as may be designated and authorized by
said Water Districts.
A.
This bylaw shall be in addition to any other rule, regulation or state and
local law relating to the protection of wetlands and water resources.
B.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw, or any regulations
adopted hereunder, shall be subject to a fine of $300 for each offense.
Each day on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
A.
This bylaw shall be enforced by the members of the Chelmsford
Conservation Commission and the Agent of the Commission.
B.
21.Editor's Note: Original Section 8, which immediately followed this subsection and stated
that violations would be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, was
deleted 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 47.
§ 180-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 185-5
180:162
Chapter 187
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 195. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
§ 187-1. Purpose.
§ 187-2. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of the bylaw, and any rule or regulation adopted
hereunder, may be enforced by any available means in law or in equity,
including but not limited to enforcement by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, and § 1-2 of the Town Bylaws,
Noncriminal disposition.
{END OF CHAPTER}
C.
The purpose of Chelmsford Bylaw, Chapter 187 ("chapter"), is to protect
the wetlands, water resources, flood-prone areas, and adjoining upland
areas in the Town of Chelmsford ("Chelmsford") by controlling activities
deemed by the Conservation Commission ("Commission") likely to have
a significant or cumulative effect on resource area values, including
hut not limited to the following: public or private water supply,
groundwater supply, flood control, erosion and sedimentation control,
storm damage prevention, water quality, prevention and control of
water pollution, fisheries, fresh water shellfisheries, wildlife habitat,
rare species habitat, agriculture, aquaculture, recreation and aesthetic
values deemed important to the community (collectively, the "values
protected by this chapter" or "values").
A.
This chapter is intended to utilize the Home Rule authority of
Chelmsford so as to protect the resource areas under the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, ("the Act") to a greater degree,
to protect additional resource areas beyond the Act recognized by
Chelmsford as significant, to protect all resource areas for their
additional values beyond those recognized in the Act, and to impose
in the Commission Regulations and permits additional standards and
procedures stricter than those of the Act and Act regulations, 310
CMR 10.00, subject, however, to the rights and benefits accorded to
agricultural uses and structures of all kinds tinder the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts ("commonwealth") and other relevant
bylaw chapters of Chelmsford.
B.
Except as permitted by the Commission or as provided in this chapter,
no person shall commence to remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade,
discharge into, or otherwise alter the following resource areas: any
A.
§ 185-5 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 187-2
180:163
§ 187-3. Definitions.
freshwater wetlands, marshes, wet meadows, bogs, swamps, vernal
pools, springs, banks, reservoirs, lakes, ponds of any size, beaches,
lands under water bodies; intermittent streams, brooks and creeks;
buffer zones; perennial rivers, streams, brooks and creeks; the
riverfront area; lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater
or surface water. Said resource areas shall be protected whether or not
they border surface waters.
The jurisdiction of this chapter shall not extend to uses and structures
of agriculture that enjoy the rights and privileges of laws and
regulations of the commonwealth governing agriculture, including
work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural or aquacultural uses as defined by the Act regulations, 310
CM 10.04.
B.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this chapter:
ABUTTER(S) — Includes owners of property immediately adjacent or
directly opposite on any public or private street or way, or across a
water body or in another municipality if within 300 feet of the boundary
of the property where work is proposed.
AGRICULTURE — Shall be defined as provided by MGL c. 128, § 1A.
ALTER(ATION) — Includes. without limitation. the following activities
when undertaken to, upon or within, or affecting resource areas subject
to this chapter:
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
materials of any kind.
(1)
Changing of preexisting drainage, flushing or flood storage
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns or flow
patterns.
(2)
(3) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table.
Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material or other activity
which may degrade water quality in or out of Chelmsford.
(4)
Driving of piles or erection, expansion or repairs of buildings or
structures of any kind.
(5)
(6) Placing of obstructions or objects in water.
(7) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees and shrubs.
Changing of temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other
physical, biological or chemical characteristics of any waters.
(8)
A.
§ 187-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 187-3
180:164
BANK — The land area which normally abuts and confines a water
body, the lower boundary being the mean annual low flow level, and
the upper boundary being the first observable break in the slope of the
mean annual flood level, whichever is higher.
BUFFER ZONE — The lands out to a distance of 100 feet horizontally
that adjoin the following: any freshwater wetlands, marshes, wet
meadows, bogs, swamps, vernal pools, springs, banks, reservoirs, lakes,
ponds of any size, beaches, lands under water bodies, intermittent
streams, brooks and creeks.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls,
built, erected and framed of a combination of any materials, whether
portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter
of persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this definition,
"roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering, whether or not
permanent in nature.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity that will change the natural condition
of the land or alter the characteristics of the land involving, but not
limited to, land clearing, filling, grading, covering and dumping.
PARKING LOT/AREA — An off-street area, including parking spaces,
loading areas and all associated maneuvering areas such as aisles and
driveways, serving as an accessory use for the parking of vehicles and
available to the public as an accommodation for clients, customers or
employees.
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,
the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof to the extent
subject to Chelmsford bylaws, administrative agencies, public or quasipublic
corporations or bodies, Chelmsford and any other legal entity, its
legal representatives, agents or assigns.
POND — As defined in the Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.04, except that
the size threshold of 10,000 square feet shall not apply.
RARE SPECIES — Those vertebrate and invertebrate animal species
and plant species officially listed as endangered, threatened or of
special concern by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife
under regulations 321 CMR 10.00 regardless of whether the site in
which they occur has been previously identified by the Division.
RESOURCE AREA(S) — Areas that are presumed important to the
protection of the values of the chapter including any freshwater
wetlands, marshes, wet meadows, bogs, swamps, vernal pools, springs,
banks, reservoirs, lakes, ponds of any size, beaches, lands under water
bodies, intermittent streams, brooks and creeks; buffer zones;
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater.
(9)
Incremental activities which have, or may have, a cumulative
adverse impact on the resource areas protected by this chapter.
(10)
§ 187-3 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 187-3
180:165
§ 187-4. Exemptions and exceptions.
The applications and permits required by this chapter shall not be required
for:
perennial rivers, streams, brooks and creeks; the riverfront area; and
lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface
water, whether or not they abut surface water.
RIVERFRONT AREA — Lands adjoining perennial rivers, streams,
brooks and creeks out to a distance of 200 feet.
VALUES PROTECTED BY THIS CHAPTER — Includes public or private
water supply, groundwater supply, flood control, erosion and
sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water quality, water
pollution prevention, fisheries, freshwater shellfisheries, wildlife
habitat, rare species habitat, agriculture, aquaculture, recreation and
aesthetics.
VERNAL POOL — Shall include, in addition to scientific definitions
found in the Act regulations, any confined basin or depression not
occurring in existing lawns, gardens, landscaped areas or driveways
which, at least in most years, holds water for a minimum of two
continuous months during the spring and/or summer, contains at least
200 cubic feet of water at some time during most years, is free of
adult predatory fish populations, and provides essential breeding and
rearing habitat functions for amphibian, reptile or other vernal pool
community species, regardless of whether the site has been certified by
the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The boundary of
the resource areas for vernal pools shall be the mean annual high-water
line defining the depression.
WILDLIFE — All mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and vertebrate
and invertebrate animal species, except domesticated species.
The Commission may adopt additional definitions consistent with this
chapter.
B.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Commission
regulations, the definitions of terms and the procedures in this chapter
shall be as set forth in the Act and Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
C.
Work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of lands in
agricultural and aquacultural use as defined by the Act regulations, 310
CMR 10.04.
A.
Maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantially changing or
enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used
in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, telephone,
telegraph or other telecommunications services, provided that written
notice has been given to the Commission prior to commencement of
work and that the work conforms to any performance standards and
design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
B.
§ 187-3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 187-4
180:166
§ 187-5. Limitations on construction and disturbance.
Emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health and
safety of the public, provided that the work is to be performed by or
has been ordered by an agency of the Commonwealth or its political
subdivision; that advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the
Commission prior to or within 24 hours after commencement of work;
that the Commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency
project; that the work is performed only for the time and place certified
by the Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate the
emergency; and that within 21 days of commencement of an emergency
project a permit application shall be filed with the Commission for
review. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the
Commission, the Commission may, after notice and a public hearing,
revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration
and mitigation measures.
C.
Minor activities as specified in the Commission regulations within the
buffer zone or riverfront area, provided the activity is not within any
other resource area.
D.
Other than stated in this chapter and the Commission regulations, the
exceptions provided in the Act and Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.00
shall not apply.
E.
The construction of any building, as defined herein, on any lot having
an area of 40,000 square feet or more shall be prohibited within 50 feet
of any resource area excluding buffer zones, riverfront area and lands
subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water. The
Commission may, at its discretion, allow a shed, playhouse or other
structure; provided that it is built on footings requiring no more than
four square feet cumulative ground disturbance and has a footprint no
larger than 144 square feet.
A.
The construction of any parking lot/area including 10 or more parking
spaces shall be prohibited within 50 feet of any resource area excluding
buffer zones, riverfront area and lands subject to flooding or inundation
by groundwater or surface water. Any drives, fire lanes or
appurtenances shall be clearly marked "No Parking."
B.
The construction of any impervious surface shall be prohibited within
30 feet of any resource area excluding buffer zones, riverfront area
and lands subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface
water.
C.
The disturbance of any area shall be prohibited within 25 feet of any
resource area excluding buffer zones, riverfront area and lands subject
to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water.
D.
The reconstruction, alteration, extension or structural change of a
building existing on or before October 15, 1990, shall be exempt from
E.
§ 187-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 187-5
180:167
§ 187-6. Applications and fees.
§ 187-7. Notice and hearings.
the provisions of § 187-5A. However, said work shall require approval
from the Commission if within its jurisdiction.
The Commission may waive any provisions of § 187-5, Limitations on
construction and disturbance, where the Commission specifically finds
that literal enforcement of the provision would involve demonstrated
substantial hardship to an applicant and that desirable relief may be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this
chapter.
F.
Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities affecting resource areas. The permit application shall include
such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on the
resource area. No activities shall commence except as explicitly
permitted in writing by the Commission.
A.
The Commission in an appropriate case may accept as the application
and plans under this chapter any application and plans filed under the
Act and Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.00, but the Commission is not
obliged to do so.
B.
Any person desiring to know whether a proposed activity or an area is
subject to this chapter may request in writing a determination from the
Commission. Such a request for determination of applicability (RDA) or
abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD) filed under
the Act shall include information and plans as are deemed necessary by
the Commission.
C.
At the time of an application the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable
fee as specified in the Commission regulations. The fee is in addition to
that required by the Act and Act regulations.
D.
Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G, and the Commission regulations, the
Commission may impose reasonable fees upon applicants for the
purpose of securing outside consultants, including engineers, wetlands
scientists, wildlife biologists or other experts in order to aid in the
review of proposed projects.
E.
Any person filing a permit application or ANRAD with the Commission
at the same time shall give written notice by certified mail (return
receipt requested) or hand delivered to all abutters and abutters to
abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the applicant at their
mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the
Assessors. The notice shall state a brief description of the project or
other proposal and the date of any Commission hearing or meeting
A.
§ 187-5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 187-7
180:168
§ 187-8. Coordination with other boards.
The Commission may solicit the advice and opinions of appropriate boards,
departments and Town officials. Each shall be entitled to file written
comments and recommendations with the Commission at least three days
before the hearing. The Commission shall take these comments and
recommendations into account, but may not be bound by them. The
applicant shall have the right to receive any such comments and
recommendations, and respond to them at the hearing.
§ 187-9. Burden of proof.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving by preponderance of the
credible evidence that the work proposed in the permit application will
not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon the values
protected by this chapter. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the
Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the
Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
date if known. The notice to abutters also shall include a copy of the
application or request, with plans, or shall state where copies may be
examined or obtained by abutters. An affidavit of the person providing
such notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed
with the Commission.
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on any permit application,
RDA, or ANRAD with written notice given at the expense of the
applicant, at least five business days prior to the hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in Chelmsford and by mailing a notice
to the applicant. When the applicant is other than the owner, the
request and the notice of the hearing shall be sent by the applicant to
the owner. An affidavit of the person providing such notice, with a copy
of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission.
B.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
front receipt of a completed permit application, RDA, or ANRAD unless
an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
C.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine its hearing
under this chapter with the hearing conducted under the Act and the
Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
D.
The Commission may continue the hearing to a date announced at
the hearing for reasons stated at the hearing. These may include the
need for additional information from the applicant or others as deemed
necessary by the Commission in its discretion and based on comments
and recommendations of the boards and officials indicated in § 187-8.
E.
The Commission shall issue its permit, other order or determination
in writing within 21 days of the close of the public hearing unless an
extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
F.
§ 187-7 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 187-10
180:169
§ 187-10. Permits and conditions.
If after a public hearing the Commission determines that the activities
in the permit application, or the land and water uses which will result
therefrom, are likely to have a significant individual or cumulative
effect on the resource area values, the Commission shall issue or deny
a permit for the activities requested within 21 days of the close of the
hearing. The Commission shall take into account the extent to which
the applicant has avoided, minimized and mitigated any such effect.
The Commission also shall take into account any loss, degradation,
isolation, and replacement or replication of such protected resource
areas elsewhere in the community and the watershed, resulting from
past activities, whether permitted, unpermitted or exempt, and
foreseeable future activities.
A.
If it issues a permit, the Commission shall impose conditions which
the Commission deems necessary or desirable to protect resource area
values. All activities shall be conducted in accordance with those
conditions.
B.
Where no conditions are adequate to protect resource area values,
the Commission is empowered to deny a permit application for failure
to meet the requirements of this chapter. It may also deny a permit
application for failure to submit necessary information and plans
requested by the Commission; for failure to comply with the
procedures, design specifications, performance standards, and other
requirements in the regulations of the Commission; or for failure to
avoid, minimize or mitigate unacceptable significant or cumulative
effects upon the resource area values.
C.
In reviewing activities within the buffer zone, the Commission shall
presume the buffer zone is important to the protection of other
resource areas because activities undertaken in close proximity have a
high likelihood of adverse impact either immediately, as a consequence
of construction, or over time as a consequence of daily operation or
existence of the activities. These adverse impacts can include, without
limitation, erosion, siltation, loss of groundwater recharge, poor water
quality, and loss of wildlife habitat.
D.
In reviewing activities within the riverfront area, the Commission shall
presume the riverfront area is important to all the values protected
by this chapter unless demonstrated otherwise. No permit issued
hereunder shall allow any activities unless the applicant, in addition to
meeting the applicable requirements of this chapter, has proved by a
preponderance of the evidence that there is no practicable alternative
to the proposed project with less adverse effects, and that such
activities, including proposed mitigation measures, will have no
significant adverse impact on the areas or values protected by this
chapter. The Commission shall regard as practicable an alternative
which is reasonably available and capable of being done after taking
into consideration the proposed property use, overall project purpose
E.
§ 187-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 187-10
180:170
(e.g., residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial), logistics,
existing technology, costs of the alternatives, and overall project costs.
To prevent resource area loss, the commission shall require applicants
to avoid alteration wherever feasible; to minimize alteration; and,
where alteration is unavoidable and has been minimized, to provide
full mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require replication
of wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with specific plans,
professional design, proper safeguards, adequate security, and
professional monitoring and reporting to assure success, because of the
high likelihood of failure of replication.
F.
The Commission may require a wildlife habitat study of the project
area pursuant to § 187-6E to be paid for by the applicant, whenever
it deems appropriate, regardless of the type of resource area, or the
amount or type of alteration proposed. The decision shall be based
upon the Commission's estimation of the importance of the habitat
area considering, but not limited to, such factors as proximity to other
areas suitable for wildlife, importance of wildlife corridors in the area,
or actual or possible presence of rare plant or animal species in the
area. The work shall be performed by an individual who at least meets
the qualifications set out in the wildlife habitat section of the Act
regulations, 310 CMR 10.60.
G.
The Commission shall presume that vernal pools including their buffer
zone perform essential habitat functions. This presumption may be
overcome only by the presentation of credible evidence which, in the
judgment of the Commission, demonstrates that the basin or depression
does not provide essential habitat functions. Any formal evaluation
should be performed by an individual who at least meets the
qualifications under the wildlife habitat section of the Act regulations,
310 CMR 10.60.
H.
A permit, determination of applicability (DOA), or order of resource
area delineation (ORAD) shall expire three years from the date of
issuance. Notwithstanding the above, the Commission in its discretion
may issue a permit expiring five years from the date of issuance for
recurring or continuous maintenance work, provided that annual
notification of the time and location of work is given to the Commission.
Any permit may be renewed once for up to an additional three-year
period, provided that a request for a renewal is received in writing by
the Commission 30 days prior to expiration. Notwithstanding the above,
a permit may identify requirements which shall be enforceable for a
stated number of years, indefinitely, or until permanent protection is in
place, and shall apply to all present and future owners of the land.
I.
For good cause the Commission may revoke any permit, DOA, or ORAD
or any other order, determination or other decision issued under this
chapter after notice to the holder, the public, abutters, Town hoards and
a duly conducted public hearing.
J.
§ 187-10 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 187-10
180:171
§ 187-11. Regulations.
§ 187-12. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this chapter, in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the
Commission may require that the performance and observance of the
conditions imposed including conditions requiring mitigation work he
secured wholly or in part by one or both of the methods described below:
Amendments to permits, DOAs, or ORADs shall be handled in the
manner set out in the Act regulations and policies.
K.
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine the decision
issued under this chapter with the permit, DOA, ORAD, or certificate of
compliance (COC) issued under the Act and Act regulations.
L.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until a permit
or ORAD issued by the Commission with respect to such work has been
recorded in the Registry of Deeds; or, if the land affected is registered
land, in the registry section of the Land Court for the district wherein
the land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies in writing to the
Commission that the document has been recorded. If the applicant fails
to perform such recording, the Commission may record the documents
itself and require the applicant to furnish the recording fee, either at
the time of recording or as a condition precedent to the issuance of a
COC.
M.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall establish
rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of this chapter, effective
when voted and filed with the Town Clerk. Failure by the Commission to
issue such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity
by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of
this chapter. At a minimum these regulations shall reiterate the terms
defined in this chapter, define additional terms not inconsistent with the
chapter, and impose specific filing and consultant fees.
A.
The Commission may establish, in its regulations, design specifications,
performance standards, and other measures and safeguards, including
setbacks, no-disturb areas, no-build areas, and other work limits for
protection of such lands, including without limitation strips of
continuous, undisturbed vegetative cover, unless the applicant
convinces the Commission that the area or part of it may be disturbed
without harm to the values protected by the chapter.
B.
By a proper bond, deposit of money or negotiable securities under
a written third party escrow arrangement or other undertaking of
financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission to
be released in whole or in pan upon the issuance of a COC for work
performed pursuant to the permit.
A.
§ 187-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 187-12
180:172
§ 187-13. Enforcement.
By accepting a conservation restriction, easement or by a covenant.
enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner
of record, running with the land to the benefit of Chelmsford whereby
the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot
may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be
used only with the consent of the applicant.
B.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise
alter resource areas protected by this chapter, or cause, suffer, or allow
such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to
restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply
with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this chapter.
A.
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have the
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this chapter and may make or cause to
be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the Commission
deems necessary, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United
States and the commonwealth.
B.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this chapter, its
regulations, and permits issued by letters, phone calls, electronic
communication and other informal methods, violation notices,
noncriminal citations under MGL c. 40, § 21D, and civil and criminal
court actions. Any person who violates provisions of this chapter may be
ordered to restore the property to its original condition and take other
action deemed necessary to remedy such violations, or may be fined, or
both.
C.
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate
upon which work has been done in violation of the provisions of this
chapter or in violation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall forthwith comply with any such order to restore such land to its
condition prior to any violation; provided, however, that no action, civil
or criminal, shall be brought against such person unless commenced
within three years following the date of acquisition of the real estate by
such person.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any
conditions of a permit issued pursuant to it may be punished in
accordance with Chelmsford General Code, Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-2,
Noncriminal Disposition. Each day or portion thereof during which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This chapter
may be enforced by the Commission, Conservation Agent or designee
of the Commission, a Town police officer or other officer having police
powers. Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and
Town Counsel shall take such legal action as may be necessary to
enforce this chapter and permits issued pursuant to it.
E.
§ 187-12 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 187-14
180:173
§ 187-14. Appeals.
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in
accordance with MGL c. 249, § 4.
§ 187-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit,
approval or determination which previously has been issued.
[END OF CHAPTER]
Chapter 195
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Community Preservation Committee — See
Ch. 19.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 63.
Historic district — See Ch. 68.
Noise — See Ch. 100.
Right to farm — See Ch. 127.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 142.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 146.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 158.
Wetlands — See Ch. 187.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 202.
§ 187-14 CHELMSFORD CODE § 187-15
180:174
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 195-1. Purpose and authority.
This chapter is enacted to promote the general welfare of the Town of
Chelmsford, to protect the health and safety of its inhabitants, to encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout the town, to preserve the
cultural, historical and agricultural heritage of the community, to increase
the amenities of the Town and to reduce the hazard from fire by regulating
the location and use of buildings and the area of open space around them,
all as authorized by the provisions of the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, as
amended, and by Article 89 of the amendments to the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 195-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-1
180:175

ARTICLE II
Districts
§ 195-2. Establishment.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Town of Chelmsford is hereby
divided into the following districts:
RA - Residential A District. These are the lowest density singlefamily
residence districts.
(1)
RB - Residential B District. These are low-density single-family
residence districts.
(2)
RC - Residential C District. These are medium-density general
residence districts.
(3)
RM - Residential Multifamily District. These are high-density
residence districts.
(4)
CV - Center Village District. This district is for maintaining
downtown village character. [Added 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
28]
(5)
CA - Neighborhood Commercial District. These are commercial
districts for neighborhood areas.
(6)
CB - Roadside Commercial District. These are general commercial
districts which are high traffic generators. Included are such uses
as automotive repair, open lot sales, wholesale business, retail and
offices and so on.
(7)
CC - Shopping Center District. These are commercial districts
designed to allow the clustering of stores, offices and so on around
a central parking area. These are high traffic generators usually
located on major roads.
(8)
CD - General Commercial District. These are primarily retail
commercial offices, restaurants and entertainment commercial
uses, excluding repair, open lot sales, wholesale and storage uses.
These uses are usually located along existing major traffic
thoroughfares.
(9)
CX - Adult Entertainment District. This is a commercial district
created for adult entertainment establishments and other
permitted uses as defined by this chapter.
(10)
IA - Limited Industrial District. These are areas that are primarily
used for office, research development, manufacturing and
warehousing.
(11)
IS - Special Industrial District. This district is suited for heavy
industrial.
(12)
A.
§ 195-2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-2
180:177
§ 195-3. Official Zoning Map.
The districts set forth above are shown on the Official Zoning Map, which,
together with all explanatory material thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map
shall be identified by the signature of the Chairperson of the Planning Board
and attested by the Town Clerk bearing the Seal of the town. The Official
Zoning Map is included as originally dated May 1963 and as most recently
amended.22
§ 195-4. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainties exist as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map, the following shall apply:
RMH - Residential Mobile Home District. This is a district for
mobile homes.
(13)
P - Public District. These are lands owned or leased by federal,
state or municipal governments for governmental purposes.
(14)
OS - Open Space District. These are privately owned lands used for
open space.
(15)
Overlay districts are also hereby created, as follows: CX, Aquifer
Protection, Floodplain Overlay District, Community Enhancement and
Investment Overlay District, and Village Center Overlay District.
[Amended 4-27-2009 ATM by Art. 19; 4-29-213 ATM by Art. 26;
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 16; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 23]
B.
Where the boundary lines are shown upon said map as approximately
following the street lines of public and private ways or railways, the
center lines of such ways shall be the boundary lines.
A.
Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of
property lot lines and the exact location of property, lot or boundary
lines is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, then the
property or lot lines shall be the boundary lines.
B.
Boundary lines located outside of street lines and shown approximately
parallel thereto shall be regarded as parallel to such street lines, and
dimensions shown in figures placed upon said map between such
boundary lines and street lines are the distance in feet of such boundary
lines from such street lines, such distances being measured at right
angles to such street lines unless otherwise indicated.
C.
In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this section,
the location of boundary lines shall be determined by the distance
in feet, if given, from other lines upon said map, by the use of
identifications as shown on the map or by the scale of the map.
D.
22.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file at the office of the Planning Board.
§ 195-2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-4
180:178
Where the district boundary line follows a stream, lake or other body
of water, said boundary line shall be construed to be at the thread or
channel of the stream or at the limit of the jurisdiction of the Town of
Chelmsford, unless otherwise indicated.
E.
Where a district boundary line divides any lot existing at the time such
line is adopted, the regulations of any district in which the lot has
frontage on a street may be extended by special permit from the Board
of Appeals not more than 30 feet into the other district.
F.
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Map or in other
circumstances not covered by the above subsections, the Board of
Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
G.
§ 195-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-4
180:179

ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 195-5. Permitted uses; interpretation of schedule.
§ 195-6. Accessory uses.
Any use permitted as a principal use is also allowed as an accessory use,
as are others customarily accessory and incidental to permitted principal
uses. Accessory uses are permitted only in accordance with lawfully existing
principal uses. An accessory use may not, in effect, convert a principal
use to a use not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
Where a principal use is permitted under special permit, its accessory
use is also subject to the special permit. In all instances where site plan
review and approval are required for a principal use, the addition of any
new accessory use to the principal use, where such addition exceeds the
thresholds established in § 195-104, shall also require site plan review and
approval.
No structure shall be erected or used or land used except as set forth
in the Use Regulation Schedule23 or in § 195-6, Accessory uses, unless
exempted by this chapter or by statute. Uses not expressly provided for
herein are prohibited. Not more than one principal structure shall be
placed on a lot, except in accordance with § 195-12.
A.
When an activity might be classified under more than one of the uses
on the Use Regulation Schedule, the more specific classification shall
govern; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall govern.
B.
Accessory scientific uses. Uses, whether or not on the same parcel
as activities permitted as a matter of right, which are necessary in
connection with scientific research or scientific development or related
production may be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by
the Board of Appeals, provided that the Board finds that the proposed
use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
A.
Major recreational equipment. No major unregistered recreational
equipment shall be stored on any lot in a residential district other
than in a carport or enclosed building or behind the building line of
the principal building; provided, however, that such equipment may be
parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed
72 hours. No such equipment shall be used for living or housekeeping
purposes when stored on a residential lot or in any location not
approved for such use. All equipment which does not conform to these
regulations shall be considered nonconforming.
B.
Family day-care homes. Family day-care home providers shall be
registered with and have obtained all applicable licenses from the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Office of Children and shall be in full
C.
23.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-5 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-6
180:181
§ 195-6.1. Limited accessory apartment (LAA). [Added 10-15-2001
ATM by Art. 19; amended 10-18-2010 ATM by Art. 18]
compliance with all applicable rules and regulations promulgated by
the Office of Children as set forth in accordance with MGL c. 28A,
particularly §§ 9 through 13 thereof, and in accordance with Section 13
of Chapter 785 of the Acts of 1972. Providers shall also comply with
the provisions of the Life Safety Code adopted by the National Fire
Protection Association, Section 10-9, Family Child Day-Care Homes,
and any amendments or revisions thereto or act in relation thereto.
Barn sale, yard sale, garage sale or flea market. The temporary use of
residential, institutional or industrial premises for the sale of personal
property is permitted, provided that a temporary occupancy permit is
obtained. Such permits shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings
for up to two consecutive days only, not more than twice each calendar
year for any given premises. For each such sale a separate permit shall
be required. No merchandise dangerous to life or limb shall be shown
or sold, and all persons conducting such sales shall take all necessary
steps for the protection of persons while on their premises.
D.
Animals accessory to dwellings. In excess of two cattle, horses, sheep,
hogs, goats, game birds or similar livestock shall be maintained
accessory to a dwelling only on a lot having an area of not less than
40,000 square feet plus 15,000 square feet per large animal (25 pounds
or heavier at maturity) in excess of one or per 10 smaller animals in
excess of the first 10. Such animals and their wastes shall be contained
at least 50 feet from any abutting lot line of a residentially used lot and
at least 50 feet from any year-round surface water body. [Amended
10-16-2017 by ATM, Art. 20]
E.
Objectives.
To allow the provision of a limited accessory apartment (LAA)
within an as-existing (as of the date of application) single-family
dwelling unit for extended family members of the owner;
(1)
To assure that the single-family character of the neighborhood will
be maintained;
(2)
To assure that the limited accessory apartment shall not be
converted to a rental unit;
(3)
To provide for flexibility within the existing Zoning Bylaw to afford
an opportunity to accommodate additional living arrangements;
(4)
(5) To plan for changing demographics and economic climate;
(6) To increase the supply of affordable housing for family members;
(7) To provide housing options for extended family members;
A.
§ 195-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-6.1
180:182
To ensure compliance with building, safety, fire code standards and
zoning provisions.
(8)
Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the LAA Bylaw:
EXTENDED FAMILY MEMBER — Related by blood, marriage, or
adoption to the owner of the property, or to the owner's spouse, or
persons providing nursing or domiciliary care.
LIMITED ACCESSORY APARTMENT (LAA) — An area contained within
an owner-occupied as-existing (as of the date of application) singlefamily
dwelling unit that maintains internal access and circulation to
the dwelling unit, and which is restricted to extended family members,
consisting of provisions for bathing, cooking and sleeping. The inclusion
of an apartment within a single-family dwelling unit does not convert
the single-family dwelling to a two-family dwelling. Internal walls and
doors, for purposes of privacy, and additional means of access/egress
are not precluded. The LAA shall be ancillary/subordinate in size,
location and function to the single-family dwelling unit.
B.
Applicability/Eligibility.
The Building Inspector may issue a permit (by right) for an LAA
based upon the following criteria:
The LAA is located within an as-existing (as of the date of
application) owner-occupied single-family property located
within any zoning district.
(a)
The LAA is located within the existing dwelling unit, inclusive
of legal nonconforming structures.
(b)
(1)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for a LAA
located within a new addition, inclusive of additions made to legal
nonconforming structures.
(2)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a waiver for a deviation
from any of the design standards in Subsection D.
(3)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for the
renewal of an LAA that has been discontinued and where a permit
has automatically lapsed and become null and void.
(4)
LAAs shall not be rented to or occupied by persons who do not
qualify as extended family members.
(5)
C.
Design standards.
Ingress, egress, access. Adequate provision, as determined by the
Building Inspector, shall be provided for separate ingress and
egress to the outside of the limited accessory apartment. To the
extent possible, exterior passageways and accessways shall not
detract from the single-family appearance of the dwelling. Any
new exterior entrance for the LAA shall be located to the side or
(1)
D.
§ 195-6.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-6.1
180:183
rear of the single-family dwelling. Staircases, serving a second or
third floor, shall be enclosed. An interior doorway shall be provided
between the LAA and the principal dwelling unit.
Area limitation. An LAA shall be limited to a maximum of 750
square feet of gross floor area, exclusive of stairwells and common
areas associated with ingress, egress or access.
(2)
Parking and utilities. Provisions for off-street parking of residents
and guests of both units shall be provided so as to be consistent
with the character of the neighborhood, as determined by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. The requirements of § 195-17 need not
apply to the LAA. Both the principal and accessory apartment
shall be tied into Town sewer, if available. The LAA shall not have
separate metered utilities, unless required by the State Building
Code.
(3)
(4) Only one LAA may be created per lot.
(5) An LAA shall not have more than two occupants.
Use restriction. To ensure continued compliance with owner-occupancy
and other bylaw requirements by current as well as by any subsequent
owners, LAAs permitted under this bylaw shall be subject to a use
restriction, to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds. The use restriction,
to be provided by the Building Inspector, shall be the only form
acceptable and shall include the following:
Notice that the existence of the LAA is predicated upon occupancy
by the owner or the owner's extended family, to whom the permit
has been issued;
(1)
(2) Notification to a buyer of the LAA bylaw;
Upon sale of the property, the new owner shall be required to
file a new application, with the Building Inspector, for purposes of
maintaining the LAA;
(3)
Within 30 days of receipt of a letter from the Building Inspector
determining a violation, a special permit shall be sought for the
continuation of the LAA. Failure to apply for the special permit
within 30 days shall result in the LAA being discontinued and the
permit shall automatically lapse and be null and void.
(4)
Require that current and future property owners notify the
Building Inspector in the event the LAA has been or will voluntarily
be discontinued.
(5)
The dwelling unit remains a single-family and the LAA cannot be
rented to persons who are not extended family members.
(6)
E.
F. Procedural requirements.
§ 195-6.1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-6.1
180:184
By right. The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for an
LAA allowed by right in compliance with Subsection D.
(1)
Special permit. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing, in accordance with MGL c.40A, § 9, for LAA allowed by
special permit.
(2)
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the special permit, if
applicable, and the use restriction shall be recorded in the Registry
of Deeds and evidence of such shall be submitted to the Building
Inspector.
(3)
Submission requirements. For purposes of both by right and special
permit applications, the following shall be submitted:
Architectural plans for the entire structure, including building
elevations and floor plans.
(1)
Site plan showing at a minimum the footprint of all structures, all
building entrances and exits, parking, and screening from abutting
uses.
(2)
The names of the owner and the person(s) proposed to reside in the
limited accessory apartment.
(3)
(4) An executed use restriction regarding the LAA, as described above.
G.
Criteria for approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special
permit for an LAA based upon the criteria as set forth in § 195-103
of this Zoning Bylaw. In order to provide an adequate dwelling unit
for disabled and handicapped individuals, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may allow reasonable deviation from the requirements of this bylaw
where the Board finds that it is necessary to install features that
facilitate access and mobility for disabled persons in addition to any
requirements in accordance with the Massachusetts State Building
Code and as exempt pursuant MGL c.40A, § 3.
Monitoring, inspections and enforcement. The following methods
are available to ensure continued compliance with these
regulations as set forth:
In accordance with § 195-6.1(3), upon the sale of the property,
the new owner shall be required to file a new application with
the Building Inspector. Upon filing, the Building Inspector shall
conduct an inspection of the LAA for purposes of verifying
compliance.
(a)
(1)
If a complaint is filed with the Building Inspector, the Building
Inspector shall inspect the LAA for purposes of determining
whether there is a violation. If a violation is found, the owner
shall apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a special permit
for the continuation of the LAA; such application shall be filed
within 30 days from the receipt of the letter from the Building
(2)
H.
§ 195-6.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-6.1
180:185
§ 195-7. Home occupations. [Amended 10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 13]
Inspector notifying the owner of the violation. Failure to apply for
the special permit within 30 days shall result in the LAA being
discontinued and the permit shall automatically lapse and be null
and void. Renewal of said LAA that has been discontinued in which
the permit has automatically lapsed and become null and void may
be sought in accordance with § 195-6.1C(4).
Discontinued LAAs, whether by choice of the property owner or as
a result of a violation, may be inspected by the Building Inspector
by providing reasonable notice to the property owner.
(3)
Violations to any provision of this bylaw or permit granted under
this bylaw, may be subject to a fine in accordance with § 195-100 of
this bylaw.
(4)
Home occupations as of right. Businesses or professions incidental
to and customarily associated with the principal residential use of
premises may be engaged in as an accessory use by a resident of that
dwelling; provided, however, that all of the following conditions shall be
satisfied:
The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the
principal building or within a building or other structure accessory
thereto which has been in existence at least five years, without
extension thereof.
(1)
Not more than 25% of the combined gross floor area, not to exceed
a maximum of 500 gross square feet, of the residence and any
qualified accessory structures shall be used in the home
occupation. The gross square feet shall be calculated based upon
square feet principally used for the home occupation. Common
areas within the principal structure shall not be included in this
calculation. In calculating gross floor area for the purposes of a
home occupation, the provisions of this section shall prevail over
those in § 195-108 (floor area, gross).
(2)
No person not a member of the household shall be employed at the
home occupation site.
(3)
The home occupation shall not serve clients, customers,
salespersons or the like on the premises with the exception of
individualized services not to exceed four visits per day and the
visits cannot occur concurrently. Business hours shall be from 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(4)
There shall be no sign or exterior display, no exterior storage of
materials and no other exterior indication (such as but not limited
to noise, smoke, dust, odor, vibrations) of the home occupation
or other variation from the residential character of the premises,
including, but not limited to, alterations to utility services which
(5)
A.
§ 195-6.1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-7
180:186
may not be increased beyond that which is required for residential
structures of similar size.
No use or storage of hazardous materials in quantities greater than
associated with normal household use shall be permitted.
(6)
Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally expected in a
residential neighborhood.
(7)
No more than two commercial motor vehicles, including trailers,
provided:
That total combined gross vehicle weight does not exceed
20,000 pounds.
(a)
(b) That any single vehicle does not exceed 14,000 pounds.
That vehicles be parked within an existing paved driveway (offstreet).
(c)
(8)
By-right home occupations shall be required to apply for a business
certificate with the Town Clerk.
(9)
Home occupations by special permit. All non as-of-right businesses or
professions incidental to and associated with the principal residential
use of premises may be engaged in as an accessory use by a resident
of that dwelling upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of
Appeals; provided, however, that all of the following conditions shall be
satisfied:
All of the requirements of Subsection A(1), (2), (4) and (5), unless
noted below.
(1)
Not more than one person not a member of the household shall
perform work in the home occupation at any one time.
(2)
An unlighted sign of not more than three square feet in area may be
permitted. The visibility of exterior storage of materials and other
exterior indications of the home occupation, or other variation
from the residential character of the premises, shall be minimized
through screening and other appropriate devices.
(3)
Parking generated by the home occupation shall be accommodated
off street, other than in a required front yard, and shall not occupy
more than 20% of the lot area. In granting a special permit, the
Board of Appeals may consider the use of on-street parking if it
finds that the neighborhood will not be adversely impacted.
(4)
The use or storage of hazardous materials in quantities greater
than associated with normal household use shall be subject to
design requirements to protect against discharge to the
environment.
(5)
B.
§ 195-7 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-7
180:187
§ 195-8. Nonconforming uses and structures.
No more than two commercial motor vehicles, including trailers,
may be parked in the driveway, provided that:
The motor vehicles, including any associated trailers, do not
exceed a total combined 28,000 pounds' gross vehicle weight;
(a)
The motor vehicles shall not be heavy construction equipment/
apparatus;
(b)
The motor vehicles are not loaded in whole or in part with
noxious, flammable, dangerous or offensive materials or
liquids.
(c)
(6)
Special permits by the Zoning Board.
A special permit may be issued to waive Subsection A(1) to allow
for a building that is less than five years old to be considered for the
home occupation, provided the structure was an existing structure
and not constructed solely for the home occupation.
(1)
A special permit may be issued to waive Subsection A(2) to allow
a greater area for the home occupation, but this area shall not
exceed 50% of the allowable square-foot area allowed in
Subsection A(2).
(2)
A special permit may be issued to waive Subsection A(5) if it
is determined that a sign not to exceed two square feet or any
exterior alteration associated with the household occupation will
not detract from the character of the neighborhood or the
residential structure.
(3)
A special permit may only be granted to the current homeowner,
shall be personal to that person, and shall not be transferable upon
the sale of the property.
(4)
A special permit may be issued to waive Subsection A(4) to allow
additional visits up to a total of eight per day, which cannot occur
concurrently.
(5)
C.
Applicability. This chapter shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully
in existence or lawfully begun or to a building or special permit issued
before the first publication of notice of the public hearing required by
MGL c. 40A, § 5 at which this chapter, or any relevant part thereof,
was adopted. Such prior lawfully existing nonconforming uses and
structures may continue, provided that no modification of the use or
structure is accomplished, unless authorized hereunder. For the
purposes of § 195-8B and § 195-8C, the Board, of Appeals shall be the
special permit granting authority for single- and two-family dwellings
and the Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority
for all other uses and structures, including multifamily and
A.
§ 195-7 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-8
180:188
nonresidential uses and structures. [Amended 10-20-2008 ATM by
Art. 12]
Nonconforming uses. The Board of Appeals or the Planning Board, as
applicable, may award a special permit to change a nonconforming
use in accordance with this section only if it determines that such
change or extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than
the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood. The following
types of changes to nonconforming uses may be considered by the
Board of Appeals: [Amended 10-20-2008 ATM by Art. 12]
(1) Change or substantial extension of the use.
Change from one nonconforming use to another, less detrimental,
nonconforming use.
(2)
B.
Nonconforming structures (except one- and two-family structures). The
Board of Appeals or the Planning Board, as applicable, may award a
special permit to reconstruct, extend, alter or change, including the
extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming
line, parallel to the required setback, of a nonconforming structure
in accordance with this section only if it determines that such
reconstruction, extension, alteration or change shall not be
substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming
structure to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to
nonconforming structures may be considered by the Board of Appeals
or the Planning Board, as applicable: [Amended 10-20-2008 ATM by
Art. 12; 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 28]
(1) Reconstructed, extended or structurally changed.
Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the
same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a
substantially greater extent.
(2)
Reconstructed after a catastrophe, provided that the owner shall
apply for a building permit and start operations for reconstruction
on said premises within two years after such catastrophe, and
provided that the building(s) as reconstructed shall be only as great
in volume or area as the original nonconforming structure.
(3)
C.
Variance required. Except as provided for in Subsections C and E,
the reconstruction, extension or structural change of a nonconforming
structure in such a manner as to increase an existing nonconformity,
or create a new nonconformity, shall require the issuance of a variance
from the Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 28]
D.
By-right nonconforming single- and two-family residential structures.
Nonconforming single- and two-family residential structures may be
reconstructed, extended, altered or structurally changed (the work)
upon a determination by the Inspector of Buildings that such proposed
reconstruction, extension, alteration or change does not increase the
E.
§ 195-8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-8
180:189
nonconforming nature of said structure. [Amended 4-30-2012 ATM
by Art. 28]
The following circumstances, (a)-(d), shall not be deemed to
increase the nonconforming nature of said structure, provided the
gross square footage of the nonconforming structure is not
increased by more than the standards in the below table.
Insufficient lot area. The work to a structure located on a
lot with insufficient lot area which complies with all current
setback, yard, building coverage, frontage and building height
requirements;
(a)
Insufficient frontage. The work to a structure located on a
lot with insufficient frontage which complies with all current
setback, yard, building coverage, lot area and building height
requirements;
(b)
Other encroachment. The work to a structure which
encroaches upon one or more required yard or setback areas,
where the alteration will comply with all current setback, yard,
building coverage and building height requirements. Extension
of the nonconforming structure along the same nonconforming
line, parallel to the required setback, shall not be deemed to
increase the nonconforming nature of said structure;
(c)
Existing footprint. The work to a structure that will remain
within the existing footprint which complies with building
height requirements.
Lot Size % Increase of Structure
Under 10,000 square feet 10%
Between 10,001-19,999
square feet
20%
Over 20,000 square feet 30%
(d)
(1)
Special permits for nonconforming single- and two-family
residential structures. In the event that the Inspector of Buildings
determines that the nonconforming nature of such structure would
be increased by the proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration
or change or a new conformity created, the Board of Appeals may,
by special permit, allow such reconstruction, extension, alteration
or change where it determines that the proposed modification
will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing
nonconforming structure to the neighborhood.
(2)
Abandonment or nonuse. A nonconforming use or structure which has
been abandoned, or not used for a period of two years, shall lose its
protected status and be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter.
F.
§ 195-8 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-8
180:190
§ 195-8.1. through § 195-8.4. (Reserved)
§ 195-8.5. Temporary moratorium on medical marijuana treatment
centers. [Amended 4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 25]
Reversion to nonconformity. No nonconforming use shall, if changed to
a conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use.
G.
Purpose. By vote at the state election on November 6, 2012, the voters
of the commonwealth approved a law regulating the cultivation,
distribution, possession and use of marijuana for medical purposes.
The law provides that it is effective on January 1, 2013, and the State
Department of Public Health is required to issue regulations regarding
implementation within 120 days of the law's effective date. Currently
under the Zoning Bylaw, a medical marijuana treatment center is a
permitted use in the Town of Chelmsford and any regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Public Health are expected
to provide guidance to the Town in regulating medical marijuana,
including medical marijuana treatment centers. The regulation of
medical marijuana raises novel and complex legal, planning, and public
safety issues, and the Town needs time to study and consider the
regulation of medical marijuana treatment centers and address such
novel and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact
of the state regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning
process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation
of medical marijuana treatment centers and other uses related to the
regulation of medical marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a
temporary moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for
medical marijuana treatment centers so as to allow the Town sufficient
time to engage in a planning process to address the effects of such
structures and uses in the Town and to enact bylaws in a manner
consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER — A not-for-profit entity,
as defined by Massachusetts law only, registered by the Department of
Public Health, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including
development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils
or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or
administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related
supplies, or educational materials to qualifying patients or their
personal caregivers.
B.
Temporary moratorium.
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other
provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby
adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures for
a medical marijuana treatment center.
(1)
C.
§ 195-8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-8.5
180:191
(2) The moratorium shall be in effect through June 30, 2014.
During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a
planning process to address the potential impacts of medical
marijuana in the Town, consider the Department of Public Health
regulations regarding medical marijuana treatment facilities and
related uses, and shall consider adopting new Zoning Bylaws to
address the impact and operation of medical marijuana treatment
centers and related uses.
(3)
§ 195-8.5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-8.5
180:192
ARTICLE IV
Dimensional Regulations
§ 195-9. Conformity required; reduction of dimensional
requirements.24 [Amended 10-18-2010 ATM by Art. 17]
§ 195-10. Existing nonconforming lots.
No existing nonconforming lot shall be changed in size or shape, except
through a public land taking or donation for road widening, drainage or
utility improvements or except where otherwise permitted herein, so as to
increase the degree of nonconformity that presently exists.
§ 195-10.1. Wastewater pumping stations. [Added 10-21-1999 ATM
by Art. 26]
Municipal wastewater pumping stations shall not be subject to the
dimensional regulations of this article.
§ 195-11. Accessory buildings. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
29; 10-15-2001 ATM by Art. 20; 5-3-2007 ATM by Art. 19]
No accessory building or structure, except a permitted sign or roadside
stand, shall be located within a required front yard area. Detached
No structure shall be erected or used, premises used or lot changed in
size or shape except in conformity with the requirements of this article,
unless exempted by this chapter or by statute (see MGL c. 40A, § 6).
A.
Reductions to dimensional requirements. For purposes of single- and
two-family dwellings, the Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special
permit for the reduction, of not more than 20% from front, side and
rear yard dimensional requirements, within the Table of Dimensional
Requirements, if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the reduction
meets the following criteria:
The lot or structure may not be developed without a reduction in
the dimensional requirements or a site design is proposed which is
more suitable for the lot than one which would be allowed under
the permitted dimensional requirements;
(1)
(2) Adjacent properties would not be adversely impacted; and
The reduced dimensions would not be detrimental to the public
good and would not substantially deviate from the intent or
purpose of this Zoning Bylaw.
(3)
Any lot reduced under this section may not be further reduced or
subdivided.
(4)
B.
24.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 195-9 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-11
180:193
accessory buildings may be located in the rear or side yard areas and on
the same lot as a principal building, provided that not more than 25% of
the required yard area shall be so occupied, and further provided that a
swimming pool shall not be located nearer than 10 feet from the principal
building and shall be at least 10 feet from any side or rear lot line. An
accessory building attached to its principal building or within 10 feet of it
shall be considered an integral part thereof arid as such shall be subject
to the front, side and rear yard requirements applicable to the principal
building. An accessory building smaller than 260 square feet shall not be
located closer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot line. An accessory building
larger than 260 square feet shall be subject to the front, side and rear yard
requirements applicable to the principal building. An accessory building
with a footprint greater than 900 square feet, or with a building height in
excess of 20 feet, or of two stories or greater shall be subject to a Planning
Board special permit.
§ 195-12. Multiple principal structures.
Except in the residential districts, more than one principal nonresidential
structure may be erected on a lot, pursuant to a special permit issued by
the Planning Board in accordance with § 195-103 herein and the following
conditions:
§ 195-13. Conversion of dwelling units.
Alteration of a single-family dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter in 1938 for occupancy by not more than two families is permitted,
in accordance with Article III of this chapter, provided that the lot contains
not less than 15,000 square feet and the exterior design of the structure is
not changed from the character of a single-family dwelling, and provided
further that at least 600 square feet of living space shall be provided for
each resulting dwelling unit.
Roadside stands. Roadside stands shall be located at least 15 feet back
from any street right-of-way and 20 feet from any lot line. Portable
stands shall be removed during seasons when not in use.
A.
No principal building shall be located in relation to another principal
building on the same lot, or on an adjacent lot, so as to cause danger
from fire.
A.
All principal buildings on the lot shall be served by accessways suitable
for fire, police and emergency vehicles.
B.
All of the multiple principal buildings on the same lot shall be accessible
via pedestrian walkways connected to the required parking for the
premises and to each principal building.
C.
§ 195-11 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-14
180:194
§ 195-14. Height restrictions on certain accessory structures.
Tall structures and roof-mounted or attached structures shall comply with
the following requirements, conditions and guidelines. For purposes of this
section, a "tall structure" shall mean any freestanding man-made device
(lattice, mast, pole, windmill, wind turbine, spire, tower, antenna or the like)
which exceeds 35 feet in height and which is not subject to Article XIII,
Wireless Communications Facilities.
§ 195-15. Rear lots.
Rear lots shall be allowed only in the RA and RB Districts by special permit
issued by the Planning Board. Individual lots need not have the required
amount of street frontage, provided that all of the following conditions can
be met for each individual lot lacking such frontage:
Each tall structure shall be placed in a circle with a radius equal to its
height as measured from the base of said structure. This circle must
be contained entirely within the property on which the tall structure is
located. More than one tall structure may be erected on a lot, provided
that the total area of the circles required above does not exceed the
area of the lot.
A.
No tall structure shall be located within a required front or side yard
area.
B.
Roof-mounted or attached structures, including masts, poles, towers,
antennas, etc., may not exceed 20 feet above the uppermost part of
the structure to which attached. Such structures shall not be located
nearer to the lot line than the total height of the mounted or attached
structure.
C.
A. The area of said lot is at least 80,000 square feet.
B. The front, rear and side yards shall be at least 40 feet.
A building line is designated on the plan, and the width of the lot at that
line equals or exceeds 125 feet.
C.
Lot width is at no point less than 50 feet, and lot frontage is not less
than 50 feet. No section of the lot with a width of less than 100 feet
shall be used to compute the minimum lot area set forth above.
D.
Not more than one rear lot shall be created from a property or a
set of contiguous properties held in common ownership as of October
22, 1998. In order to be eligible for a rear lot, such property or set
of contiguous properties held in common ownership as of October
22, 1998, shall not have been divided after such date. No further
division of said property or properties shall be permitted after the
creation of a rear lot. Documentation to this effect shall be submitted
to the Inspector of Buildings. The Inspector of Buildings shall not
issue a building permit for any rear lot without first establishing that
E.
§ 195-14 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-15
180:195
compliance with this provision has been determined by the Planning
Board.
At the time of the creation of the rear lot, it shall be held in common
and contiguous ownership with the front lot.
F.
There shall be a turnaround at the house site suitable for an SU30
vehicle. There shall be a pullout on the access driveway every 250 feet.
G.
§ 195-15 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-15
180:196
ARTICLE V
Off-Street Parking and Loading
Purpose and Intent. [Added 10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 15]
In order to minimize traffic congestion, air pollution, and the risk of motor
vehicle and pedestrian accidents, as well as to promote other elements of
sound community planning, off-street parking, loading spaces, circulation,
and access shall be required and designed as appropriate to protect or
enhance the desired character of a given zoning district. It is further the
intent of this bylaw to:
1. Ensure there are adequate parking and loading facilities to serve the
use or uses of the property;
2. Ensure that parking facilities are designed to provide proper
circulation, reduce hazards to pedestrians, and protect the users of
adjoining properties from nuisance caused by the noise, fumes, and
glare of headlights which may result from the operation of vehicles
parking off the street;
3. Reduce congestion in the streets and contribute to traffic safety;
4. Encourage alternate modes of travel that will reduce dependence upon
the single-occupancy automobile; and
5. Reduce impervious surfaces and stormwater runoff through
sustainable design.
§ 195-16. Off-street parking to be provided; common parking areas.
[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29; 10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 15]
Applicability. Adequate off-street parking must be provided to service
all parking demand created by new structures, additions to existing
structures or changes of use. Existing buildings and uses need not
comply unless expanded or otherwise changed to increase their parking
needs.
Additions.
A building or site may be renovated or repaired without
providing additional parking, provided there is no increase in
gross floor area or improved site area and the use does not
change.
(a)
When a building, use or site is increased in gross floor area or
improved site area, additional parking is only required for the
additional gross floor or site area.
(b)
(1)
Change in use.
A change in use must comply with the parking requirements
unless the new use has the same or a lower parking demand
than the previous use.
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 195-16 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-16
180:197
§ 195-17. Minimum parking requirements. [Amended 10-21-1999
ATM by Arts. 28 and 29; 10-16-2006 ATM by Art. 19; 10-21-2013
ATM by Art. 15]
Where required parking spaces for the new use exceed the
required parking spaces for the existing use, additional
parking is only required for the difference between the current
parking spaces required and the parking spaces required for
the new use.
(b)
Meeting parking demand. In applying for building or occupancy
permits, the applicant must demonstrate that the minimum parking
requirements set forth below will be met for the new demand without
counting existing parking necessary for preexisting remaining uses.
B.
Shared parking. Common parking areas may be permitted for the
purpose of servicing two or more principal uses on the same or separate
lots, provided that:
Proximity. Evidence is submitted that safe and accessible parking
is available within 500 feet of the premises, which lot satisfies the
requirements of this chapter and has excess capacity during all
or part of the day, which excess capacity shall be demonstrated
by a competent parking survey conducted by a traffic engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(1)
Legal agreement. A contract, agreement or suitable legal
instrument acceptable to the Planning Board and Chelmsford's
Town Counsel shall be filed with the application for a building
permit, occupancy permit or special permit for exception which
shall specify the location of all spaces to be jointly used, the
number of such spaces, the hours during the day that such parking
shall be available and the duration or limit, if any, on such parking.
(2)
Parking reserve. Any reduction in area required for parking
because of these joint use provisions may be required by the
Planning Board to be reserved in landscaped open space. Such area
shall be computed at the rate of 300 square feet per parking space
and verified with an engineered site plan.
(3)
Discontinuation. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner
from providing parking facilities in accordance with this chapter
if subsequently the joint use of parking facilities shall terminate.
In such cases, the owner shall return to the Planning Board to
provide an alternative joint agreement or another method of relief
acceptable to the Board.
(4)
C.
Parking reduction method. The requirements set forth in this article
may be reduced by special permit issued by the Planning Board upon a
finding that such reduction will not detract from the purpose and intent
of this article.
D.
§ 195-16 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-17
180:198
Minimum parking requirements. For the purpose of computing the
parking requirements of different uses, the number of spaces required
shall be the largest whole number obtained after increasing all
fractions upwards to one. Employees shall include the largest number
of owners, managers, full- and part-time workers and volunteers that
may be normally expected on the premises during any single shift
or portion thereof. The number of seats in benches, pews or other
continuous seating arrangements shall be calculated at 20 inches for
each seat. The following minimum parking requirements shall apply to
uses as listed below:
Use Number of Spaces
Stores, retail business and
services
1 space per 200 square feet of net
floor area or a minimum of at least 3
spaces per establishment
Banks, libraries and post
offices
1 space per 100 square feet of floor
area devoted to public use, plus 1
space per employee
Bowling alleys 4 spaces for each alley
Business and professional
offices, office buildings and
offices of a wholesale
establishment, including sales
space
1 space per 200 square feet of net
floor area
Medical and dental offices
and clinics
1 space per 200 square feet of net
floor area
Restaurants, lounges and
function rooms
1 space per employee on the largest
shift and 1 space per 2.5 seats based
on the maximum rated legal seating
capacity of the facility
Fast-food establishments 1 space per 50 square feet of net floor
area
Adult entertainment
establishments
1 space per employee on the largest
shift and 1 space for each 1.25
persons allowed for said
establishment's seating capacity
Theaters, funeral homes and
places of assembly
1 space for each 4 seats or for each 50
square feet of assembly area,
whichever is greater
Hotels, motels and tourist
homes
1 space per guest room, plus 1 space
per employee, plus a number of spaces
as required elsewhere herein for
restaurants, assembly halls, function
rooms, shops and similar functions if
occurring on the premises
Nonfamily accommodations 1 space per 2 persons accommodated
A.
§ 195-17 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-17
180:199
Use Number of Spaces
Nursing and convalescent
homes
1 space for each 3 beds, plus 1 space
for each employee serving on the shift
having the greatest number of
employees, plus 1 space for each
visiting staff
Clubs, lodges and association
buildings
1 space per 3 memberships
Lumber and building material
yards, nurseries and outdoor
sales
1 space per 200 square feet of net
floor area and 1 space per 1,000
square feet of outdoor or bulk sales
area
Manufacturing, truck
terminals, wholesale
establishments, public utility
buildings other than their
business office, warehouses
and similar uses not normally
visited by the general public
1 space per 500 feet of net floor area;
provided, however, that the Inspector
of Buildings may waive the actual
construction of said space to no less
than 1 space per 1.4 employees, plus 1
space for each vehicle used in the
operation upon issuance of a building
permit or occupancy permit
Facilitated living facilities 1 space for each employee on the shift
having the greatest number of
employees, plus 1 space for each
visiting staff person; when on-site
parking for the facility's residents is
permitted, the parking requirement is
8/10 space per room; when on-site
parking for the facility's residents is
not permitted, the parking
requirement is 1 space for each 3
beds; the site must support the
potential for meeting the parking
requirement for business and
professional offices in the event of a
building conversion and shall be
shown on the site plan as potential
future parking
Single-family and two-family
dwellings
2 spaces per dwelling unit for units
with 2 or more bedrooms
Multifamily dwellings 1 space per dwelling unit for 1
bedroom; 2 spaces per dwelling unit
for units with 2 or more, plus 1 space
per every 3 units or fraction thereof
Home occupations In addition to the spaces required for
the dwelling, 1 space for the
nonresident employee
§ 195-17 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-17
180:200
§ 195-18. Reduction in number of required spaces. [Amended
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 15]
Use Number of Spaces
Accessory residential use in
the CV District
1 space per unit
Child/day care 1 space per 4 students, plus 1 space
per employee on the largest shift, plus
a dedicated drop-off zone adequate to
accommodate a minimum of 5
automobiles
Self-storage mini-warehouse A minimum of 3 spaces per facility,
plus 1 space per 100 storage units
Any other nonresidential use
or any use involving a
combination of functions
similar to or listed herein
A number of spaces as determined by
the Inspector of Buildings by
application of the ratios above
Maximum on-site parking. On-site surface parking shall not exceed
100% of the required minimum parking spaces under § 195-17 except
on special permit from the Planning Board.
B.
Base parking reduction methods. The requirements of § 195-17 may
be reduced up to a maximum of 25% with a special permit from the
Planning Board if a property owner can demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Board that the required number of spaces will not be needed for
the proposed use and that fewer spaces meet all parking needs. Such
cases might include:
Use of a shared/common parking lot for separate uses having peak
demands occurring at different times.
(1)
Age or other characteristics of occupants which reduce their auto
usage.
(2)
Peculiarities of the use that make usual measures of demand
invalid.
(3)
(4) The area necessary for the reduced spaces is available on the lot.
If the use is located adjacent to a public right-of-way where striped
on-street parking is available, the Board may allow the reduction
of one off-street parking space required for each 20 linear feet of
abutting right-of-way where on-street parking is located.
(5)
If an off-street public parking lot of 20 spaces or more exists
within 300 feet of the principal land use, on-site parking may be
reduced by an amount determined by the Planning Board, taking
into consideration other users of the lot.
(6)
A.
§ 195-17 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-18
180:201
If a private off-street parking lot with sufficient space for longterm
parking (such as employees) is within a seven-hundred-foot
walking distance of the principal land use, on-site parking may
be reduced by an amount determined by the Planning Board. The
off-site parking must be secured by a legal agreement per
§ 195-16C(2) above and the applicant must demonstrate that
adequate parking for all of the uses sharing the parking facility
exist.
(7)
Proximity to public transportation where it can be demonstrated to
the Planning Board that consistent ridership results in less demand
for on-site parking at the principal use.
(8)
Other transportation mitigation programs (TMP) such as carsharing,
carpooling, shuttle service, on-site bicycle commuter
services, or other programs. A TMP plan must be submitted to the
Planning Board and clearly demonstrate that the programs result
in permanent reduction in the need for on-site parking.
(9)
Additional parking reduction methods. In addition to the parking
reduction methods in Subsection A(1) through (9) above, required
parking in § 195-17 may be reduced up to a maximum of 50% with a
special permit from the Planning Board if one or more of the following
methods is utilized for reducing the required number of parking spaces.
Payment to public parking fund. In lieu of providing the total
minimum on-site parking required, the Planning Board may accept
a one-time payment per required parking space for all or a portion
of required on-site parking that would be committed to a fund for
the construction of public parking in the district. The Planning
Board shall establish the amount of payment required per parking
space.
(1)
Public parking reserve. In lieu of providing the total minimum onsite
parking required, the Planning Board may accept a permanent
easement on the property for the purposes of constructing public
parking for all or a portion of required on-site parking spaces. The
reserve easement shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board.
(2)
Traffic circulation and pedestrian safety improvement incentives.
On-site parking requirements may be reduced if one or more of the
following pedestrian safety improvements are made on site:
Permanently eliminates and/or significantly reduces the width
of existing curb cuts in a manner that improves the pedestrian
safety and access control on a primary public street; or
(a)
Provides a perpetual agreement for one or more driveway
consolidations or interconnections that will alleviate traffic on
a primary street and facilitates shared use of off-street parking;
or
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 195-18 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-18
180:202
An internal sidewalk is provided with connections to the
primary use entrance, on-site parking area, the adjacent public
sidewalk, and adjacent uses (where appropriate).
(c)
Public access through a permanent easement is provided to
the Bruce Freeman Trail or the Beaver Brook and bike racks
to accommodate at least two bicycles per eliminated parking
space.
Label A on the diagram illustrated an internal pedestrian
connection between the public sidewalk, main building
entrance and on-site parking area.
(d)
Special permit criteria for reducing required parking spaces. Per
§ 195-18, the Planning Board may authorize a decrease in the required
number of off-street parking spaces that will not create undue
congestion, traffic hazards, or a substantial detriment to the business
district or neighborhood, and does not derogate from the intent and
purpose of this bylaw, subject to the following criteria:
Placed into reserve (landbanked).
The reduction of on-site parking spaces shall not be used for
building area except by special permit from the Planning
Board. The Planning Board may require an area of 300 square
feet per each waived parking space be labeled as "Reserve
Parking" on the site plan.
(a)
The reserve parking spaces shall be properly designed, and
verified with an engineered site plan, as an integral part of
the overall parking development, and in no case shall any
reserve parking spaces be located within areas counted as
yard setbacks.
(b)
If, after one year from the date of issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, the Building Inspector and/or Planning Board
find that all or any of the reserve spaces are needed, the
Planning Board may require that all or any portion of the
spaces identified as reserve parking on the site plan be
constructed within a reasonable time period, as specified in
(c)
(1)
C.
§ 195-18 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-18
180:203
§ 195-19. Size of parking spaces. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art.
29; 10-15-2012 ATM by Art. 18]
The area of the parking lot shall be determined by the following table:
Angle
Stall and Aisle Dimensions
(feet)
X B C D E F G I
30 9.0 17.3 11.0 26.8 18.0 4.5 16.4
45 9.0 19.8 13.0 33.2 12.8 6.4 13.4
60 9.0 21.0 18.0 37.4 10.5 7.8 9.5
70 9.0 20.9 19.0 38.8 9.6 8.5 6.5
80 9.0 20.3 24.0 39.0 9.1 8.8 3.3
90 9.0 19.0 24.0 38.0 9.0 9.0 0.0
§ 195-20. Off-street loading.
All buildings requiring the delivery of goods, supplies or materials or
shipments of the same shall have bays and suitable maneuvering space for
off-street loading of vehicles in accordance with the following:
writing by the Planning Board following a public meeting with
the owner of the property. Notice of the public meeting shall
be by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
accordance with M.G.L. c. 40A, Section 11.
Waived.
The Board may determine that all or a portion of the parking
spaces are not needed and therefore not placed into reserve.
(a)
(2)
(3) Combination of reserve and waived.
§ 195-18 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-20
180:204
§ 195-21. Parking and loading area design and location.
Retail stores and services. For each establishment with a net floor
area from 5,000 to 8,000 square feet, at least one berth shall be
provided. Additional space is required at the rate of one berth per
8,000 square feet or nearest multiple thereof. Where two or more
such establishments are connected by a common wall, such as in a
shopping center, common berths may be permitted for the use of all
establishments at the rate of one berth space per 8,000 square feet in
the entire shopping center.
A.
Office buildings. For each office building with net area of 4,000 square
feet or more, at least one berth shall be provided.
B.
Manufacturing industrial warehousing. For manufacturing, industrial
warehousing and similar uses up to 8,000 square feet of net floor area,
at least one berth shall be provided. For larger floor areas, additional
berths shall be provided as required by the Inspector of Buildings
adequate for off-street loading and unloading.
C.
Loading areas shall provide screening in accordance with Article IX,
Landscaping.
D.
Loading bays shall not be less than 12 feet in width, 40 feet in length
and 14 feet in height, exclusive of driveway and maneuvering space.
Required off-street loading bays and maneuvering spaces shall be
located entirely on the same lot as the building being served.
E.
No off-street parking area shall be located within 10 feet of a property
line or within 20 feet of a street right-of-way. See § 195-44C for
increased parking buffers. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
A.
Sidewalks are required within the site where necessary for safe
pedestrian access and circulation. There shall be a marked pedestrian
aisle at each entrance to the building served by the parking lot.
B.
Parking spaces more than 500 feet from the building entrance they
serve may not be counted towards fulfillment of parking requirements
unless the Planning Board determines that circumstances justify this
greater separation of parking from use.
C.
All required parking areas except those serving single-family
residences shall be paved, unless exempted on special permit from
the Planning Board for cases such as seasonal or periodic use where
unpaved surfaces will not cause dust, erosion, hazard or unsightly
conditions.
D.
Parking areas for five or more cars shall not require vehicles to back
onto a public way.
E.
Parking areas shall provide screening in accordance with Article IX,
Landscaping. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
F.
§ 195-20 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-21
180:205
§ 195-22. Parking garages.
An application for a special permit for a parking garage shall require
the submission of a site plan in conformance with § 195-104. A parking
garage shall not exceed three stories in height (35 feet) and, when taken in
No dead-end aisle may exceed seven parking spaces in width for uses
exclusively for retail, restaurants, professional offices, and medicalrelated
uses. For all other uses, dead-end aisles shall not exceed 15
parking spaces in width. However, the Planning Board shall waive the
requirement for a special permit if the Board finds that the dead-end
aisle will not detract from the objectives of this article, an adequate
turnaround area is provided and dedicated for such purposes with
sufficient signage and the parking spaces closest to the dead end
are reserved for employees and signed accordingly. [Amended
10-18-2010 ATM by Art. 19]
G.
Continuous curbing shall be provided to control access, drainage and
damage.
H.
Curb stops, planting strips or other means shall be provided to maintain
a minimum usable sidewalk width of four feet or the minimum width
required by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
I.
Parking areas with 20 or more spaces. The following shall apply to
entrances or exits to all parking areas with 20 or more spaces:
Entrance or exit center lines shall not fall within 50 feet of an
intersection of street side lines or within 150 feet of the center line
of any other parking area entrance or exit on the same side of the
street, whether on the same parcel or not, if serving 20 or more
spaces. Uses shall arrange for shared egress if necessary to meet
these requirements.
(1)
Egressing vehicles shall have 400 feet of visibility in each travel
direction.
(2)
Street entrances shall be designed consistent with Massachusetts
Department of Public Works Traffic Regulations, Section 10A-9 or
subsequent revisions.
(3)
An appropriate area for snow storage after plowing shall be
provided on the premises.
(4)
J.
Pervious parking materials. Turf grid systems, pervious pavers, gravel
and similar parking materials are allowed for supplemental parking
areas where excess parking is necessary on a temporary basis in
addition to required parking. Some specific applications may include
places of worship, parks and recreation facilities, or public and private
schools. Off-street parking facilities surfaced with pervious materials
may be allowed by special permit from the Planning Board. [Added
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 15]
K.
§ 195-21 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-22
180:206
consideration with the principal structure, shall not exceed the lot coverage
for the applicable zoning district.
§ 195-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-22
180:207

ARTICLE VI
Fairs, Carnivals and Similar Events
§ 195-23. Special permit.
Special permits for carnivals, fairs, exhibits or similar outdoor events may
be granted consistent with the following:
§ 195-24. Other requirements.
All requirements of this chapter, except paving for parking areas but
including Article VIII, Environmental Protection Standards, and § 195-34,
Outdoor lighting, shall be observed.
Sponsorship. The sponsor shall be a religious, charitable, social or
public organization.
A.
Duration. The event shall continue no longer than one week at any one
time, and not more than two such events shall be authorized within any
12 months for any one sponsor.
B.
§ 195-23 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-24
180:209

ARTICLE VII
Signs and Outdoor Lighting
§ 195-25. Objectives.
The following sign regulations are intended to serve these objectives: to
facilitate efficient communication to ensure that people receive the
messages they need or want; to promote good relationships between signs
and the visual qualities of their environs and the buildings to which they
relate; to maintain visual diversity within commercial areas by avoiding
requirement of uniformity; and to support business vitality within
nonresidential zones by accomplishing the above objectives without
burdensome procedures and restrictions.
§ 195-25.1. Definitions. [Added 10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14;
amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
CORRELATED COLOR TEMPERATURE (CCT) — A specification of the
apparent color of the light emitted by a lamp, as measured in kelvins
(K). A CCT of 3,000K provides a slightly yellowish hue, and a CCT of
5,000K provides a slightly bluish hue.
A.
DAYTIME OPERATION — The time interval beginning 30 minutes
before sunrise and ending 30 minutes after sunset.
B.
NIGHTTIME OPERATION — The time interval beginning 30 minutes
after sunset and ending 30 minutes before sunrise.
C.
LUMINANCE — The surface brightness of internally or externally
illuminated sign elements, measured in nits (candela per square meter).
D.
NIT (Nit) — A unit of apparent surface brightness equal to one candela
per square meter. Nits are measured using methods and equipment
commonly employed by lighting professionals.
E.
SIGN — See § 195-108, Word usage and definitions. For purposes of
legal notices or informational devices erected or required by public
agencies, it is the Town's preference that signage for public agencies
comply to the maximum extent practicable.
F.
G. SIGN AREA — See § 195-108, Word usage and definitions.
SIGN TYPES —
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign whose light source
is located in the interior of the sign so that the light becomes
visible by shining through a translucent surface, but not including
changing-image signs. The luminance of sign elements shall not
exceed 2,000 nits during daytime operation nor 200 nits during
nighttime operation. Internally illuminated signs on the premises
shall collectively total no more than 15,000 lumens.
(1)
H.
§ 195-25 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-25.1
180:211
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is illuminated
from an external source such as a floodlight directed toward or
across or by backlighting from a source not within the sign. The
luminance of sign elements shall not exceed 200 nits during
nighttime operation. The correlated color temperature of the
illumination source shall not exceed 3,000K, except that an
illumination source with a CCT not exceeding 4,000K may be
granted by special permit.
(2)
NEON SIGN — An illuminated sign containing neon, argon or any
other similar gas to illuminate transparent or translucent tubing or
other materials to create a colored light.
(3)
BULLETIN-BOARD SIGN — A freestanding, wall or window sign
with letters, words or numerals that are manually moveable,
indicating the names of persons associated with, or events
conducted upon, or products or services offered upon the premises
upon which such sign is maintained. Such sign is permitted in all
zoning districts as applicable.
(4)
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE/IMAGE BOARD — A sign or portion
thereof using digital, electronic or other methods to create
characters, letters, illustrations or images that can be changed,
altered or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of
the sign. Such signs shall not be changed, altered or rearranged
more than once per day. A digital display of time, temperature, or
fuel prices shall not be considered a changing message/image sign.
The luminance of sign elements shall not exceed 2,000 nits during
daytime operation nor 200 nits during nighttime operation.
(5)
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not permanently affixed to
a building or mounted in the ground, or placed on the ground,
which is designed to be movable and/or portable. Temporary signs
may include small ground signs such as A-frame, H-frame, T-frame
(also known as sandwich signs), small wall signs (also known as
banner signs) and special signs. Portable temporary signs shall not
include trailers or motorized vehicles. Such a sign shall not be lit,
erected on a sidewalk, walkway or driveway, or within five feet
from the sideline of a street or right-of-way customarily used by
the general public. Such signs shall not block vision of vehicles
entering or exiting driveways, and the Building Commissioner has
the discretion to request portable signs be moved when there is a
safety issue.
(6)
SPECIAL SIGN — A temporary sign used for advertising,
identification or promotion such as an opening, reopening, under
new management, sale or service, product, commodity,
entertainment or activity. Such sign is not intended to advertise a
continuing or regularly reoccurring operation.
(7)
§ 195-25.1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-26
180:212
§ 195-26. Permit required. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
No sign shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered without a sign
permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings, with the exception of unlighted
signs one square foot or smaller in area and temporary construction signs
less than 12 square feet in area. Temporary unlighted real estate signs
require no sign permit if the erecting agent has obtained a one-year permit
from the Inspector of Buildings for erecting such signs.
§ 195-27. Maintenance. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
All signs shall be maintained in a safe and neat condition to the satisfaction
of the Inspector of Buildings and in accordance with Sections 1404.0 and
1405.0 of the Massachusetts State Building Code.
§ 195-28. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign legally erected may be continued and maintained despite being
made nonconforming through change in this chapter, except that no offpremises
signs may be maintained after June 1, 1980. Any sign rendered
nonconforming through erection of additional signs on the premises or
through change or termination of activities on the premises shall be
removed within 30 days of order of the Inspector of Buildings. No existing
sign shall be enlarged, reworded (unless equipped with movable letters),
redesigned or altered in any way except in conformity with the provisions
contained herein. Any sign which has been destroyed or damaged to the
extent that the cost of repair or restoration will exceed 1/3 of the
replacement value as of the date of the destruction shall not be repaired,
rebuilt, restored or altered unless in conformity with this chapter.
§ 195-29. Identification number.
All signs approved by the Inspector of Buildings will have an identifying
number affixed to the face of the sign in the lower right-hand corner, said
number to be at least one inch in height.
§ 195-30. Prohibited signs.
No moving, animated, revolving, moving-light, blinking, or flashing sign
or sign elements shall be permitted, except for traditional illuminated
barbershop poles with revolving pillars. Only registered and licensed
barbershops are allowed to display a barber pole, and the barber
pole shall not exceed 18 inches in height. No pennants, streamers,
advertising flags, spinners or similar devices shall be permitted.
[Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
A.
No sign shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of side lines
of intersecting streets unless entirely less than 3 1/2 feet or more than
eight feet above grade.
B.
§ 195-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-30
180:213
§ 195-31. Signs permitted in residential districts. [Amended
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14]
The following signs are permitted in Residential Districts RA, RB, RC and
RM:
No part of any sign shall be more than 20 feet in height above ground
level or exceed the height of the building to which it relates, whichever
is less, unless granted a special permit for an exception by the Board of
Appeals. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
C.
No part of any sign shall overhang a public way by more than 12 inches,
except that on special permit from the Board of Appeals such overhang
may be increased up to four feet.
D.
No sign shall be erected or maintained unless its subject matter relates
exclusively to the premises on which it is located or to products,
accommodations, services or activities on those premises. [Amended
10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
E.
Laser-projected signs are not permitted. [Added 10-21-2013 ATM by
Art. 14; amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
F.
One non-internally-illuminated sign for each family residing on the
premises indicating the owner or occupant or pertaining to a permitted
accessory use, provided that no such sign shall exceed one square foot
in area. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
A.
One non-internally-illuminated sign not over nine square feet in area
pertaining to a permitted use or building other than dwellings or their
accessory uses. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
B.
One unlighted temporary sign not over six square feet in area
pertaining to the sale, rent or lease of the premises, provided that
it shall be removed within seven days after the sale, rent or lease
thereof. Such signs may be externally illuminated only if granted a
special permit by the Board of Appeals upon its determination that
such illumination serves public safety and convenience without damage
to neighborhood character. These signs require no sign permit if the
erecting agent has obtained a one-year permit from the Inspector of
Buildings for erecting such signs. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by
Art. 12]
C.
Unlighted directional signs not exceeding one square foot in area each
and pertaining to permitted building, uses of the premises other than
dwellings and their accessory uses or prohibiting use of the premises
or certain portions of it.
D.
One temporary unlighted sign not larger than 25 square feet in an area
indicating the name and address of the parties involved in construction
on the premises. This sign requires no permit if it is not more than 12
square feet in area and is removed within 30 days of erection.
E.
§ 195-30 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-31
180:214
§ 195-32. Signs permitted in business districts. [Amended
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14]
The following internally or externally illuminated signs are permitted in
Business Districts CA, CB, CC, and CD:
Internally illuminated signs and electronic message/image boards are
not permitted. [Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 1225]
F.
Attached signs. One sign may be attached to any one wall of a building,
not to exceed an area equivalent to 15% of the front wall area of said
building or 60 square feet, whichever is greater.
Allowable sign area may be divided between two signs, each sign
to be attached to a different wall of the building, and the total
allowable sign area shall not exceed an area equivalent to 20% of
the front wall area of said building or 80 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(1)
In the case of buildings with multiple occupants, each occupant is
allowed one sign, with the above total allowable sign area divided
among them in proportion to their share of total floor area.
(2)
No attached sign shall extend above the wall to which it is attached.
No sign shall be attached to a roof, real or simulated.
(3)
A building located at an intersection fronting on two public ways
may divide the allowable sign area between two signs, each sign
to be attached to a different wall of the building, and the total
allowable sign area shall not exceed an area equivalent to 20% of
the front wall area of said building or 80 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(4)
A.
Freestanding signs.
One freestanding sign located within the front yard area of the
lot and not exceeding 5% of the front wall of the building or 40
square feet, whichever is smaller, provided that the building has a
minimum setback of 30 feet and the sign is so located as to be set
back 15 feet from the street line and 20 feet from any side lot line.
On special permit from the Board of Appeals the allowable sign
area may be increased to 60 square feet.
(1)
Directory signs. A freestanding directory sign, representing multitenants,
must have uniformity of size and color, and the overall
sign must meet the criteria for freestanding signs. [Amended
10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
(2)
B.
25.Editor’s Note: This article also repealed former Subsection G, prohibiting LED and laser
projector lights signs, which immediately followed.
§ 195-31 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-32
180:215
§ 195-32.1. Signs permitted in Center Village District. [Added
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14]
Any sign permitted in a business district is permitted in the Center Village
District (CV), with the exception of electronic message/image boards. All
signage located within the Historic District shall receive approval from the
Historic District Commission, and the applicable Commission regulations
shall prevail.
§ 195-32.2. Signs permitted in the Public Districts. [Added
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14]
Although signs for public agencies are exempt, per § 195-108, definition
of a "sign," it is the Town's preference that the signage complies to the
maximum extent practicable and shall take into consideration the
surrounding area, public need and public benefit.
Directional signs. No more than two directional signs per driveway.
Said signs shall contain no advertising and shall not exceed an area of
five square feet each.
C.
Window signs. One unlighted window sign for each window of the
building not to exceed in area 20% of the area of any window upon
which located.
D.
Lighted window signs. One internally or externally illuminated window
sign, including a neon sign, conforming to the following standards:
[Amended 10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area or cover more
than 20% of the window in which they are situated, whichever is
less, and shall only be allowed in ground-floor windows.
(1)
Such signs shall be equipped with a timer which shall permit
illumination no longer than 30 minutes before opening or after
closing of the business.
(2)
Such signs shall not flash or blink or use lights changing in
intensity.
(3)
Such signs illuminated by a neon source shall be composed of
primarily single-strand glass tubing with a maximum outside
diameter of one inch.
(4)
Such signs within three feet of a window shall be considered to be
a window sign for purposes of these standards.
(5)
(6) Such signs shall not have a lit background.
E.
Bulletin boards and electronic message/image boards are permitted.
Such signs may not exceed one square foot in area. [Amended
10-20-2014 ATM by Art. 12]
F.
§ 195-32 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-33
180:216
§ 195-33. Signs permitted in industrial districts.
Any sign permitted in a business district is permitted in an industrial district
(IA or IS), excepting window signs. However, a freestanding sign oriented
parallel to the street line and not more than 30 square feet in area need be
set back only five feet from the street line.26
§ 195-33.1. through § 195-33.4. (Reserved)
§ 195-34. Outdoor illumination. [Amended 10-16-2000 ATM by Art.
19]
Purpose. This section recognizes the benefits of outdoor lighting and
provides clear guidelines for its installation, so as to help maintain and
complement the character of the town. The intent of this section is to
encourage lighting that provides safety, utility and security; prevent
glare on public roadways; protect the privacy of residents; promote
energy-efficient outdoor lighting; and to reduce atmospheric light
pollution.
A.
Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all new
lighting and any new construction. With the exception of single-family
dwellings and two-family dwellings, if modifications or additions exceed
25% of the gross floor area, dwelling units or parking spaces, all
lighting on the property shall be made to comply with the provisions
of this section. For the purposes of this section, if the aggregate of
any additions or modifications within the five previous calendar years
exceeds 25%, the provisions of this section shall apply. The
requirements of this section may be reduced by special permit issued
by the Planning Board upon a finding that such reduction will not
detract from the objectives of this section. [Amended 10-21-2013
ATM by Art. 14]
B.
Standards.
Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of more than
2,000 lumens, and all flood or spot luminaires with a lamp or lamps
rated at a total of more than 1,000 lumens, shall be of a full cutoff
design, with the lamp or lamps surrounded and shielded such that
no direct light is emitted above a horizontal plane through the
lowest part of the luminaire emitting direct light. If any spot or
flood luminaire rated 1,000 lumens or less is directed or focused
such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be cast toward
residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare
perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways,
the luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as
necessary to eliminate such conditions.
(1)
C.
26.Editor's Note: Former § 195-33.5, Billboard Overlay District, added 4-27-2009 ATM by Art.
19, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 26.
§ 195-33 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-34
180:217
Illuminated signs, parking lot lighting, building floodlighting or
other exterior lighting shall be so designed and arranged that
their collective result does not create so much light overspill onto
adjacent premises that it casts observable shadows and so that it
does not create glare from unshielded light sources.
(2)
Luminaires used primarily for sign illumination may be mounted at
any height to a maximum of 25 feet, regardless of lumen rating.
(3)
The maximum height of the luminaire shall not exceed 25 feet. A
maximum luminaire height of 35 feet may be allowed by special
permit from the Planning Board upon a finding that the increase
in luminaire height will not negatively impact abutting properties,
particularly property used or zoned for residential purposes.
(4)
Internally illuminated signs on the premises shall collectively total
no more than 15,000 lumens.
(5)
No sign or building in any residential district or within 300 feet of
any residential district if within sight from it shall be illuminated
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless indicating an
establishment open to the public during those hours.
(6)
Luminaires intended solely to illuminate any freestanding sign or
the walls, roof or any other architectural feature of any building
shall be shielded so that its direct light is confined to the surface
of such sign or building, and its lumen output shall be such that
the average illumination on the ground or on any vertical surface is
not greater than 0.5 footcandle or five lux. [Amended 10-21-2013
ATM by Art. 14]
(7)
No flashing, moving, color (white only) or revolving lights shall be
maintained. [Amended 10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14]
(8)
Exceptions.
All temporary emergency lighting needed by the Police or Fire
Departments or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular
luminaires, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article.
(1)
All hazard-warning luminaires required by federal regulatory
agencies are exempt from the requirements of this article, except
that all luminaires used shall be red and shall be shown to be as
close as possible to the federally required minimum lumen output
requirement for the specific task.
(2)
Luminaires used to illuminate nighttime sporting events shall not
exceed 35 feet. A greater luminaire height may be allowed by
special permit from the Planning Board upon a finding that the
increase in luminaire height will not negatively impact abutting
properties, particularly property used or zoned for residential
purposes. Such luminaires shall not be illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
(3)
D.
§ 195-34 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-34
180:218
Submission. The applicant for any permit under this section shall
submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with this section.
The submission shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating
device, both existing and proposed.
(1)
Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports,
reflectors, both existing and proposed. The description may
include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts and illustrations by
manufacturers (including sections where required).
(2)
Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or
similar showing the angle of cut off of light emissions.
(3)
E.
Definitions. The terms used in this section shall be defined as follows:
DIRECT LIGHT — Light emitted directly from the lamp, off the reflector
or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a
luminaire.
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps, which can
include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting
bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror
and/or a refractor or lens.
FLOOD OR SPOT LIGHT (OR LUMINAIRE) — Any light fixture or lamp
that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light
output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
FULL CUTOFF — A luminaire designed with an opaque shield
surrounding and extending below the lamp, such that no direct light is
emitted above a horizontal plane.
GLARE — Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great
enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see and in extreme cases causing
momentary blindness.
HEIGHT OF LUMINAIRE — The vertical distance from the ground
directly below the center line of the luminaire to the lowest direct-lightemitting
part of the luminaire.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces light.
LUMEN — A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per
square foot; one lux is one lumen per square meter. For the purposes
of this section, the lumen-output value shall be the initial lumen output
rating of a lamp.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting system; that is, a lamp (or lamps)
and a fixture.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING — The nighttime illumination of an outside area
or object by any device located outdoors that produces light by any
means.
F.
§ 195-34 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-35
180:219
§ 195-35. Temporary signs. [Amended 4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 27;
10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 14]
Temporary signs (including those mounted on wheels, trailers or motor
vehicles if those vehicles, trailers or wheeled signs are regularly located for
fixed display) are prohibited unless complying with all requirements of this
chapter as applicable to permanent signs or as may be allowed herein.
By-right temporary signs for which a permit is NOT required.
Political signs. Temporary, freestanding political signs, not
exceeding in aggregate 24 square feet in area, which are designed
to influence the action of voters for the passage or defeat of a
referendum question or other measure appearing on the ballot of
an election duly called in the Town of Chelmsford or designed to
influence the action of voters for election of a candidate whose
name appears on the ballot of an election duly called in the Town of
Chelmsford are allowed in all districts. It is the Town's preference
that such signs be erected no sooner than 21 days prior to the
date of election and be removed not later than 14 days after such
election. Signs permitted by this subsection shall not be higher
than three feet above ground level; shall not be artificially
illuminated; shall be freestanding and not attached to a building,
tree, utility pole or fence; shall be set back at least 15 feet from the
street line; and shall only be located within the front or side yard
area of the property. These signs require no sign permit.
(1)
Construction signs. Temporary, freestanding signs may be erected
on the premises to identify any building under construction and
its owner, architect, builder or other associated with it, provided
that such sign shall not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall
not be erected to interfere with sight lines along the public way.
Such sign shall be removed within seven days of the issuance of an
occupancy permit. These signs require no sign permit if they are
not more than 12 square feet in area and are removed within 30
days of erection.
(2)
Real estate signs. A temporary freestanding sign or signs attached
to the front wall of the building and pertaining to the sale, rental
or lease of the premises are allowed in all districts. Such sign shall
be removed within seven days of the sale, rental or lease of said
premises. These signs require no sign permit if the erecting agent
has obtained a one-year permit from the Inspector of Buildings
for erecting such signs. Signs advertising an open house shall be
situated only on the property which is for sale and/or at nearby
intersections to guide potential buyers to that location and only
during the hours of the open house.
(3)
Yard sale signs. A sign advertising a yard sale shall not exceed two
square feet in area, shall not be erected more than 72 hours before
(4)
A.
§ 195-35 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-35
180:220
the sale and shall be removed immediately thereafter. No permit is
required for a yard sale sign.
Temporary signs for which registration is required. The following signs
do not require a permit; however, registration is required. Such signs
shall comply with all applicable signage provisions unless specifically
provided otherwise in this section.
Special signs. Any use may erect one special sign as follows:
(a) A small wall sign not to exceed 12 square feet in sign area;
A small ground sign not to exceed 12 square feet in sign area
and a height of four feet as measured from average grade;
(b)
(c) Off-premises signs are not allowed.
(1)
Sign registration for special signs. The following procedures and
standards apply:
Prior to installation, signs shall be registered and receive
written approval from the Building Commissioner.
(a)
Each use/business located on a site may have one sign at a
time.
(b)
A sign may be registered for no more than 14 consecutive
calendar days.
(c)
Each use/business may register a sign once per quarter of the
calendar year. Such quarter is defined as the periods from
January 1 to March 31, from April 1 to June 30, from July 1
to September 30 and from October 1 to December 31, or as
determined by the Building Commissioner.
(d)
There shall be at least 30 days between the display of
registered signs.
(e)
(2)
Nonmunicipal signs on Town property and within or over Townowned
rights-of-way. Signs related to community based events,
sponsored by public, charitable, religious or agricultural
organizations and/or businesses and the like, may erect signs as
follows:
A ground sign not to exceed 12 square feet in sign area and a
height of four feet as measured from the average grade.
(a)
(b) A banner-type sign over a street right-of-way.
The sign shall not be in place for more than 14 days prior to
the event.
(c)
(d) Wall signs are prohibited.
(3)
B.
§ 195-35 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-35
180:221
§ 195-36. Design and content guidelines.
These guidelines are not mandatory, but the degree of compliance with
them shall be considered by the Board of Appeals in acting upon special
permits authorized under this article, as shall consistency with the basic
sign objectives and any specific criteria cited above.
§ 195-37. Sign Advisory Committee.
Prior to installation, signs shall be registered and receive
written approval by the Board of Selectmen or its designee in
accordance with adopted policies or regulations.
(e)
Design.
Any increase above the basic maxima for the size and number
of signs should be justifiable because of multiple frontages,
development scale or other special needs and should be
appropriate in relation to street width, signage on nearby
structures and speed of vehicular travel.
(1)
Sign content normally should not occupy more than 40% of the sign
background, whether a signboard or a building element.
(2)
Signs should be simple, neat and avoid distracting elements so that
contents can be quickly and easily read.
(3)
Signs should be sized and located so as not to interrupt, obscure
or hide the continuity of columns, cornices, roof eaves, sill lines or
other elements of building structure and, where possible, should
reflect and emphasize building structural form.
(4)
Sign materials, form, colors and lettering shall be reflective of the
character of the building to which the sign relates.
(5)
Clutter should be avoided by not using support brackets extending
above the sign or guy wires and turnbuckles.
(6)
A.
Content.
Signs should not display brand names, symbols or slogans of
nationally distributed products except in cases where the majority
of the floor or lot area on the premises is devoted to manufacturing,
sale or other processing of that specific product.
(1)
Premises chiefly identified by a product brand name (such as a
gasoline or auto brand) should devote some part of their permitted
sign area to also displaying the identity of the local outlet.
(2)
Signs should not contain selling slogans, product descriptions, help
wanted notices or other advertising that is not an integral part of
the name or other identification of the location or the enterprise.
(3)
B.
§ 195-35 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-37
180:222
A Sign Advisory Committee of five members shall be appointed by the
Town Manager for three-year terms (except so arranged initially that no
more than two terms expire each year). Members shall include at least
one retail merchant operating in Chelmsford and two others preferably
with a strong interest in architecture, landscape architecture or visual
design. In addition a member of the Board of Appeals shall be
designated by the Board as a nonvoting sixth member of the Sign
Advisory Committee.
A.
Procedure. All appeals to the Board of Appeals involving signs,
applications for sign permits and all applications for special permits
authorized hereunder shall be referred to the Sign Advisory Committee
for its review and comment. No such appeal or application shall be
acted upon prior to receipt of a report thereon from the Sign Advisory
Committee, unless no report is received within 21 days from the date
of referral of a sign permit application or 35 days from the date of
referral of an appeal or special permit application. Any departure from
the recommendations of the Sign Advisory Committee in the decision
shall be explained in a written report from the authorizing agent to the
Sign Advisory Committee, Board of Selectmen and Planning Board.
B.
§ 195-37 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-37
180:223

ARTICLE VIII
Environmental Protection Standards
§ 195-38. Conformity required; technical evidence and expert
advice.
§ 195-39. Standards established.
The following standards are hereby established:
No activity shall be permitted in any district unless it shall be in
conformity with the standards for environmental protection included
herein.
A.
The Inspector of Buildings may require an applicant for a building or
occupancy permit to supply, at the applicant's expense, such technical
evidence as is necessary in support of the application and may, in
connection therewith and at the applicant's expense, obtain expert
advice as necessary to review the plans and proposals of the applicant.
Payment of such expert advice to the Inspector of Buildings shall be
made, or guaranteed by bond or other legally binding device, before
further consideration of the application shall continue.
B.
After a permit is issued in accordance with this article, continuing
compliance is required. When the Inspector of Buildings suspects a
subsequent violation, the Inspector may, as necessary, obtain expert
advice, which, if the violation is established, shall be paid for by the
violator and otherwise by the town.
C.
Water quality. No discharge at any point into any public sewer, private
sewerage disposal system, stream or water body or into the ground
of any materials of such nature or temperature as can contaminate
such water body or water supply or cause emission of dangerous or
offensive elements in reaction thereto shall be permitted except in
accordance with applicable federal, state and local health and water
pollution control laws and regulations.
A.
Air quality. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any
facility subject to regulation under the Massachusetts Air Pollution
Control Regulations, 310 CMR 7.00, until compliance with those
regulations has been demonstrated and, if applicable, the appropriate
permit(s) has been obtained from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Waste Prevention. The provisions
of said regulations shall apply to dust, flash, gas, fume, mist, odor,
smoke, vapor, pollen, microorganism, radioactive material, radiation,
heat, sound, any combination thereof or any decay or reaction product
thereof in the ambient air space. [Amended 4-25-2005 ATM by Art.
23]
B.
Noise. No use shall be permitted within the Town of Chelmsford which,
by reason of excessive noise generated therefrom, would cause
C.
§ 195-38 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-39
180:225
nuisance or hazard to persons or property. Exempt from the provisions
of this subsection are vehicles not controlled by an owner or occupant
of a lot within the town, temporary construction activities occurring
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, occasionally
used safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure-relief valves
or other such temporary activity and the use of power tools and
equipment such as lawn mowers, snowblowers, chain saws, tractors
and similar equipment for the maintenance of property. For the
purposes of this chapter, the standards in the Noise Table shall apply
for sounds generated continuously from any source not otherwise
exempted above.
Noise Table
Location of Measurement
Maximum
Permitted Sound
Level
(dBA)*
At the lot line of an adjacent or nearby
residence or institutional use, weekdays during
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
60
At the lot line of an adjacent or nearby
residence or institutional use, Sundays or
during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
weekdays
50
At the lot line of an adjacent business use 65
At the lot line of an adjacent industrial use 70
NOTES:
*"dBA" shall mean the A-weighted sound-pressure level in decibels,
as measured by a general purpose sound-level meter complying with
the provisions of the American National Standards Institute. The
instrument shall be properly calibrated and set to the A-weighted
response scale and the meter set to the slow response. Reference
pressure shall be 0.0002 microbars.
Exceptions for intermittent noise. The levels (dBA) specified in the
Noise Table may be exceeded by 10 dBA weekdays during the hours
of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., but not at any other time, for a period not
to exceed 20 minutes during any one day.
(1)
Impact noise. Impact noise such as from a punch press, drop forge
hammer or similar equipment shall be measured using the fast
response of the sound-level meter and shall not exceed the levels
specified in the Noise Table by more than 10 dBA.
(2)
Solid waste storage. Any accessory receptacle or structure with holding
capacity of at least 100 cubic feet for temporary storage of solid or
liquid waste materials, including garbage, rubbish, junk, discarded bulk
D.
§ 195-39 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-39
180:226
§ 195-40. Erosion control.
Site design, materials and construction processes shall be designed to avoid
erosion damage, sedimentation or uncontrolled surface water runoff by
conformance with the following:
items and similar waste items, shall be located not less than 10 feet
from any structure and shall be screened from all adjacent premises
and streets from which it would otherwise be visible in accordance with
§ 195-44B of this chapter. Screening materials will not be attached to
any structure.
No vibration, odor, glare or flashing shall be detectable without
instruments at any lot line of a residential or institutional use.
E.
Cinders, dust, fumes, gases, odors, smoke, radiation, refuse or other
waste materials shall be effectively confined to the premises and
treated or disposed of in accordance with state, federal and Town laws
and regulations.
F.
No process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in
any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations
in excess of 10% in line voltage off the premises.
G.
All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive
materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against
hazards from fire and explosion and with adequate fire-fighting and
fire-suppression equipment standard in this industry. Burning of waste
materials in the open contrary to state law is prohibited.
H.
All materials which may be edible by or attractive to rodents or insects
shall, when stored indoors or outdoors, be stored in tightly closed
containers.
I.
Grading or construction which will result in final slopes of 15% or
greater on 50% or more of the lot area or on 30,000 square feet or more
on a single lot, even if less than half the lot area, shall be allowed only
under special permit from the Planning Board, which shall be granted
only upon demonstration that adequate provisions have been made
to protect against erosion, soil instability, uncontrolled surface water
runoff or other environmental degradation. Applications and plans for
such special permits shall be referred to the Conservation Commission
for its advisory review.
A.
All such slopes exceeding 15% which result from site grading or
construction activities shall either be covered with topsoil to a depth
of four inches and planted with vegetative cover sufficient to prevent
erosion or be retained by a wall constructed of masonry, reinforced
concrete or treated pile or timber or other acceptable means.
B.
No area or areas totaling two acres or more on any parcel or contiguous
parcels in the same ownership shall have existing vegetation clear-
C.
§ 195-39 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-40
180:227
stripped or be filled six inches or more so as to destroy existing
vegetation unless in conjunction with agricultural activity; or unless
necessarily incidental to construction on the premises under a currently
valid building permit; or unless within streets which are either public
or designated on an approved subdivision plan; or unless a special
permit is approved by the Planning Board on condition that runoff
will be controlled, erosion avoided and either a constructed surface or
cover vegetation will be provided not later than the first full spring
season immediately following completion of the stripping operation. No
stripped area or areas which are allowed by special permit shall remain
through the winter without a temporary cover of winter rye or similar
plant material being provided for soil control, except in the case of
agricultural activity where such temporary cover would be infeasible.
The Inspector of Buildings may require the submission of all
information from the building permit applicant or the landowner, in
addition to that otherwise specified herein, necessary to ensure
compliance with these requirements, including, if necessary, elevations
of the subject property, description of vegetative cover and the nature
of impoundment basins proposed, if any.
D.
In granting a special permit hereunder, the Planning Board may require
a performance bond to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
section.
E.
Hillside areas, except naturally occurring ledge or bedrock
outcroppings or ledge cuts, shall be retained with vegetative cover or
appropriate stabilization.
F.
§ 195-40 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-40
180:228
ARTICLE IX
Landscaping
§ 195-41. Objectives.
This article is designed to accomplish the following objectives:
§ 195-42. Applicability.
The requirements of this article shall apply to any nonresidential use and
to multifamily dwellings. The requirements set forth in this article may be
reduced by special permit issued by the Planning Board upon a finding that
such reduction will not detract from the objectives of this article.
§ 195-43. Property lines. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
Property lines with residential uses or districts shall be screened from
nonresidential uses by means of plantings or maintenance of trees of a
species common to the area and appropriate for screening, spaced to
minimize visual intrusion, and providing an opaque year-round visual buffer
between uses. Such plantings shall be provided and maintained by the
owner of the property used for nonresidential purposes. The buffer area
may contain walks, sewerage and wells, but no part of any building,
structure or paved space intended for or used as a parking area may be
located within the buffer area. Planted buffer areas along property lines
with residential districts or uses shall be of the following minimum depth in
each district:
To provide a suitable boundary or buffer between residential uses and
districts and nearby nonresidential uses.
A.
To define the street edge and provide visual connection between
nonresidential uses of different architectural styles.
B.
To separate different and otherwise incompatible land uses from each
other in order to partially or completely reduce potential nuisances,
such as dirt, dust, litter, noise, glare from motor vehicle headlights,
intrusion from artificial light (including ambient glare) or view of signs,
unsightly buildings or parking lots.
C.
To provide visual relief and a source of shade in parking lots and other
areas and protection from wind in open areas.
D.
To preserve or improve the visual and environmental character of
Chelmsford, as generally viewed from residential or publicly accessible
locations.
E.
To offer property owners protection against diminution of property
values due to adjacent nonresidential use.
F.
§ 195-41 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-43
180:229
District
Distance
(feet)
RM 20
CA 10
CB 30
CC 30
CD 10
IA 40
IS 40
RMH 30
CX 30
P 10
OS 10
§ 195-44. Parking areas.
§ 195-45. Street frontage of nonresidential uses. [Amended
10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
With the exception of the CA, CD and P Districts, a landscaped buffer area,
except for approved accessways, at least 20 feet in width as measured from
the layout of the roadway providing frontage shall be established. In the CA,
Parking areas with more than 10 spaces shall contain 150 square feet of
planted area for every 1,000 square feet of pavement related to parking
spaces and aisles. Such planted areas shall be appropriately situated
within the parking area and contain an appropriate mix of shade trees
and other plants.
A.
Parking lots, loading areas, storage areas, refuse storage and disposal
areas and service areas shall be screened from view, to the extent
feasible, from all public ways and from adjacent properties by the use
of planted areas, berms, natural contours, fences or a combination of
the above.
B.
Buffer strips between parking lots and rear or side lot lines shall meet
the following specifications:
Number of Spaces in
Lot
Depth of Buffer Strip
(feet)
Up to 10 10
11 to 24 10, plus 1 foot for each space in excess of 10
spaces
25 or more 25
C.
§ 195-43 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-45
180:230
CD and P Districts the required landscaped buffer area shall be 10 feet. The
buffer area shall be planted with grass, medium-height shrubs and shade
trees. Shade trees shall be planted at least every 35 feet along the road
frontage.
§ 195-46. Planted areas.
Planted areas shall contain an appropriate mix of the following types of
plants. Plant species shall be appropriate to proposed use, siting, soils and
other environmental conditions. Where the Planning Board determines that
the planting of trees is impractical, the permit applicant may substitute
shrubbery for trees.
§ 195-47. Coordination with site plan approval.
The Planning Board may require a landscaping plan as part of the overall
site plan for the premises. Such landscaping plan shall be at a scale
sufficient to determine compliance with the specifications set forth in this
article.
§ 195-48. Maintenance of landscaped areas.
The owner of the property used for nonresidential purposes shall be
responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping
materials installed in accordance with this article. All plant materials
required by this chapter shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Dead
limbs, refuse and debris shall be promptly removed. Dead plantings shall
be replaced with new live plantings at the earliest appropriate season. Bark
Shrubs and hedges shall be at least 2.5 feet in height at the time of
planting and have a spread of at least 18 inches.
A.
B. Grass is preferable to mulch where practical.
Existing trees with a caliper of six inches or more shall be preserved
wherever feasible.
C.
Deciduous trees shall be at least two inches in caliper as measured six
inches above the root ball at time of planting. Deciduous trees shall be
expected to reach a height of 20 feet within 10 years after planting.
[Amended 4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 24]
D.
Evergreens shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of
planting and shall be spaced five feet on center when planted in a single
row. When planted in a double row, each row of evergreens shall be
spaced 10 feet on center. These minimum standards may be reduced
by the Planning Board, subject to the recommendation of an arborist,
landscape architect, or other competent individual. Areas planted in
conformance with this subsection shall, at the time of planting, be
deemed to comply with the opacity requirement of § 195-43. [Amended
4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 24]
E.
§ 195-45 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-48
180:231
mulch and nonplant ground surface materials shall be maintained so as to
control weed growth.
§ 195-48 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-48
180:232
ARTICLE X
Earth Removal
§ 195-49. Applicability; exceptions.
§ 195-50. Special permit required; application procedure.
The Board of Appeals may authorize earth removal upon the issuance of a
special permit.
General. No removal of sod, loam, humus, clay, sand or gravel shall
be permitted except in accordance with the conditions and procedures
contained herein.
A.
Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following
types of uses. Any fill material imported to the site pursuant to any
exception shall be inorganic material, and any earthwork, final grades,
planting and landscaping shall be constructed with due regard for the
protection of persons and property adjacent to the site. At no time will a
slope exceed 3:1. Any site within 100 feet of a wetland shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission.
Removal or filling incidental to the construction of a building, for
which the site of removal or filling is not more than six months
old, or for grading or otherwise improving the premises around the
building.
(1)
Removal on a lot located in a residential district containing an
existing residential dwelling, provided that a plan of the proposed
work has been submitted to the Inspector of Buildings and a
residential earth removal permit has been issued by the Inspector
of Buildings upon determination of compliance of said plans with
the requirements of this chapter.
(2)
(3) Removal on any town-operated or town-maintained landfill.
B.
Each application for a special permit shall be accompanied by a plan
of land, at least six eight-inch by ten-inch photographs of the area and
a statement describing any fill material to be used and where such fill
would be obtained. The plan of land shall indicate the existing grade,
proposed area of fill, proposed area of cut, area to be left as natural
ground, grades below which no removal is to take place, proposed final
landscaping and permanent benchmarks.
A.
All required plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and
surveyor, except that the Board of Appeals may waive this requirement,
upon written request, where it is evident that the plan is sufficiently
accurate for the scope of operations proposed and where such
operations will be minor.
B.
Five copies of the initial plan of land shall be prepared, and, at the time
of application to the Board of Appeals, such copies shall be distributed
C.
§ 195-49 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-50
180:233
§ 195-51. Review procedure; permit conditions; withdrawal of
permit.
Before granting a special permit for removal, the Board of Appeals shall
give due consideration to the location of the proposed operation, to the
general character of the neighborhood surrounding such location, to the
existing topography and natural landscape, drainage patterns, ground cover
and vegetation and to the general safety of the public on the public ways
and in the vicinity of the removal or landfill operations.
to the Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Planning Board and
Conservation Commission.
The Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Planning Board and
Conservation Commission may report with recommendations to the
Board of Appeals either at or prior to the hearing on the application.
D.
A final plan of land shall be prepared showing the final grades, cross
sections, location of culverts and other site improvements and cover
vegetation, trees and landscaping.
E.
Three copies of the final plan shall be prepared, one of which shall be
distributed to the Inspector of Buildings and one to the Town Engineer,
who shall review the final plan and inspect the completed site for
conformity with this chapter and any terms and conditions imposed by
the Board of Appeals.
F.
A performance bond in an amount determined by the Board of Appeals
shall be posted in the name of the Town assuring satisfactory
compliance with this chapter and any conditions imposed by the Board
of Appeals in the interests of safeguarding the area and the Town
against injury, assuring proper future use of the land after operations
are completed or to control the transportation of such material through
the town. Upon failure to comply and forfeiture of the bond, moneys
therefrom shall be utilized by the Town for the purpose of fulfilling
these requirements. No bond shall be released until sufficient time has
elapsed to ascertain that any filled area has stabilized, that vegetation
planted has successfully been established and that drainage is
satisfactory.
G.
The Board of Appeals may set additional conditions governing the
conduct of operations, hours when trucking is permitted, trees,
screening and landscaping which shall be in writing and a part of the
permit issued.
A.
A permit shall not be issued for more than one year and may be
renewed only upon application and following a public hearing. Prior to
renewal, inspection of the premises shall be made by the Inspector of
Buildings.
B.
The Board of Appeals, after hearing and proof of violation of the terms
of the permit or of this chapter, shall withdraw the permit, after which
C.
§ 195-50 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-51
180:234
§ 195-52. Standards of operation.
Removal operations shall comply with the following standards:
§ 195-53. Restoration.
Within 10 days after the expiration or withdrawal of a permit or upon
voluntary cessation of operations or upon completion of removal in a
substantial area, that entire area shall be restored as follows:
the operation shall be discontinued and the area restored in accordance
with this chapter.
Removal shall not take place below a level that would reasonably be
considered a desirable grade for the later development of the area
or below the grades specified on the plan accompanying the permit,
provided that such plan has been approved or modified in accord with
the directive of the Board of Appeals.
A.
During removal operations, no slope shall exceed one foot rise to 1 1/2
feet horizontal distance or the natural angle of repose of the material in
a dry state, whichever is lower, except in ledge rock.
B.
Provision shall be made for safe drainage of water and for prevention
of wind or water erosion carrying material onto adjoining properties.
C.
Soil shall not be disturbed within 100 feet of the boundaries of the
premises, excepting at the conclusion of operations, if required in order
to improve the overall grading.
D.
All land shall be graded so that the elevation of any disturbed areas
shall be one foot or more above the grade level of any adjacent street
or way and so that no slope exceeds a rise of one foot vertical for each
three feet of horizontal distance and shall be graded as to safely provide
for drainage without erosion.
A.
B. All boulders larger than 1/2 cubic yard shall be removed or buried.
The entire area of disturbed ground shall be covered with not less
than four inches of loam, which shall be planted with cover vegetation
adequate to prevent soil erosion, using either grasses or ground cover,
depending upon conditions.
C.
Retaining walls. Where it is necessary to erect retaining walls to guard
against erosion, such retaining walls shall be no more than 18 inches
above the grade of all adjacent streets or ways, with the filled land at
least eight inches below the top of the retaining wall.
D.
§ 195-51 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-53
180:235

ARTICLE XI
Major Business Complexes
§ 195-54. Objectives.
The objectives for allowing major business complexes are to increase the
diversity and convenience of goods and services available in Chelmsford, to
provide entrepreneurial and employment opportunities for area residents,
to focus development at locations able to support it with relatively small
environmental or municipal cost and to protect the town's natural
environment, existing character and development and ability to provide
public services.
§ 195-55. Applicability.
Any existing or proposed premises having more than 20,000 square feet
gross floor area devoted to any use included in the Use Regulation
Schedule27 under commercial and industrial uses shall be considered a
major business complex. Any construction, alteration, relocation or change
of use resulting in such complex shall be permitted only upon the granting
of a special permit by the Planning Board. For the purposes of this
subsection, "change of use" shall mean a change in principal use which
results in or is accompanied by an increase in the gross floor area of the
principal structure of 10% or the addition of at least 10 new parking spaces.
§ 195-56. Submittals.
Ten copies of the following shall be filed with the Planning Board application
for a special permit for a major business complex or for rezoning to
accommodate such a complex. Additional copies shall be filed with the
Town Clerk and the Inspector of Buildings. The Inspector of Buildings shall
review the application for a major business complex and shall submit a
report with recommendations not later than the time of the public hearing.
The Planning Board shall neither sponsor nor favorably recommend any
rezoning of three or more acres to a commercial or industrial district unless
such materials have been submitted to it at a public hearing.
A. A site plan, as specified at § 195-104.
Narrative analyses of the consequences of the proposed development,
including evaluation of the following concerns at a level of detail
appropriate to the scale of development proposed, as determined by the
Planning Board:
Natural environment. Groundwater and surface water quality,
groundwater level, stream flows, erosion and siltation, vegetation
removal (especially unusual species and mature trees) and wildlife
habitats.
(1)
B.
27.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-54 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-56
180:237
§ 195-57. Decision criteria.
In addition to the criteria set forth in § 195-103, a special permit may be
granted by the Planning Board only after consideration of the following
factors:
§ 195-58. Lapse of permit.
Special permits granted pursuant to this article shall lapse within two years
following the filing of the special permit (including such time required to
pursue and await the determination of an appeal referred to in MGL c. 40A,
§ 17 from the grant thereof) with the Town Clerk if a substantial use thereof
has not sooner commenced, except for good cause, or in the case of a permit
for construction if construction has not begun by such date, except for good
cause.
Public services. Traffic safety and congestion, need for water
system improvements and need for public sewerage.
(2)
Economics. Anticipated market area, augmentation or duplication
of existing services, amount and types of employment and labor
force area.
(3)
Visual environment. Visibility of buildings and parking and visual
consistency with existing development in the area.
(4)
If the required traffic study shows that there will be an increase in
traffic above the present level of service at any point within one mile of
the premises, satisfactory evidence shall be presented to demonstrate
that the complex will not be injurious to public safety.
A.
Satisfactory evidence shall be presented to demonstrate that the
complex will result in no net increase of runoff above current flows and
the design capacity of receiving structures or the channel capacity of
receiving streams shall not be exceeded.
B.
§ 195-56 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-58
180:238
ARTICLE XII
Multifamily Dwellings
§ 195-59. Objectives.
Multifamily dwellings may be allowed by special permit in RM Districts
in Chelmsford to provide greater variety and choice in housing types, to
broaden availability of housing for persons and families of limited income,
to focus development at locations able to support it with relatively small
environmental or municipal cost and to protect the town's natural
environment, existing character and development and ability to provide
public services.
§ 195-60. Creation of district.
§ 195-61. Special permit required; application procedure.
RM Districts may be created by Town Meeting vote, but only if the
proposed district meets the following criteria:
(1) At least five acres of land.
Two hundred fifty linear feet of frontage upon one or more of the
following: a state-numbered highway, a street having a right-of-way
width of 60 feet or more or a street determined by the Planning
Board to have current annual average daily traffic equal to 1,000
vehicles per day or more.
(2)
A.
Except as part of a comprehensive reconsideration of the Zoning Map,
the Planning Board shall neither sponsor nor favorably recommend any
proposal to create an RM District unless it has had presented to it at a
public hearing the information required in § 195-61B.
B.
Multifamily dwellings may be allowed by special permit in the RM
District by the Planning Board.
A.
Submittals. The following information shall be submitted as part of the
application for a special permit:
A schematic site plan of the property, showing general shape and
location of structures, parking, retained vegetation, wetlands and
points of egress onto public ways.
(1)
Materials indicating proposals for methods of water supply and
sewage disposal; number of dwelling units, distinguishing singlefamily
and multifamily; a development schedule for dwellings and
improvements; proposed form of tenure, whether rental,
condominium, cooperative or other; means, if any, of providing for
design control; and means, if any, of providing assurance of longterm
conformity with present proposals.
(2)
B.
§ 195-59 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-61
180:239
§ 195-62. Review procedure.
The applicant shall transmit one copy of the materials required herein to
each of the following for their review and recommendation, to be made
not later than the public hearing: the Conservation Commission, Board of
Selectmen and Fire Department. A special permit shall be approved by the
Planning Board only after consideration of the criteria set forth in § 195-103
and the following additional factors:
A development phasing schedule indicating the maximum number
of dwelling units proposed to be erected in each calendar year and
the timing of construction of any proposed community facilities.
(3)
Analysis of the consequences of the proposed development,
evaluating the following impacts at a level of detail appropriate
to the number of units proposed and using analysis materials
provided by the Planning Board:
Natural environment. Groundwater and surface water quality,
groundwater level, stream flows, erosion and siltation,
vegetative removal (especially unusual species and mature
trees) and wildlife habitats.
(a)
Public services. Traffic safety and congestion, need for water
system improvements, need for public sewerage, need for
additional public recreation facilities and need for additional
school facilities.
(b)
Economics. Municipal costs and revenues, local business
activity and local jobs.
(c)
Social environment. Rate of Town population growth and range
of available housing choice.
(d)
Visual environment. Visibility of buildings and parking and
visual consistency with existing development in the area.
(e)
(4)
Departure from the scale of single-family development is minimized
through including not more than 24 dwelling units in a single structure,
serving not more than six dwelling units from a single entrance, limiting
building length to not more than 200 feet, having unbroken roof area of
not more than 3,000 square feet and having parking areas individually
contain not more than 36 parking spaces and be separated from all
other parking areas by at least 50 feet.
A.
Visual separation from nearby premises is assured through providing
yards of at least 1.5 times building height measured from each lot
line, which shall contain no parking areas, and through use of outdoor
lighting fixtures not higher than 15 feet.
B.
§ 195-61 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-63
180:240
§ 195-63. Density bonus.
For every one unit in 10 set aside for low- and moderate-income persons
and families in a multifamily housing project, the applicant may apply and
the Planning Board may grant a bonus of one additional unit. To apply the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that:
The rent required for the unit set aside shall meet the affordable rents
established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for
the Chelmsford area;
A.
The unit set aside shall be made available to low- and moderate-income
persons and families for a period of no less than 10 years;
B.
The low- and moderate-income level shall be as defined by the
Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Chelmsford
area; and
C.
The applicant shall work with the Housing Authority to rent units to
eligible persons and families.
D.
§ 195-63 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-63
180:241

ARTICLE XIII
Wireless Communications Facilities
[Amended 10-15-2001 ATM Art. 22]
§ 195-64. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to establish siting criteria and standards
for wireless communication facilities (WCF's); to minimize the adverse
visual impacts of WCF's on nearby properties and residential
neighborhoods; to encourage the location of WCF's in nonresidential
neighborhoods; to minimize the overall number and height of monopoles
to only what is essential; and to promote collocation of WCF's to reduce
the need for additional monopoles. This article is intended to establish
reasonable regulations while allowing adequate service to residents, the
traveling public and others within the Town, and to minimize the number
of monopoles within the Town. Preference shall be given to wireless
communications facilities that are located in nonresidential zoning districts.
This article shall not apply to transmission facilities necessary for public
safety, satellite dishes, ham radio antennas, or antennas for residential use
which are regulated under § 195-14.
§ 195-65. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
COLLOCATION — The use of a single mount by more than one carrier and/
or several mounts on a tower, monopole, building, or structure by multiple
carriers for the purpose of providing wireless communications services.
Each service on collocations is a separate wireless communications facility.
MONOPOLE — A pole consisting of not more than one leg, anchored in the
ground, which is not supported by guy wires or other bracing.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — A facility for the
provision of wireless communications service, including but not limited to
towers, monopoles, antennas, antennas attached to existing structures and
associated accessory structures, if any, which facilitate the provision of
wireless communications service.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The provision of the
following types of services: cellular telephone, personal communications
and enhanced specialized mobile radio service as described in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
§ 195-66. By-right uses; general standards.
Wireless communications facilities that meet the following standards shall
be eligible for a building permit by right.
The wireless communications facility will be attached to an existing
building or structure and:
A.
§ 195-64 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-66
180:243
§ 195-67. Special permit uses; general standards.
Wireless communications facilities that are proposed to be located on new
monopoles or which do not otherwise comply with the standards of § 195-66
shall be subject to a special permit issued by the Board of Appeals. The
following standards shall apply:
Will not extend more than 20 feet above the uppermost part of the
structure; or
(1)
Will be attached to a lawfully existing monopole or lattice tower,
where such existing monopole or lattice tower is not extended in
height; or
(2)
Will be attached to a lawfully existing expandable monopole
approved by the Board of Appeals, where such expansion is not
higher than that approved by the Board of Appeals.
(3)
The wireless communications facility will be located in one of the
following zoning districts: CA, CB, CC, CD, IA, IS, or P.
B.
Wireless communications facilities will be at least 500 feet from a
residential structure. This measurement shall be from the face of the
wireless communications facility to the closest point of the residential
structure.
C.
Wireless communications facilities shall be removed within one year
of cessation of use. If applicable, proof of required maintenance and
continued compliance with the standards of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and the State
Building Code shall be filed with the Inspector of Buildings by the
permit holder on an annual basis or as deemed necessary by the
Inspector of Buildings.
D.
Only freestanding monopoles, with associated antennas and/or panels,
shall be allowed. Lattice-style towers and similar facilities requiring
three or more legs and/or guy wires for support are not allowed.
A.
Monopoles shall be set back from the property line 50 feet or a distance
equal to one and one-half times the height of the largest section of
the monopole, whichever is greater. The Board of Appeals may allow a
reduced setback if it specifically finds that safety of abutting property
owners will be maintained.
B.
Erection of new monopoles may be allowed by special permit in any
zoning district. WCF's shall only be allowed in a residential zoning
district if the Board of Appeals specifically finds that the impact on
residential uses will be minimal.
C.
§ 195-66 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-67
180:244
§ 195-68. Application procedures.
All special permit applications for WCFs shall be made and filed in
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Appeals. In
addition to the minimum requirements of the Board of Appeals, applications
under this article shall include the following:
No new monopoles shall be erected within 500 feet of an existing
residential structure. This measurement shall be from the base of the
monopole to the closest point of the residential structure.
D.
Monopoles shall not normally exceed 120 feet in height as measured
from ground level at the base of the pole. The Board of Appeals may
allow a monopole in excess of 150 feet but not higher than 180 feet
if it specifically finds that the benefits of a taller monopole outweigh
the deficits and if it specifically finds that a taller monopole supports
greater collocation.
E.
F. In no case shall a monopole be located on a building.
No monopole shall be visible from any location within the Historic
District.
G.
Night-lighting of monopoles shall be prohibited unless required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Lighting shall be limited to that
needed for emergencies and/or as required by the FAA.
H.
Monopoles shall be designed and located to accommodate the
maximum number of users technologically practicable in order to
reduce the number of monopoles in the community.
I.
All wireless communications facilities shall be sited in such a manner
that the view of the facility from adjacent abutters, residential
neighbors, and other areas of town shall be as limited as possible.
J.
Fencing shall be provided to control access to monopoles and other
WCFs. The fence shall be screened as required by the Board of Appeals.
K.
There shall be no signs, except for announcement signs, "no
trespassing" signs, and a required sign giving a phone number where
the owner can be reached on a twenty-four-hour basis. All signs shall
conform to Article VII, Signs and Outdoor Lighting.
L.
WCFs shall be removed within one year of cessation of use. If
applicable, proof of required maintenance and continued compliance
with the standards of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), and the State Building Code shall be filed
with the Inspector of Buildings by the special permit holder on an
annual basis or as deemed necessary by the Inspector of Buildings.
M.
A locus plan showing all property lines, the exact location of the
proposed WCF, all structures on the lot, abutting streets, landscape
A.
§ 195-67 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-68
180:245
features, and all structures within 500 feet as measured from the
property line of the lot where the WCF is proposed.
A color photograph or rendering of the proposed WCF. For WCFs
attached to existing structures, a color photograph or rendition
illustrating the WCF at the proposed location is required. A rendering
shall also be provided illustrating a view of the WCF from the nearest
street or streets.
B.
The following information prepared by one or more professional
engineers:
A description of the WCF and the technical, economic, and other
reasons for the proposed location, height, and design.
(1)
Confirmation that the WCF complies with all applicable federal and
state standards.
(2)
A description of the capacity of the monopole, including the
number and type of WCFs that it can accommodate and the basis
for these calculations.
(3)
If applicable, a written statement that the proposed facility
complies with or is exempt from applicable regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts Aeronautics
Commission, and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(4)
C.
Coverage maps showing existing coverages and coverages with the
proposed WCF.
D.
E. Visibility maps showing all locations where the WCF will be visible.
The Board of Appeals may require balloon, crane, or other tests at the
proposed WCF in order to determine visual and aesthetic impacts.
F.
The Board may require additional information in order to determine
visual and aesthetic impacts, and the Board may require that wireless
communications facilities be camouflaged in order to minimize visual
intrusion.
G.
§ 195-68 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-68
180:246
ARTICLE XIIIA
Commercial Solar Photovoltaic Facility
[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 29]
§ 195-68.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to promote the creation of new commercial
solar photovoltaic facilities by providing standards for the placement,
design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of
such installations that address public safety and minimize impacts on
residential neighborhoods and scenic, natural and historic resources.
§ 195-68.2. Applicability.
§ 195-68.3. Design and dimensional standards.
A. The facility may be allowed in all zoning districts.
The facility shall be subject to the procedures, submissions and
approval of site plan review, in accordance with Article XIX, § 195-104,
as well as state and federal law. This section also pertains to physical
modifications that materially alter the type, configuration or size of
these installations or related equipment throughout the useful life of
the system or where alterations may impact abutters.
B.
With the exception of Articles VIII, Environmental Standards, Article
X, Earth Removal, Article XIV, Aquifer Protection and Article XV,
Floodplain District, all other zoning articles and provisions shall not be
applicable.
C.
Where abutting or within a residential zone or use:
(1) Shall be allowed on parcels of not less than three acres.
A minimum ten-foot-wide visual buffer shall be provided along the
property line. This buffer may consist of existing and/or proposed
vegetation, fences, walls and berms or a combination thereof. In
cases where the buffer cannot be provided on site, the Planning
Board may consider existing and/or proposed off-site buffering.
(2)
No structure or buildings shall be located within 25 feet of the
residential property line.
(3)
A.
Where abutting a nonresidential zone or use, no structures or buildings
shall be located within 10 feet of the property line.
B.
A security fence shall be installed along or proximate to the perimeter
of the property and shall be maintained for the lifetime of the facility.
C.
Adequate access shall be provided for emergency services. At the
terminus of the accessway, either inside or outside a perimeter fence,
D.
§ 195-68.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-68.3
180:247
§ 195-68.4. Criteria for approval.
In addition to Article XIX, § 195-104H, the Planning Board shall make the
following specific findings:
an adequate staging and maneuvering area shall be provided for
emergency services.
The owner/operator shall provide a copy of the project summary,
electrical schematic, and site plan to the Fire Department. The owner/
operator shall provide an emergency response plan. The emergency
response plan is subject to the approval of the Planning Board, the
Fire Department and the Police Department and shall include, at a
minimum, explicit instructions on all means of shutting down the
facility, which shall be clearly marked. The owner/operator shall
identify a responsible person for emergencies throughout the life of the
installation.
E.
The visual impact of the facility, including all accessory structures
and appurtenances, shall be mitigated. All accessory structures and
appurtenances shall be architecturally compatible with each other.
Whenever reasonable, structures shall be shaded from view by
vegetation and/or joined and clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
Methods such as the use of landscaping, natural features and fencing
may be utilized.
F.
Lighting shall be limited to security and emergency purposes. Where
used, lighting shall be directed downward and full cutoff fixtures shall
be used.
G.
H. Signage shall be limited to security and emergency services.
All utility connections from the facility shall be underground unless
specifically permitted otherwise by the Planning Board. Electrical
transformers and inverters to enable utility interconnections may be
above ground if required by the local electrical utility provider.
I.
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for
the construction, operation and maintenance of the facility or otherwise
prescribed by applicable laws, regulations and bylaws.
J.
The provisions of § 195-68.3 may be waived by the Planning Board
upon a finding that such deviation will not detract from the purpose of
§ 195-68.1.
K.
The facility conforms to the provisions of this section and is in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
A.
The facility will not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of
the neighborhood or the Town.
B.
Environmental features of the site and surrounding areas are
protected, and the surrounding area will be protected from the
C.
§ 195-68.3 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-68.4
180:248
§ 195-68.5. Maintenance.
The facility owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition.
Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural
repairs, continued compliance with landscaping and screening
requirements, and integrity of security measures. The owner or operator
shall be responsible for the maintenance of any access roads serving the
installation.
§ 195-68.6. Discontinuance.
A facility shall be deemed to have been discontinued if it has not been in
service for a continuous twenty-four-month period. Upon receipt of a notice
of discontinuance from the Building Commissioner, the owner shall have
the right to respond to the notice within 30 days of receipt. The Building
Commissioner shall withdraw the notice of discontinuance and notify the
owner that the notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides information
that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner that
the facility has not been discontinued. If the facility is determined to be
discontinued, the owner shall remove the facility, including all structures,
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines, and stabilize or
revegetate the site as necessary to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
proposed use by provision of adequate surface water drainage.
Adequate measures are provided to mitigate the impact during
construction, including but not limited to dust and erosion control.
For purposes of ensuring conformity with the section, the Planning
Board may place reasonable conditions and safeguards on the approval.
Such conditions may include:
The requirement of a performance bond, secured by deposit of
money or negotiable securities, posted with the Town to cover
the cost of maintenance or removal in the event the Town must
remove, remediate the landscape the installation. The amount of
the performance bond shall not exceed the estimated cost of the
removal of the facility.
(1)
(2) Additional vegetative buffering.
Performance bonds for unique environmental conditions such as
the protection of a landfill cover.
(3)
D.
The applicant shall provide evidence to the Planning Board that the
utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation
is to be located has been informed of the facility owner's or operator's
intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Proof
of a mutual agreement with the utility company shall be provided
to the Planning Board. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement, however if it goes on grid in the future, it shall comply
with this requirement.
E.
§ 195-68.4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-68.6
180:249
at the owner's sole expense, within three months of receipt of the notice
of discontinuance. Failure to remove the installation and stabilize the site
within said time period may subject the owner to action pursuant to Article
XIX, § 195-100.
§ 195-68.6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-68.6
180:250
ARTICLE XIV
Aquifer Protection District
§ 195-69. Purpose.
Groundwater is the sole source of drinking water for the residents,
businesses and industries of the Town of Chelmsford. The purpose of the
Aquifer Protection District is to protect the health, safety and general
welfare by protecting the town's limited present and future drinking water
supply, to ensure a sufficient quantity of potable pure drinking water for
the present and future residents, institutions and businesses of the Town of
Chelmsford and to limit the adverse effects of use and development of land
on the quality of the groundwater and surface water resources of the Town
of Chelmsford.
§ 195-70. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
AQUIFER — A geologic formation composed of rock, sand, gravel or other
geologic material that contains significant amounts of potentially
recoverable water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material or a structure on, above or below the
ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate
directly into the soil.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any substance or
mixture of physical, chemical or infectious characteristics posing a
significant, actual or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazard to
human health if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water
of the Town of Chelmsford. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without
limitation, synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals,
radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis and all substances defined
as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C and 21E and 310 CMR 30.00.
For the purposes of this article, sanitary domestic wastes from residential
sources shall not be considered toxic or hazardous waste.
§ 195-71. Establishment and delineation of district.
There is hereby established within the Town of Chelmsford the Aquifer
Protection District. This area is described on a map entitled "Aquifer
Protection District, Town of Chelmsford," dated October 1997. Said
map is incorporated herein by reference.28
A.
If the location of the district boundary in relation to a particular parcel
is in doubt, resolution of boundary disputes shall be through a special
permit application to the Board of Appeals. Any application for a special
B.
28.Editor's Note: The Aquifer Protection District Map is on file at the office of the Planning
Board.
§ 195-69 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-71
180:251
§ 195-72. Overlay district.
The Aquifer Protection District is an overlay district superimposed on the
zoning districts and whose regulations are in addition to any other
regulations established by this chapter. This overlay district shall apply to
all new construction, reconstruction or expansion of existing buildings and
new or expanded uses. Applicable activities or uses in a portion of one of the
underlying zoning districts which fall within the Aquifer Protection District
must additionally comply with the requirements of this district. Uses that
are prohibited in the underlying zoning district shall not be permitted in the
Aquifer Protection District.
§ 195-73. Use regulations.
The uses permitted within the Aquifer Protection District shall be the uses
permitted in the underlying zoning district, except as restricted below.
In the following Table of Use Regulations, "N" indicates that the use is
prohibited, "Y" indicates that the use is permitted and "PB" indicates that
the use may only be permitted by a special permit from the Planning Board.
permit for this purpose shall be accompanied by adequate
documentation according to the normal application requirements of
the Board of Appeals. If the applicant is able to demonstrate that
groundwater flows will not be impacted by the activity on the site
or that groundwater from the site does not contribute to the aquifer,
the Board may grant a special permit relieving the applicant of the
obligations of the Aquifer Protection District. The burden of proof shall
be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show where the bounds
should properly be located. At the request of the owner(s), the Town
may engage a registered professional engineer, hydrologist, geologist
or soil scientist to determine more accurately the boundaries of the
district with respect to individual parcels of land and may charge the
owner(s) for all or part of the cost of the investigation.
§ 195-71 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-73
180:252
Table of Use Regulations Within the Aquifer Protection District
[Amended 10-17-2011 ATM by Art. 17]
Principal or Accessory Use
1. Sanitary landfill, solid waste disposal site, refuse treatment
and disposal facility, landfilling of sludge and septage and
storage of sludge and septage
N
2. Generation, treatment, disposal or storage of toxic or
hazardous materials or waste, except for the following:
municipal uses associated with the provision of public water,
public works, and sanitary sewer services; very small
quantity generators, as defined by 310 CMR 30.00; waste oil
retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A; treatment
works approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection designed in accordance with 314 CMR 5.00 for the
treatment of contaminated groundwater or surface water;
and household hazardous waste collection centers or events
operated pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390
N
3. Motor vehicle repair facility PB
4. Automobile graveyard and junkyard as defined in MGL c.
140B, § 1
N
5. Car, truck and equipment washing facility where all
wastewater discharges to the municipal sewer system or to a
private sewer system which discharges to the municipal
sewer system or to an approved disposal facility
PB
6. Commercial laundries not connected to the municipal sewer
system or to a private sewer system which discharges to the
municipal sewer system
PB
7. Dry cleaners with on-site cleaning facilities PB
8. Furniture or wood stripping, painting and refinishing PB
9. Disposal of snow contaminated with de-icing chemicals and
originating from outside the district
N
10. Outdoor storage of fertilizer, animal manure, soil conditioner,
pesticide, herbicide and de-icing chemicals
N
11. Chemical, bacteriological or radiological laboratory or
production facility
N
12. Treatment disposal works for nonsanitary wastewater that is
subject to 314 CMR 5.00, except replacement or repair of
existing treatment works or treatment works approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection designed for the
treatment of contaminated groundwater or surface water or
treatment works for pretreatment of industrial discharges to
the municipal sewer system
N
§ 195-73 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-73
180:253
Table of Use Regulations Within the Aquifer Protection District
[Amended 10-17-2011 ATM by Art. 17]
Principal or Accessory Use
13. Individual sewage disposal systems designed and/or
maintained in accordance with the current requirements of
Title 5, 310 CMR 15.00
Y
14. Earth removal, consisting of the removal of soil, loam, sand,
gravel or any other earth material (including mining
activities) within four feet of historical high groundwater as
determined from monitoring wells and historical water table
fluctuation data compiled by the United States Geological
Survey, except for excavations for building foundations, roads
or utility works
N
15. The enclosed storage of road salt or other de-icing chemicals PB
16. Modification of groundwater flow through use of underdrains
or similar devices, except that a special permit shall not be
required to maintain, modify or expand single-family
residential structures lawfully in existence on the effective
date of this article
PB
17. Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that are
nonconforming in the Aquifer Protection District
PB
18. Storage of hazardous materials as defined in MGL c. 21E
and/or liquid petroleum products, unless such storage is
above ground level, on an impervious surface and either in a
container(s) or aboveground tank(s) within a building or
outdoors in a covered container(s) or aboveground tank(s) in
an area that has a containment system designed and
operated to hold either 10% of the total possible storage
capacity of all containers or 110% of the largest container's
storage capacity, whichever is greater; these storage
requirements shall not apply to replacement of existing tanks
or systems for the keeping, dispensing or storing of gasoline,
provided that the replacement is performed in a manner
consistent with state and local requirements
N
19. The construction of dams or other water-control devices,
ponds or other changes in water bodies or courses created
for swimming, fishing or other recreational uses, agricultural
uses or drainage improvements
PB
20. Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 2,500
square feet of any lot, whichever is greater (see § 195-74)
PB
21. Any discharge to the ground through an interior floor drain N
§ 195-74. Lot coverage.
Any use proposed to render impervious more than 15% or 2,500 square feet
of any lot, whichever is greater, shall be subject to a special permit from the
§ 195-73 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-74
180:254
Planning Board. On any such lot a system for groundwater recharge must be
provided which does not degrade groundwater quality. Any project drainage
design that satisfies the stormwater policy issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection dated November 18, 1996, as amended, shall be
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this section.
§ 195-75. Special permits; performance standards.
The special permit granting authority under this article shall be the
Planning Board. The Planning Board may grant the special permit only upon
a finding that the proposed use meets the following performance standards:
The use shall not, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect
the existing quality or quantity of water that is available in the Aquifer
Protection District;
A.
The use shall be designed to avoid substantial disturbances of the
soils, topography, drainage, vegetation and other water-related natural
characteristics of the site to be developed which are likely to affect
existing quality or quantity of water that is available in the Aquifer
Protection District;
B.
The use shall be designed to meet state and federal drinking water
standards at the property line; and
C.
The use shall utilize the best management practices which are available
for the proposed use.
D.
§ 195-74 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-75
180:255

ARTICLE XV
Floodplain District
§ 195-76. Purpose.
The purposes of this district are to:
§ 195-77. Overlay district; boundaries. [Amended 4-28-2003 ATM by
Art. 20; 4-26-2004 ATM by Art. 27; 4-26-2010 ATM by Art. 14;
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 22]
The Floodplain District and Floodway District is herein established as an
overlay district. The underlying permitted uses are allowed, provided that
they meet the following additional requirements as well as those of the
Massachusetts State Building Code dealing with construction in floodplains.
The Floodplain District and Floodway District includes all special flood
hazard areas within the Town of Chelmsford designated as Zone A and AE
on the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of
the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex
County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Chelmsford
are panel numbers 25017C0118E, 25017C0119E, 25017C0138E and
25017C0231E dated June 4, 2010; and 25017C0232F, 25017C0234F,
25017C0242F, 25017C0251F, 25017C0252F, 25017C0253F, 25017C0254F,
25017C0256F, 25017C0258F, 25017C0261F and 25017C0262F dated July
7, 2014. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the onehundred-
year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined
by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 7,
2014. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and
are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Inspector of Buildings and
Conservation Commission.
§ 195-78. Base flood elevation and floodway data. [Amended
4-28-2003 ATM by Art. 20; 4-26-2004 ATM by Art. 27]
Provide that the lands in the Town of Chelmsford subject to seasonal
or periodic flooding as described hereinafter shall not be used for
residence or other purposes in such manner as to endanger the health
or safety of the occupants thereof.
A.
Protect, preserve and maintain the water table and water recharge
areas within the Town so as to preserve present and potential water
supplies for the public health and safety of the residents of the Town of
Chelmsford.
B.
Assure the continuation of the natural flow of the watercourse(s) within
the Town of Chelmsford in order to provide adequate and safe
floodwater storage capacity to protect persons and property against the
hazards of flood inundation.
C.
§ 195-76 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-78
180:257
§ 195-79. Notification of watercourse alteration.
Notify, in a riverine situation, the following of any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse:
§ 195-80. Use regulations.
Floodway data. In Zone A and AE, along watercourses that have not
had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments
in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[Amended 4-26-2010 ATM by Art. 14]
A.
Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.
B.
A. Adjacent communities.
B. Bordering states.
NFIP State Coordinator, Massachusetts Office of Water Resources, 251
Causeway Street, Suite 600-700, Boston, MA 02114-2104. [Amended
4-26-2004 ATM by Art. 27]
C.
NFIP Program Specialist, FEMA Region I, 99 High Street, 6th Floor,
Boston, MA 02110. [Amended 4-26-2004 ATM by Art. 27]
D.
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other
districts. All development in the district, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special
permit, must be in compliance with MGL c. 131, § 40 and with the
following:
Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which addresses
floodplain and coastal high-hazard areas (currently 780 CMR).
[Amended 4-26-2004 ATM by Art. 27; 4-26-2010 ATM by Art.
14; 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 22]
(1)
Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00).
(2)
Inland Wetlands Restriction, Department of Environmental
Protection (currently 310 CMR 13.00). [Amended 4-26-2004
ATM by Art. 27]
(3)
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage, Department of Environmental Protection (currently 310
CMR 15, Title 5).
(4)
A.
§ 195-78 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-80
180:258
§ 195-81. Floodway regulations. [Amended 4-28-2003 ATM by Art.
20]
In the floodway, designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the following
provisions shall apply:
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the abovereferenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance with
the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
B.
In the Floodplain District, no new building shall be erected or
constructed and no existing structure shall be altered, enlarged or
moved, no dumping, filling or earth transfer or relocation shall be
permitted and no land, building or structure shall be used for any
purposes except:
(1) Conservation of water, plants and wildlife.
Outdoor recreation, including play areas, nature study, boating,
fishing and hunting, where otherwise legally permitted, but
excluding buildings and structures.
(2)
Noncommercial signs (as permitted in the residential districts),
wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths and
bridges, provided that such uses do not affect the natural flow
pattern of watercourses.
(3)
Grazing and farming, including truck gardening and harvesting of
crops.
(4)
(5) Forestry and nurseries.
C.
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that: [Added
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 22]
(1) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(2)
(3) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D.
All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures and other development, are
prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is
provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
one-hundred-year flood.
A.
Any encroachment meeting the above standard shall comply with the
floodplain requirements of the State Building Code.
B.
If a property owner questions the location of a floodplain or floodway
district, the owner may engage, at the owner's own cost, a registered
C.
§ 195-80 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-81
180:259
§ 195-82. Special permits.
In the Floodplain District, the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit
for exception for uses or structures in addition to those allowed under
§ 195-80, subject to the following:
licensed surveyor with the approval of the Town Engineer to determine
if the land in question is within the floodplain or floodway district. The
landowner shall be responsible for the cost for this determination. The
Board of Appeals, in consultation with the Town Engineer, shall decide
whether or not to accept the surveyor's determination.
No new building or portion thereof located within the Floodplain
District shall be allowed to connect to the municipal wastewater system
or to a private wastewater system that discharges to the municipal
wastewater system.
D.
The portion of any lot within the area delineated in § 195-77 above
may be used to meet the area and yard requirements for the district or
districts in which the remainder of the lot is situated.
E.
The applicant has referred the request to the Planning Board, the Town
Engineer, the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission for
review and recommendation as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 11;
A.
The land is shown to be neither subject to flooding nor unsuitable for
the proposed use because of hydrologic and/or topographic conditions;
B.
The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare;
C.
The proposed use will comply in all respects with the provisions of the
underlying district or districts within which the land is located; and
D.
Any loss of floodplain or floodway shall be compensated for at a similar
elevation within the same local watershed.
E.
§ 195-81 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-82
180:260
ARTICLE XVI
Adult Entertainment Establishments
§ 195-83. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate adult entertainment
establishments to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of Chelmsford and to guard against adverse secondary effects
on the youth of the town. Furthermore it is the intent and purpose to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious
location and concentration of adult entertainment establishments within
the town, thereby reducing the adverse secondary effects from such adult
entertainment establishments. The provisions of this chapter have neither
the purpose nor effect of imposing limitations or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of
this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
§ 195-84. Adult Entertainment Overlay District.
The Adult Entertainment Overlay District is established in addition to the
Adult Entertainment (CX) District. The Adult Entertainment Overlay District
use regulations shall be as herein described in the Adult Entertainment
District.
§ 195-85. Spacing requirement.
Special permits shall not be granted for an adult entertainment
establishment if it is to be located less than 1,000 feet from the
following uses. Measurement of distances shall be from the lot line of
any of the uses described herein.
(1) Another adult entertainment establishment.
(2) Residential uses.
(3) Public or private nursery schools.
(4) Public or private day-care centers.
(5) Public or private kindergartens.
(6) Public or private elementary schools.
(7) Public or private secondary schools.
(8) Playgrounds or parks.
(9) Religious institutions.
A.
Reduction of spacing requirement. The Board of Appeals may waive
the one-thousand-foot restriction contained in Subsection A by special
permit; provided, however, that the Board of Appeals shall not, under
any circumstances, grant a special permit for an adult entertainment
B.
§ 195-83 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-85
180:261
§ 195-86. Special permit required; conditions.
establishment which shall be closer that 750 feet to any of the uses
listed in Subsection A. To grant a special permit reducing the spacing
requirement, the Board shall find that:
The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or
injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit of this chapter will
be observed;
(1)
The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of
a "skid row" area;
(2)
The establishment of an additional regulated use in that area will
not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor
will it interfere with any program or urban renewal;
(3)
(4) All applicable regulations of this chapter will be observed; and
No portion of the establishment shall be located on the ground level
of any building.
(5)
Special permit. No adult entertainment establishment shall commence
operations without first applying for and receiving a special permit
from the Board of Appeals.
A.
Conditions. The following conditions shall be attached to any special
permit for adult entertainment establishments:
Adult entertainment establishments shall not be allowed within a
building containing other retail, consumer or residential uses.
(1)
No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 60
feet of a public or private way.
(2)
Any adult entertainment establishment shall cease its operations
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. each day.
(3)
No adult entertainment establishment may have visible from the
exterior of the premises any flashing lights.
(4)
At all times when an adult entertainment establishment is open
for business, the entire area of the premises must be continually
illuminated to the degree of not less than one footcandle (measured
30 inches from the floor), except those portions of the room
covered by furniture.
(5)
B.
Statutory prohibition. No special permit for an adult use shall be issued
to any person convicted of violating MGL c. 119, § 63 or MGL c. 272,
§ 28.
C.
§ 195-85 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-86
180:262
ARTICLE XVII
Facilitated and Independent Senior Living Facilities
[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 28; 10-16-2000 ATM by Art. 20]
§ 195-87. Purpose.
Facilitated and independent senior living facilities are allowed in a variety
of zoning districts by special permit from the Planning Board. The intent of
this chapter is to provide the opportunity for the development of the types of
multifamily and communal housing most beneficial for the senior and elder
population of Chelmsford. The provision of senior affordable housing is an
important goal of the chapter.
§ 195-88. Dimensional standards.
The following dimensional standards shall apply to facilitated and
independent senior living facilities:
RM CA CB CC CD CV IA
Minimum lot area (acres)1 5 5 5 5 5 3 7
Minimum lot width (feet) 150 125 150 200 50 50 150
Minimum lot depth (feet) 150 125 0 200 0 0 150
Minimum frontage (feet) 150 125 150 200 50 50 150
Minimum front yard (feet) 40 20 60 60 20 20 40
Minimum side yard (feet) 25 40 40 40 40 40 40
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 40 40 40 40 40 40
Minimum building separation
(feet)
25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
35 35 35 35 35 35 35
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35
Minimum open space -
independent senior living
(percent)4
0 30 30 30 30 30 30
Facilitated living facilities provide private or communal lodging for
persons requiring limited medical attention or supervision and who
ordinarily are ambulatory. These include, but are not limited to, assisted
living facilities, Alzheimer's facilities and congregate living facilities.
A.
Independent senior living facilities are intended to provide a safe,
suitable age-restricted dwelling unit for a senior couple or individual
who is able to live independently. Open space preservation is an
important facet of independent senior living projects and is meant to
provide the residents of the project with opportunities for active and
passive recreation.
B.
§ 195-87 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-88
180:263
RM CA CB CC CD CV IA
Maximum number of units per
acre - facilitated living2
8 7 7 7 7 7 7
Maximum number of units per
acre - independent senior living
8 43 43 43 43 7 43
NOTES:
1A smaller lot size may be allowed by special permit from the Planning
Board where such smaller lot is determined to promote the objectives of
this Article XVII.
2Up to 10 units per acre may be allowed by special permit from the
Planning Board where increase is determined to promote the objectives of
this Article XVII and shall meet the criteria of § 195-91.1.
3Exclusive of open space requirement. Tract size minus open space
requirement minus wetlands/floodplain not included in open space
requirement times units per acre equals maximum number of units per
tract. Total may be increased to six units per acre by special permit from
the Planning Board upon a finding that the density increase will not be
detrimental to the intent of the chapter and shall meet the criteria of
§ 195-91.1.
4May be partially or completely reduced by special permit from the
Planning Board upon a finding that the reduction of the open space
requirement will not be detrimental to the intent of the chapter and shall
meet the criteria of § 195-91.1.
§ 195-89. General standards.
The entire site shall be a size and shape as shall provide a housing
site that will be in harmony with the natural terrain and other features
of the site and will preserve natural vistas and the character of the
neighborhood.
A.
No site on a plan for which an approval is granted under this section
may be subdivided so as to create additional lots. A notation to that
effect shall be shown on the site plan.
B.
Sites abutting residentially zoned land shall provide a landscaped
buffer strip 50 feet in width or a strip as set forth in § 195-43, whichever
is larger, to provide adequate screening for adjacent properties. No
structure, driveway, parking area or sidewalk shall be located in the
landscaped buffer strip. A smaller buffer may be allowed by special
permit from the Planning Board where such smaller buffer is
determined to promote the objectives of this Article XVII.
C.
Driveways and parking areas within the development shall be
constructed in accordance with Article V, Off-Street Parking and
Loading. Sidewalks conforming to the Planning Board Subdivision
D.
§ 195-88 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-89
180:264
§ 195-90. Open space requirements.
The minimum required open space set forth in § 195-88 shall be contiguous
open space, excluding required yards and buffer areas. Such open space
may be separated by the road(s) constructed within the site. The percentage
of the open space which is wetlands, as defined pursuant to MGL c. 131,
§ 40, shall not normally exceed the percentage of the tract which is
wetlands; provided, however, that the applicant may include a greater
percentage of wetlands in the open space upon a demonstration that such
inclusion promotes the purposes set forth in this Article XVII.
Rules and Regulations29 shall be required by the Planning Board.
Additional requirements linking pedestrian circulation systems may be
required by the Planning Board.
Buildings shall be designed to be complementary in exterior design
with each other and with the existing neighborhood in which the facility
is located. Dwellings constructed under this section shall not be eligible
for subsequent conversion to conventional apartments with the
exception of projects in the RM District.
E.
The method(s) of implementing age restrictions of seniors and elders
shall be to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
F.
The Planning Board may set additional site security and safety
requirements as deemed necessary to ensure the security and safety of
the residents of the facility.
G.
Adaptability requirements for facilitated and independent senior living
projects. All units shall be constructed to be handicap adaptable
according to the standards of Section 504 of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U. S. C. § 12204 and ANSI A117.1.
H.
Developments approved as rental projects shall not be converted to
condominiums.
I.
The required open space shall be used for conservation, historic
preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a combination of
these uses, and shall be served by suitable access for such purposes.
A.
The required open space shall remain unbuilt upon, provided that 10%
of such open space may be paved or built upon for structures accessory
to the dedicated use or uses of such open space, pedestrian walks and
bike paths.
B.
Underground utilities to serve the site may be located within the
required open space.
C.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 195-89 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-90
180:265
§ 195-91. Independent living standards.
The required open space shall, at the Planning Board's election, be
conveyed to:
(1) The Town of Chelmsford or its Conservation Commission.
A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation of open space and any of the purposes for such open
space set forth above.
(2)
A corporation or trust owned jointly or in common by the owners
of lots within the site. If such corporation or trust is utilized,
ownership thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots in
perpetuity. Maintenance of the open space and facilities shall be
permanently guaranteed by such corporation or trust which shall
provide for mandatory assessments for maintenance expenses to
each lot.
Each such trust or corporation shall be deemed to have
assented to allow the Town of Chelmsford to perform
maintenance of the open space and facilities, if the trust or
corporation fails to provide adequate maintenance, and shall
grant the Town an easement for this purpose. In such event,
the Town shall first provide 14 days' written notice to the trust
or corporation as to the inadequate maintenance, and, if the
trust or corporation fails to complete such maintenance, the
Town may perform it. The owner of each lot shall be deemed to
have assented to the Town filing a lien against each lot in the
development for the full cost of such maintenance, which liens
shall be released upon payment to the Town of same.
(a)
Each individual deed, and the deed or trust or articles of
incorporation, shall include provisions designed to effect these
provisions. Documents creating such trust or corporation shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for approval and shall
thereafter be recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
(b)
(3)
D.
Any proposed open space, unless conveyed to the Town or its
Conservation Commission, shall be subject to a recorded restriction
enforceable by the town, provided that such land shall be perpetually
kept in an open state, that it shall be preserved for exclusively
agricultural, horticultural, educational or recreational purposes and
that it shall be maintained in a manner which will ensure its suitability
for its intended purposes.
E.
All dwelling units and common areas shall be constructed to be
handicap adaptable in accordance with Section 504 of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12204, ANSI A117.1 and the
requirements of the Massachusetts Architectural Barriers Board.
A.
B. Units shall contain no more than two bedrooms.
§ 195-90 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-91
180:266
§ 195-91.1. Affordability standards for facilitated and independent
senior living projects.
The Planning Board shall only grant a density bonus for a project that
provides rental units. The Planning Board may grant a density bonus upon a
finding that such increase is determined to promote the objectives of Article
XVII and according to one of the criteria listed below. Where there is more
than one size or style of unit in a project the affordable units shall comprise
the same percentage as market rate units.
C. Units shall have a maximum habitable living area of 1,600 square feet.
One-half of all additional units created through density bonuses shall be
maintained as affordable units according to Department of Housing and
Urban Development Section 8 Voucher Program or such other program
agreeable to the Planning Board, Chelmsford Housing Authority and
the applicant. The term "affordable" shall be as defined by the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development
for Chelmsford.
A.
A contribution pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53A for the creation of units of
senior and elder affordable housing.
B.
C. Such other method agreed to by the Planning Board and the applicant.
§ 195-91 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-91.1
180:267

ARTICLE XVIII
Planned Open Space Development
§ 195-92. Purpose.
Planned open space developments, hereinafter known as "POS," may be
allowed by special permit by the Planning Board for the purpose of
providing attractive, convenient, efficient neighborhoods and to promote
the conservation of open space and the efficient use of land in harmony with
its natural features.
§ 195-93. General standards.
The tract of land proposed for a POS shall contain a minimum of 10
acres. These proposals shall be permitted only within a subdivision as
defined in MGL c. 41, § 81L.
A.
Number of dwelling units. The maximum number of dwelling units
allowed shall be equal to the number of lots which could reasonably
be expected to be developed upon that parcel under a conventional
plan in full conformance with all zoning, subdivision regulations, health
regulations, wetlands regulations and other applicable requirements.
The proponent shall have the burden of proof with regard to the design
and engineering specifications for such conventional plan.
B.
If any part of a dwelling or accessory building in a POS is proposed
to be located within 100 feet of the perimeter of such development,
such building(s) shall be located so as to comply with the minimum
yard dimensions for principal and accessory buildings for the applicable
zoning district.
C.
Minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet. Minimum frontage shall
be 50 feet. Minimum side yards shall be 12 feet. Minimum front and
rear yards shall be 20 feet. Lots having reduced area or frontage
shall not have frontage on a street other than a street created by a
subdivision involved.
D.
All streets in a POS shall be improved in accordance with the
requirements and specifications of the subdivision regulations.30
Driveways and other paved areas intended to remain in private
ownership shall be approved as to design and construction standards
by the Planning Board.
E.
A written agreement or contract to be executed between the developer
and the Town of Chelmsford shall be submitted at the final stage of the
subdivision review stating that:
The owner or developer will construct the development and install
improvements, both public and private, in accordance with the
approved plan. A bond shall be posted to guarantee completion.
(1)
F.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 195-92 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-93
180:269
§ 195-94. Open space requirements.
A minimum of 25% of the site shall be contiguous open space, excluding
required yards and buffer areas. Such open space may be separated by the
road(s) constructed within the site. The percentage of the open space which
is wetlands, as defined pursuant to MGL c. 131, § 40, shall not normally
exceed the percentage of the tract which is wetlands; provided, however,
that the applicant may include a greater percentage of wetlands in the open
space upon a demonstration that such inclusion promotes the purposes set
forth in this article.
In the event of failure of the owners, successors or assigns to
maintain any common open space, recreation areas, landscaping
features or other required improvements, the Town may enter said
development and perform such necessary maintenance work and
charge the cost, including attorney fees, to the owner, successor or
assigns.
(2)
This contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, successors
or receivers of the development and shall constitute a lien on the
property in the development.
(3)
(4) Any other conditions required by the Planning Board.
A site plan, in addition to the final subdivision plan, shall be recorded
after the POS is approved. As a minimum this site plan shall show
the entire development, indicating lots, roads, easements, open space,
phases for development, any recreational uses or buildings to be
constructed in the open space and any ponds, streams or wetlands. This
plan shall be approved by the Planning Board before it is recorded.31
G.
The required open space shall be used for conservation, historic
preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry or for a combination of
these uses and shall be served by suitable access for such purposes.
A.
The required open space shall remain unbuilt upon, provided that 10%
of such open space may be paved or built upon for structures accessory
to the dedicated use or uses of such open space, pedestrian walks and
bike paths.
B.
Underground utilities to serve the site may be located within the
required open space.
C.
The required open space shall, at the Planning Board's election, be
conveyed to:
(1) The Town of Chelmsford or its Conservation Commission;
D.
31.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4628, Buffer areas, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29.
§ 195-93 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-94
180:270
§ 195-95. Homeowners association.
The applicant or developer shall provide for and establish a homeowners
association as a nonprofit organization or other legal entity under the
laws of Massachusetts for the use, care and maintenance of lands and
improvements. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all
landowners within the POS, and each lot shall be entitled to equal
representation. The association shall be formed prior to conveyance of the
first lot, in a form acceptable to the Planning Board.
A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation of open space and any of the purposes for such open
space set forth above; or
(2)
A corporation or trust owned jointly or in common by the owners
of lots within the site. If such corporation or trust is utilized,
ownership thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots in
perpetuity. Maintenance of the open space and facilities shall be
permanently guaranteed by such corporation or trust, which shall
provide for mandatory assessments for maintenance expenses to
each lot.
Each such trust or corporation shall be deemed to have
assented to allow the Town of Chelmsford to perform
maintenance of the open space and facilities if the trust or
corporation fails to provide adequate maintenance and shall
grant the Town an easement for this purpose. In such event,
the Town shall first provide 14 days' written notice to the trust
or corporation as to the inadequate maintenance, and, if the
trust or corporation fails to complete such maintenance, the
Town may perform it. The owner of each lot shall be deemed to
have assented to the Town filing a lien against each lot in the
development for the full cost of such maintenance, which liens
shall be released upon payment to the Town of the same.
(a)
Each individual deed, and the deed or trust or articles of
incorporation, shall include provisions designed to effect these
provisions. Documents creating such trust or corporation shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for approval and shall
thereafter be recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
(b)
(3)
Any proposed open space, unless conveyed to the Town or its
Conservation Commission, shall be subject to a recorded restriction
enforceable by the town, provided that such land shall be perpetually
kept in an open state, that it shall be preserved for exclusively
agricultural, horticultural, educational or recreational purposes and
that it shall be maintained in a manner which will ensure its suitability
for its intended purposes.
E.
§ 195-94 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-96
180:271
§ 195-96. Certificates or documents.
The following certificates or documents shall be submitted to the Planning
Board:
§ 195-97. Purchase and sale agreement.
§ 195-98. Decision by Planning Board.
Copies of any proposed management policies and existing or proposed
deed restrictions or covenants running with the land in the
development.
A.
A description of any existing easement, covenants or restrictions
affecting land within the development and an instrument conveying any
easements required as a condition of approval to the town.
B.
Prior to approval by the Planning Board, the developer must file and
have approved by the Planning Board a sample purchase and sale
agreement which shall be used for the purchase of individual lots
and dwellings. Said agreement shall include in conspicuous type the
following:
The property is part of a POS subject to the Zoning Bylaw and the
Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Chelmsford. The purchaser and
subsequent owners of the property are subject to the requirements
therein contained. The purchaser shall be required to be a member of
a homeowners association, shall be subject to rules and regulations of
said association and shall be liable for any applicable assessment made
by or against said association. The ultimate liability for the open space
falls on the individual lot owner.
A.
The purchase and sale agreement shall further contain a statement
by the seller that the purchaser has been provided with a copy of
the documents pertinent to the POS and a prospectus which shall
summarize in layman's language the information contained therein.
B.
The Planning Board shall not approve a POS development in an
established single-family neighborhood where, in its determination,
such land use will be inconsistent with or will have a detrimental effect
upon the surrounding property. If the Planning Board denies a POS
based on this section it shall identify this as the reason for denial.
A.
Approval under this article does not relieve the applicant from
conformance with the Subdivision Control Law.32 No part of the
construction of a POS shall begin until the plan of such development
has been granted final approval by the Planning Board in accordance
with the subdivision regulations.33 The developer shall submit with the
request for a POS an alternate plan(s) for developing the site as a
B.
32.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Subdivision of Land.
§ 195-96 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-98
180:272
conventional subdivision at the presubmission review and preliminary
plan stages of the subdivision process which shall adhere to all
subdivision requirements. The Planning Board may establish additional
rules and regulations to govern the POS and the filing of additional
material or information.
§ 195-98 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-98
180:273

ARTICLE XVIIIA
Center Village Zoning
[Added 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 28]
§ 195-98.1. Purpose.
CV (Center Village) zoning is intended to aid in revitalizing, preserving
and expanding the village character of Chelmsford's traditional business
districts.
§ 195-98.2. Dimensional standards.
Minimum Lot Requirements Area
(x 1,000 square feet)
Width (feet) 50
Depth (feet) 0
Frontage (feet) 50
Minimum Yard Requirements
Front (feet) 51
Side (feet) 101
Rear (feet) 101
Maximum Building Coverage 40%
Stories 3
Height (feet) 35
Floor area ratio .60
Minimum Building Height (feet) 202
The qualities that make up the character of a traditional New England
village center are encouraged through:
Maximum retail floor area to strengthen small business
development.
(1)
Shared parking to minimize curb cuts and maximize pedestrian
safety.
(2)
A.
Residential uses are allowed as an accessory use to reinforce downtown
village character.
B.
§ 195-98.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-98.2
180:275
NOTES:
1May be partially or completely reduced by special permit from the
Planning Board upon a finding that the setbacks as imposed by the district
would result in construction of structures that are not in keeping with the
area's scale and character. The Planning Board must further find that the
relaxation of said standards will not interfere with or negatively impact
abutting properties, particularly property used or zoned for residential
purposes.
2For any structure of 600 square feet or larger.
§ 195-98.3. Parking.
§ 195-98.4. Landscaping.
The requirements of Article IX, Landscaping, shall not apply to the CV
District, except for multifamily use. The Planning Board, during the site
plan approval process, shall require adequate landscaping to accomplish
the objectives of this section.
§ 195-98.5. Design standards.
In the CV (Center Village) District, the required parking shall be
reduced by 50% for the requirements of § 195-17, Minimum parking
requirements, except for multifamily use. Parking within front yards
shall be prohibited.
A.
Parking lots of more than 20 spaces shall provide landscaping to equal
10% of the total paved area of the site. Such landscaping shall be
contained within or adjacent to the parking lot.
B.
All drives and parking lots shall be edged with vertical granite curbing
in accordance with MHD standard specifications.
C.
The Planning Board may waive full compliance with Article V, Off-Street
Parking and Loading, by special permit, upon a finding that the strict
compliance with the applicable section would result in construction of
structures that are not in keeping with the area's scale and character.
D.
Architectural styles shall reflect and strengthen the character of
primary buildings existing in the CV District.
A.
Exterior building materials shall be chosen to be consistent with those
of the primary structures existing in the CV District.
B.
Buildings shall be constructed with a minimum of two stories or a
suitable facade suggestive of two stories.
C.
Lighting shall be consistent with the character of a village zoning
district. A lighting plan shall be required in conjunction with the site
D.
§ 195-98.2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-98.5
180:276
plan review. Lighting shall be designed to illuminate the subject
property and shall not encroach onto abutting properties.
§ 195-98.5 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-98.5
180:277

ARTICLE XIX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 195-99. Inspector of Buildings.
This chapter shall be administered by the Inspector of Buildings. Pursuant
to the State Building Code, the Inspector of Buildings may require such
plans and specifications as may be necessary to determine compliance
with all pertinent laws of the commonwealth. Buildings, structures or signs
may not be erected, substantially altered, moved or changed in use and
land may not be substantially altered or changed in principal use without
written certification by the Inspector of Buildings that such action is in
compliance with then-applicable zoning and that all necessary permits have
been received under federal, state or local law. Issuance of a building
permit or certificate of use and occupancy, where required under the
commonwealth's State Building Code, may serve as such certification.
§ 195-100. Enforcement.
The Inspector of Buildings shall institute and take any and all such action
as may be necessary to enforce full compliance with any and all of the
provisions of this chapter and of permits and variances issued thereunder,
including notification of noncompliance and request for legal action through
the Selectmen or Town Manager to Town Counsel or action pursuant to
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-2, allowing noncriminal disposition of
violations.
§ 195-101. Violations and penalties.
§ 195-102. Board of Appeals.
The penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter, of any of the
conditions under which a permit is issued or of any decision rendered
by the Board of Appeals shall be $300 for each offense. Each day that
each violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
Noncriminal disposition. In addition to the procedure for enforcement
as described in Subsection A above, the provisions of this chapter
may also be enforced by the Inspector of Buildings by noncriminal
disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. The penalty for such
violation shall be $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense,
$100 for the third offense and $200 for the fourth and each subsequent
offense. [Added 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
B.
Establishment. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and
three associate members who shall be appointed by the Town Manager.
A.
Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have and exercise all the powers
granted to it by MGL c. 40A, 40B and 41 and by this chapter. The
Board's powers are as follows:
B.
§ 195-99 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-102
180:279
§ 195-103. Special permits. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
To hear and decide applications for special permits. Unless
otherwise specified herein, the Board of Appeals shall serve as
the special permit granting authority, to act in all matters in
accordance with the provisions of § 195-103, or as otherwise
specified.
(1)
To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the
terms of this chapter, with respect to particular land or structures,
as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 10. The Board of Appeals shall not
grant use variances. Procedural requirements for variances shall
follow § 195-103C. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
(2)
To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by
reason of his or her inability to obtain a permit or enforcement
action from any administrative officer under the provisions of MGL
c. 40A, §§ 8 and 15.
(3)
To hear and decide comprehensive permits for construction of lowor
moderate-income housing by a public agency or limited dividend
or nonprofit corporation, as set forth in MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 to 23.
(4)
Special permit granting authority. Unless specifically designated
otherwise, the Board of Appeals shall act as the special permit granting
authority.
A.
Criteria. Special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting
authority, unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written
determination that the adverse effects of the proposed use will not
outweigh its beneficial impacts to the Town or the neighborhood, in
view of the particular characteristics of the site and of the proposal in
relation to that site. In addition to any specific factors that may be set
forth in this chapter, the determination shall include consideration of
each of the following:
Social, economic or community needs which are served by the
proposal;
(1)
(2) Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
(3) Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
(4) Neighborhood character and social structures;
(5) Impacts on the natural environment; and
Potential fiscal impact, including impact on Town services, tax base
and employment.
(6)
B.
Procedures. Whenever an application for a special permit is filed with a
special permit granting authority, said authority shall distribute copies
of the application, accompanying site plan and other documentation to
C.
§ 195-102 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-103
180:280
§ 195-104. Site plan review.
the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Inspector of Buildings,
Director of Public Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Sewer Commission,
Planning Board/Board of Appeals (whichever is not the special permit
granting authority) and applicable water district for their
consideration, review and report. The copies necessary to fulfill this
requirement shall be furnished by the applicant.
An application shall not be deemed complete until all copies of
required information and documentation have been filed with the
special permit granting authority.
(1)
The special permit granting authority shall notify applicants by
registered mail, within 14 days of submittal, of incomplete
application status, and the applicant shall have 14 days from the
mailing of such notice to complete an application. Failure to
complete an application within such time shall be deemed
nonsubmittal of the application, without prejudice.
(2)
Reports from other boards and officials shall be submitted to the
special permit granting authority by the date of the public hearing.
Failure of these reviewing parties to make recommendations after
having received copies of all such required materials shall be
deemed a lack of opposition thereto.
(3)
The decision/findings of the special permit granting authority shall
contain, in writing, an explanation for any departures from the
recommendations of any reviewing party.
(4)
Conditions. Special permits may be granted with such reasonable
conditions, safeguards or limitations on time or use, including
performance guaranties, as the special permit granting authority may
deem necessary to serve the purposes of this chapter.
D.
Plans. An applicant for a special permit shall submit a plan in
substantial conformance with the requirements of § 195-104 herein.
The provisions of this Subsection E shall not apply to applications for
special permits to reconstruct, extend, alter or structurally change a
nonconforming single- or two-family structure. The Board of Appeals
may establish procedures governing such applications by regulation.
E.
Lapse. Special permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or
construction thereunder has not begun, except for good cause, within
two years following the filing of the special permit approval (plus
such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal
referred to in MGL c. 40A, § 17 from the grant thereof) with the Town
Clerk.
F.
Applicability. The following types of activities and uses require site plan
review by the Planning Board:
A.
§ 195-103 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-104
180:281
Construction, exterior alteration or exterior expansion of, or
change of use within, a municipal, institutional, commercial,
industrial or multifamily structure involving more than 500 square
feet. For the purposes of this section, "change of use" shall mean
a change from one principal use listed in the Use Regulation
Schedule34 to another listed use which results in an increase in
required parking or invokes the Aquifer Protection District, Article
XIV.
(1)
Construction or expansion of a parking lot/area for a municipal,
institutional, commercial, industrial or multi-family structure or
purpose. Any construction or expansion from 500 to 2,500 square
feet shall be a minor site plan, per § 195-104G of this chapter.
Any construction or expansion under 500 square feet shall be
an administrative approval from the Community Development
Director or the Board's authorized designee. [Amended
4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 25; 4-28-2008 ATM by Art. 21]
(2)
Grading or clearing more than 10% of a lot, except for the
following: landscaping on a lot with an existing structure or a
proposed single- or two-family dwelling; clearing necessary for
percolation and other site tests; work incidental to agricultural
activity; work in conjunction with an approved subdivision plan; or
work pursuant to an earth removal permit.
(3)
Construction or exterior expansion of a single- or two-family
structure that will result in habitable space of more than 4,000
square feet on a lot which held a single- or two-family structure
within the past two years. Construction which does not increase the
floor area shall not be subject to the provisions of this section.
(4)
Establishment of any commercial or industrial use that is not
located principally within a permanent structure, regardless of
size, and which is operated for a duration greater than eight
consecutive weeks. This provision shall not be applicable to
temporary on-site structures, such as a trailer, that are incidental
to the construction of an approved development and /or public
works project [Added 10-17-2011 ATM by Art. 21]
(5)
Exemptions. A building wholly or partially destroyed may be rebuilt
without recourse to this section if rebuilt without change to the building
footprint or the square footage of usable space.
B.
Procedures.
Use, structure or activity available as of right.
An application for a building permit to perform work as set
forth in Subsection A available as of right shall be accompanied
by an approved site plan. Prior to the commencement of any
(a)
(1)
C.
34.Editor's Note: The Use Regulation Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 195-104 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-104
180:282
activity set forth in Subsection A available as of right, the
project proponent shall obtain site plan approval from the
Planning Board. Applicants for site plan approval shall submit
12 full-size sets and eight reduced-size sets of the site plan
to the Planning Board for review. The Planning Board shall
publish a legal notice no less than five days before the public
hearing and shall notify all abutters and abutters to abutters
within 300 feet. [Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
The Planning Board shall review and act upon the site plan,
with such conditions as may be deemed appropriate, within
60 days of its receipt and notify the applicant of its decision.
The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a majority of
those present and shall be in writing. No building permit shall
be issued by the Inspector of Buildings without the written
approval of the site plan by the Planning Board or unless 60
days lapse from the date of the submittal of the site plan
without action by the Planning Board.
(b)
Use or structure available by special permit or variance.
An application for a special permit or a variance to perform
work as set forth in Subsection A shall be accompanied by
an approved site plan. Applicants for site plan approval shall
submit 12 full-size sets and eight reduced-size sets of the site
plan to the Planning Board for review. The Planning Board shall
publish a legal notice no less than five days before the public
hearing and shall notify all abutters and abutters to abutters
within 300 feet.
(a)
The Planning Board shall review and act upon the site plan,
with such conditions as may be deemed appropriate, within
60 days of its receipt and notify the applicant of its decision.
The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a majority
of those present and shall be in writing. No application for
special permit or variance shall be filed with the Board of
Appeals until the Planning Board's site plan public hearing
has been opened or unless 60 days lapse from the date of the
submittal of the site plan without action by the Planning Board,
unless the Planning Board extends the sixty-day review period.
Where the Planning Board approves a site plan with conditions
and said site plan accompanies a special permit or variance
application to the Board of Appeals, the conditions imposed by
the Planning Board shall be incorporated into the issuance, if
any, of a special permit or variance by the Board of Appeals.
[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
(b)
(2)
Where the Planning Board serves as the special permit granting
authority, it shall consolidate its site plan review and special permit
procedures. Applicants must meet the submission requirements of
Subsection C(2)(a).
(3)
§ 195-104 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-104
180:283
An application for site plan approval shall be accompanied by a fee,
as set forth in the Planning Board's rules and regulations.
(4)
The applicant may request, and the Planning Board may grant by
majority vote, an extension of the time limits set forth herein. A
copy of the extension shall be provided to the Board of Appeals.
(5)
No deviation from an approved site plan shall be permitted without
modification thereof.
(6)
Preparation of plans. Site plans shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch
by thirty-six-inch sheets. Plans shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer, registered land surveyor, architect or landscape
architect, as appropriate. Dimensions and scales shall be adequate
to determine that all requirements are met and to make a complete
analysis and evaluation of the proposal. All plans shall have a minimum
scale of one inch equals 20 feet.
D.
Contents of plan. The contents of the site plan are as follows:
Five separate plans prepared at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet
or such other scale as may be approved by the Planning Board. The
plans are as follows:
Site layout, which shall contain the boundaries of the lot(s)
in the proposed development, proposed structures, drives,
parking, fences, walls, walks, outdoor lighting, loading
facilities and areas for snow storage after plowing. The first
sheet in this plan shall be a locus plan, at a scale of one inch
equals 100 feet, showing the entire project and its relation to
existing areas, buildings and roads for a distance of 1,000 feet
from the project boundaries or such other distance as may be
approved or required by the Planning Board.
(a)
Topography and drainage plan, which shall contain the existing
and proposed final topography at two-foot intervals and plans
for handling stormwater drainage.
(b)
Utility and landscaping plan, which shall include all facilities
for refuse and sewage disposal or storage of all wastes, the
location of all hydrants, fire alarm and fire-fighting facilities
on and adjacent to the site, all proposed recreational facilities
and open space areas and all wetlands, including floodplain
areas or resource protection areas subject to protection by the
Wetlands Protection Act.35
(c)
Architectural plan, which shall include all floor plans and
architectural elevations of all proposed buildings and a color
rendering.
(d)
(1)
E.
35.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A.
§ 195-104 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-104
180:284
Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing tree
lines and all proposed landscape features and improvements,
including screening and planting areas with size and type of
stock for each shrub or tree and including proposed erosion
control measures.
(e)
The site plan shall be accompanied by a written statement
indicating the estimated time required to complete the proposed
project and any and all phases thereof. There shall be submitted
a written estimate showing in detail the costs of all site
improvements planned.
(2)
A written summary of the contemplated projects shall be submitted
with the site plan indicating, where appropriate, the number of
dwelling units to be built and the acreage in residential use, the
evidence of compliance with parking and off-street loading
requirements, the forms of ownership contemplated for the
property and a summary of the provisions of any ownership or
maintenance thereof, identification of all land that will become
common or public land and any other evidence necessary to
indicate compliance with this chapter.
(3)
The site plan shall be accompanied by drainage calculations
stamped by a registered professional engineer. The stormwater
system design shall conform to the current Mass Department of
Environmental Protection Stormwater Policy. See Section 2.6 of
the Planning Board Site Plan and Special Permit Regulations for
further criteria. [Amended 10-15-2012 ATM by Art. 19]
(4)
The Planning Board may require narrative assessments of the onsite
and off-site impacts of the proposed project, including traffic,
drainage, noise and other environmental factors. The Planning
Board may require that such narrative assessments be prepared by
qualified experts.
(5)
Certification that the proposal is in full compliance with the
provisions, if applicable, of the Americans with Disabilities Act and
the Massachusetts Architectural Barriers Board.
(6)
Waiver of technical compliance. The Planning Board may, upon written
request of the applicant, waive any of the technical requirements of
Subsection D where the project involves relatively simple development
plans or constitutes a minor site plan.
F.
Minor site plan. Applications for permits to build, alter or expand any
nonresidential building, structure or use in any district where such
construction will exceed a total gross floor area of 500 square feet but
not exceed a total gross floor area of 3,000 square feet or will not
generate the need for more than 10 parking spaces shall be deemed
a minor site plan. For the purposes of computing the total gross floor
area of a minor site plan, the Inspector of Buildings shall aggregate all
G.
§ 195-104 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-104
180:285
such applications made within the five previous calendar years. Minor
site plans shall set forth all of the information required by Subsection
D; provided, however, that the scale and contents of the minor site
plan may be reduced by the Planning Board. Minor site plans shall
be referred to the applicable Town agencies at the discretion of the
Planning Board. [Amended 4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 25]
Approval. Site plan approval shall be granted upon determination by
the Planning Board that the plan meets the following objectives. The
Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions, at the expense of
the applicant, including performance guaranties, to promote these
objectives. Any new building construction or other site alteration shall
provide adequate access to each structure for fire and service
equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater
drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Planning
Board's subdivision rules and regulations. New building construction or
other site alteration shall be designed in the site plan, after considering
the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design
of building form, grading, egress points and other aspects of the
development, so as to:
Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees
six-inch caliper or larger, the length of removed stone walls, the
area of wetland vegetation displaced, soil erosion and threat of air
and water pollution.
(1)
Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and
egressing from it.
(2)
Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible
locations.
(3)
Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking,
storage or other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or
premises residentially used or zoned.
(4)
(5) Minimize glare from headlights and lighting intrusion.
Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials
and scale of buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways
and places.
(6)
Minimize contamination of groundwater from on-site wastewater
disposal systems or operations on the premises involving the use,
storage, handling or containment of hazardous substances.
(7)
Ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including
parking and landscaping.
(8)
H.
Lapse. Site plan approval shall lapse after two years from the grant
thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except
for good cause. Such approval may, for good cause, be extended in
I.
§ 195-104 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-104
180:286
§ 195-105. Amendments.
This chapter may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition or
repeal by the Town Meeting in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5 and
any amendments thereto.
§ 195-106. Effect on other laws and building permits.
§ 195-107. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision herein.
writing by the Planning Board upon the written request of the
applicant.
Regulations. The Planning Board may adopt and from time to time
amend reasonable regulations for the administration of these site plan
guidelines.
J.
Other laws. Where the application of this chapter imposes greater
restrictions that those imposed by any other regulations, permits,
restrictions, easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
A.
Conformance. Construction or operations under a building permit shall
conform to any subsequent amendment of this chapter unless the use
or construction is commenced within a period of six months after the
issuance of the permit and, in cases involving construction, unless such
construction is continued through to completion as continuously and
expeditiously as is reasonable.
B.
§ 195-104 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-107
180:287

ARTICLE XX
Terminology
§ 195-108. Word usage and definitions.
In this chapter, the following terms and constructions shall apply unless a
contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed in
the text of the chapter.
Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular
includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. The word
"shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive or discretionary. The
word "and" includes "or" unless the contrary is evident from the text.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to specified
examples but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances,
circumstances or items of like character or kind. The word "lot"
includes "plot." The word "used" or "occupied" shall be considered as
though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be
used or occupied." The word "building," "structure," "lot" or "parcel"
shall be construed as being followed by the words "or any portion
thereof." The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, company or corporation as well as an individual. The
words "business" and "establishment" are used interchangeably.
[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
A.
Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts State Building Code shall have the meaning given
therein unless a contrary intention is clearly evident in this chapter.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building located on the same
lot as the main or principal building or principal use, the use of which
is customarily incidental to that of the principal building or use of the
land.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental to that of the main or
principal building or use of the land.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A building or structure where care,
protection and supervision are provided, on a regular schedule, to
adults over the age of 18.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT —
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock-in-trade printed matter, books,
magazines, picture periodicals, motion picture films, video
cassettes, computer compact disks, computer disks or diskettes or
coin-operated motion picture machines for sale, barter or rental
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct, as that
term is defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, or an establishment having for
sale sexual devices, which shall mean any artificial human penis,
vagina or anus or other device primarily designed, promoted or
(1)
B.
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:289
AGRICULTURAL USE, NONEXEMPT — Agricultural use of property not
exempted by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the exit facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height,
or the moving from one location or position to another.
ALZHEIMER'S FACILITY — See "facilitated senior living
facility."[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
ANIMAL CLINIC OR HOSPITAL — A facility, under the control of a
licensed veterinarian, where sick or injured animals or pets are given
medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to
short-term care incidental to the clinic or hospital use. This use may
also include a kennel.36[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
marketed to physically stimulate or manipulate the human genitals,
pubic area or anal area, including dildos, penisators, vibrators,
penis rings, erection enlargement or prolonging creams or other
preparations, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — An
establishment which features live entertainment which consists of
entertainers engaging in sexual conduct or nudity as defined in
MGL c. 272, § 31.
(2)
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct as defined in
MGL c. 272, § 31, for observation by patrons therein.
(3)
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with
a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct as defined in MGL c. 272,
§ 31, for observation by patrons therein.
(4)
SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION — At least that portion
of:
(a) Retail sales accounting for at least 25% of gross sales;
Merchandise accounting for at least 25% of total merchandise
available for sales; or
(b)
Shelf space and display space which when combined is in
excess of 80 square feet.
(c)
(5)
36.Editor's Note: The former definition of "animal kennel or hospital," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:290
ASPHALT MANUFACTURING PLANT — A facility used for the
production of liquid asphalt and/or bituminous concrete to be sold
and/or used off site, including, but not limited to, facilities for
administration, combustion machines for heating products, associated
fans, belts and chimneys, rock crushers, tanks for storage of liquid
asphalt, as well as stockpiling of bulk materials used in the production
process or of finished products manufactured on the premises and the
storage and maintenance of required equipment.[Added 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 22]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — See "facilitated senior living
facility."[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
BANK, FINANCIAL AGENCY — A building or part thereof, open to
the public and engaged in the custody, loan, or exchange of money;
for the extension of credit; and for facilitating the transmission of
funds. Typically characterized by walk-in and drive-through services.
The use/inclusion of a drive-through requires a special permit.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
BARN SALE, GARAGE SALE, YARD SALE OR FLEA MARKET —
Temporary use of residential, institutional or industrial premises for
sale of personal property in accordance with § 195-6D.[Amended
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building, whether residential or commercial
or any part thereof in which lodging is provided by the owner or
operator to more than four boarders. The boardinghouse must provide
for shared/common facilities consisting of either bathing or cooking
and therefore shall not contain individual dwelling units consisting
of complete living facilities. Meals may or may not be provided. A
dwelling unit where more than four unrelated individuals rent shall
be considered a boardinghouse. A boardinghouse shall not be deemed
a multifamily dwelling.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25;
10-15-2012 ATM by Art. 17]
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are
considered medical procedures by the Board of Registration in
Medicine, such as implants under the skin, which are
prohibited.[Added 5-3-2001 ATM by Art. 17]
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment which provides
body art services as a part of its business.[Added 5-3-2001 ATM by
Art. 17]
BUILDING — A structure fully enclosed within exterior walls or fire
walls built, erected and framed of a combination of any materials,
whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the
shelter of persons, animals or property. For the purposes of this
definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering,
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:291
whether or not permanent in nature.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by
Art. 25]
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot or plot area
covered by the roof area of a building or buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean
finished grade of all sides of the building or structures to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line for mansard roofs
and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs. Not included are spires, cupolas, antennas or similar
parts of structures that do not enclose potentially habitable floor
space.[Amended 10-21-1999 ATM by Art. 29]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.37
CEMETERY — A property used for interring the dead, for both humans
and animals, including accessory uses such as mausoleums, sales and
maintenance facilities and chapels but excluding crematoriums.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A day-care center or school-age child-care
program, as those terms are defined in MGL c. 28A, § 9.38[Amended
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
CLUB or LODGE — Buildings, structures and premises used principally
by a nonprofit social or civic organization or by an organization catering
primarily to members and their guests for social, civic, recreational
or athletic purposes which may be conducted primarily for gain and
provided that there are no vending stands, merchandising or
commercial activities except as may be required generally for the
membership and purposes of such organization.[Amended 4-30-2012
ATM by Art. 25]
COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT/RECREATION, INDOOR — A
building or part thereof for entertainment, recreational, social or
amusement purposes, which may include as an accessory use the
consumption of food and drink, including all connected rooms or space
with a common means of egress and entrance. Examples include
arcades, court games, theaters, concert halls, dance halls, skating
rinks, bowling alleys, dance studios or other commercial recreational
centers conducted for profit or not for profit.[Amended 10-18-2004
ATM by Art. 17; 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR — An open-air facility
devoted to activities such as a drive-in theater, golf course/driving
range, miniature golf, bathing beach, sports club, boathouse, game
preserve, marina or other commercial recreation carried on in whole or
37.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "business or professional office" and
"campground," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 4-30-2012 ATM
by Art. 25.
38.Editor's Note: Sections 1 to 17 of MGL c. 28A were repealed 2008, c. 215, § 43.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:292
in part outdoors, except those activities more specifically designated in
this chapter.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY — See "facilitated senior living
facility."[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
CONTRACTOR'S SHOP/YARD, INDOOR — A building or part thereof
used by a landscaping, construction or building professional for the
enclosed storage of heavy equipment, materials, supplies and
fabrication of subassemblies. Accessory office, retail merchandizing
and sales are permitted. Outdoor displays, storage and sales are
prohibited.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
CONTRACTOR'S YARD, OUTDOOR — Any portion of a premises used
by a building, landscaping or construction professional for the outdoor
storage of heavy equipment, materials, supplies, fabrication and
subassemblies. An accessory office is permitted.[Added 4-30-2012
ATM by Art. 25]
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW — An establishment utilizing, principally
or accessory, an opening in a wall, including windows, designed and
intended to be used to provide for sales to and/or services to patrons
who remain in their motor vehicle. This term includes automated sales
and services.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
DWELLING — A building designed and occupied as the living quarters
of one or more families. Single- and two-family dwellings shall be
designed for and occupied by not more than one or two families,
respectively. A multifamily dwelling shall be one designed for and
occupied by three or more families. Multifamily dwellings also include
three or more family units, in any configuration whether or not
attached, on a single lot, and the buildings accessory thereto and within
this context are not subject to § 195-62A and B.[Amended 10-15-2018
ATM by Art. 19]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living and sleeping rooms providing
complete living facilities for the use of one or more individuals
constituting a single housekeeping unit, with permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.[Added 10-21-1999
ATM by Art. 29]
EARTH REMOVAL — Extraction of sand, gravel, topsoil or other earth
for sale or for use at a site removed from the place of extraction,
exclusive of the grading of a lot preparatory to the construction of a
building for which a building permit has been issued or the grading of
streets in accordance with an approved definitive plan and exclusive of
granite operations.
EDUCATIONAL USE, NONEXEMPT — Educational facilities not
exempted from regulation by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
ERECT — To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon or conduct any
physical development of the premises required for a building. To
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:293
excavate, fill, drain and the like preparation for building shall also be
considered to erect.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by a public service
corporation or by governmental agencies through erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance of gas, electrical, steam or
water or sewer transmission or distribution systems and collection,
communication, supply or disposal systems, whether underground or
overhead, but not including wireless communications facilities.
Facilities necessary for the provision of essential services include poles,
wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment in
connection therewith.
EXEMPT USES — Uses defined and permitted per c. 40A, § 3.39[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
FACILITATED SENIOR LIVING FACILITY — Includes assisted,
Alzheimer's and congregate living facilities.[Amended 4-30-2012
ATM by Art. 25]
ALZHEIMER'S FACILITY — A facility providing treatment, including
rehabilitation services, and communal lodging for more than four
unrelated persons who have been diagnosed by a medical doctor as
having Alzheimer's disease or other forms of dementia but who do not
require the skilled nursing care typically provided by a nursing home.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility providing private multifamily
dwellings or communal lodging for more than four unrelated persons
requiring assistance with the activities of daily living, such as aid
or assistance with bathing, dressing/grooming, ambulation, eating,
toileting or other similar tasks, as defined by MGL c. 19D, § 1. May also
include rehabilitation services.
CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITY — A facility providing communal
lodging for more than four unrelated elders in a noninstitutional,
residential, shared living environment which integrates shelter and
services needed by the functionally impaired or socially isolated elder
who does not require the constant supervision or intensive health care
services as provided in a nursing home. The shared living environment
shall include at least the following: shared kitchen facilities and shared
dining facilities. Each bedroom shall be considered one unit.
FAIRGROUNDS, CARNIVALS AND SIMILAR OUTDOOR EVENTS —
An open-air facility, operated for a limited period of time, for purposes
of entertainment and amusement. Examples include amusement rides,
carnivals, fair and festival grounds and circuses.[Added 4-30-2012
ATM by Art. 25]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage,
adoption, foster or legal guardianship living together in one dwelling
unit as a single housekeeping unit, but not including more than four
39.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A, § 3.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:294
persons living together unrelated by blood or marriage.[Amended
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence which on a regular
basis receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the
day children under seven years of age or children under 16 years of
age if such children have special needs; provided, however, in either
case, that the total number of children shall not exceed more than six,
excluding participating children living in the residence.
FARM STAND, NONEXEMPT — Facility for the sale of produce, wine
and dairy products on property not exempted by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floors
of a building or several buildings on the same lot measured from
the exterior face of exterior walls or from the center line of the wall
separating two buildings, not including any space where the floorto-
ceiling height is less than seven feet, or as otherwise defined in
the most recent edition of the Massachusetts State Building
Code.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
FLOOR AREA, NET — The aggregate horizontal area in square feet of
all floors of a building or several buildings on the same lot, measured
from the exterior faces of the walls enclosing each building and
exclusive of cellars and attic areas used only for storage, bathrooms,
stairwells, elevators, mechanical rooms or areas for service incidental
to the operation or maintenance of the building, or as otherwise defined
in the most recent edition of the Massachusetts State Building
Code.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the gross floor area of the building
or buildings on one lot to the total area of the lot.
FUNERAL HOME — A facility for the conducting of funerals and related
activities, such as embalming.
GRANITE OPERATIONS — The removal and processing of granite for
construction use, not including stone crushing.40
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance which is listed in, but not
limited to, the Environmental Protection Agency priority pollutants as
described in Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act, as amended.
HEALTH CLUB — A profit or nonprofit facility/structure promoting
maintenance of and/or improvement to physical and mental health
of individual users, which may include as an accessory use the
consumption of food and drink, including all connected rooms or space
with a common means of egress and entrance. Parking requirements
shall be the same as those for stores, retail businesses and
services.[Added 10-18-2004 ATM by Art. 17]
40.Editor's Note: The former definition of "group residence," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25.
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:295
HELIPAD — An accessory use, that is permanent and dedicated for
a helicopter loading area, for a hospital and EMS operations.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation, business, trade, service or
profession which is incidental to and conducted in a dwelling unit or in
a building or other structure accessory thereto by a resident thereof.
See § 195-7 for additional definitions.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by
Art. 25]
HOSPITAL — A facility, operating 24 hours, seven days a week, with
state-licensed beds and/or an emergency room providing primary
health services and medical or surgical care to persons, inpatients and
outpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other
abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral
part of the facility, accessory uses such as laboratories, outpatient
facilities or training facilities.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
IMPERVIOUS — See § 195-70 for definition.[Amended 4-30-2012
ATM by Art. 25]
INDEPENDENT SENIOR LIVING FACILITY — A facility providing an
independent, age-restricted dwelling for a retired or senior individual
or couple. In addition to bed space, such facilities would ordinarily
include a private toilet, bath, food preparation facilities and a private
dining area.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
JUNK — Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out,
cast off or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been
collected or stored for salvage or conversion. Any article or material
which, unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning, can
be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be
considered junk.
JUNKYARD or AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — The use of any area or any
lot, whether inside or outside of a building, for the storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk, scrap or discarded materials or the dismantling,
demolition or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery
or parts thereof.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — An establishment in which more than three
(three months or older) healthy (not sick) dogs or domesticated animals
are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold.[Amended
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
KITCHEN — A place for the preparation of meals, having a stove and
either or both a sink and a refrigerator.41[Added 10-15-2001 ATM by
Art. 19]
LOT — A continuous parcel of land with legally definable boundaries.
41.Editor's Note: The former definition of "light manufacturing," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25. The former definition of "limited
accessory apartment," added 10-15-2001 ATM by Art. 19, which immediately followed the
definition of "light manufacturing," was repealed 10-18-2010 ATM by Art. 18.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:296
LOT AREA — The horizontal area of the lot, exclusive of any area in
a street or recorded way open to public use. At least 80% of the lot
area required for zoning compliance shall be contiguous land other
than that under any water body, bog, swamp, wet meadow, marsh or
other wetland, as defined in MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended. When
the distance between any two points on lot lines is less than 50 feet,
measured in a straight line, the smaller portion of the lot which is
bounded by such straight line shall not be considered in computing
the minimum lot area unless the distance along such lot lines between
such two points is less than 150 feet. For the purpose of computing
the 150-foot minimum distance, the length of each lot line shall be
added together, irrespective of whether the two lines intersect. See
accompanying diagram below.[Amended 5-3-2007 ATM by Art. 18;
10-18-2018 STM by Art. 1]
LOT, CORNER — A lot with two adjacent sides abutting upon streets or
other public spaces.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean distance from the street line of the lot to
its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the side lines
of the lot.
LOT, FRONTAGE OF — The contiguous portion of a lot line coinciding
with the side line of a street which provides accessible and usable legal
rights of vehicular access and physical vehicular access to the buildable
area of the lot via the required frontage, said line to be measured
continuously along a single street or along two intersecting streets if
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:297
their angle of intersection is greater than 120°.[Amended 4-25-2005
ATM by Art. 26; 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
LOT LINE — A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or any
public place.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The horizontal distance between side lot lines,
measured parallel to the lot frontage at the front yard setback line.
MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Campers, trailers or other
recreational vehicles. See § 195-6B for additional definition.[Amended
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY — The indoor manufacturing,
predominately of raw materials or unprocessed materials, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging and
distribution. Typically characterized by the storage of large volumes
of materials needed for the manufacturing process is prohibited and
by noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare, or vibrations that are not contained
within a building and that result in external effects across property
lines. The storage and manufacturing of large volumes of highly
flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials is prohibited.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — The indoor manufacturing,
predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products
or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
packaging and distribution. Typically characterized by noise, odor,
smoke, heat, glare, and vibration being contained within a building with
no external effects detectable across property lines. Examples include
food, textile, leather, wood, paper, chemical, plastic, metal products and
renewable or alternative energy. Excludes basic industrial processing of
raw materials and any outdoor storage of materials.[Added 4-30-2012
ATM by Art. 25]
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — All types of marijuana
establishments, as defined in M.G.L. Ch. 94G, § 1, to include all
marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product
manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed
marijuana-related businesses.[Added 10-16-2017 by ATM, Art. 16]
MASSAGE SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT —
"Massage" is any method of pressure on or friction against or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or
stimulating of external parts of the human body with the hands or
with the aide of any mechanical or electric apparatus or appliances,
with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniment antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointment or
other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of
massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected
that the person to whom the service is provided, or some third
(1)
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:298
MEDICAL CLINIC — A facility licensed by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health pursuant to 105 CMR 140.000 under MGL
c. 111, §§ 51 through 56.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER — A not-for-profit entity,
as defined and further regulated by Massachusetts law only, registered
under state law, that consists of any of the following, either individually
or in combination: acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including
development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils,
or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or
administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, or related
supplies. This use shall not be eligible as a nonexempt agricultural
use or as a nonexempt educational use, per the Use Table.43[Added
4-29-2013 ATM by Art. 24]
MEDICAL OFFICE OR CENTER — A building designed and used for the
diagnosis and treatment of human patients on an outpatient basis that
does not include overnight care facilities. Practitioners may include
physicians, nurses, dentists, chiropractors, psychologists, mental
health counselors and other similar health care
professionals.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling built upon a chassis, containing complete
electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities and designed without
necessity of a permanent foundation for year-round living, irrespective
of whether actually attached to a foundation or otherwise permanently
located.
person on his or her behalf, will pay money or give any other
consideration or any gratuity therefor.
The practice of massage shall not include the following individuals
while engaged in the personal performance of duties of their
respective professions:
Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(a)
Nurses who are registered under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(b)
Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, except that this
exclusion shall apply solely to the massage of the neck, face,
scalp and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or
beautifying purposes.
(c)
Massage therapists who are duly permitted to practice under
the rules and regulations of the Chelmsford Board of Health.42
(d)
(2)
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 201, Board of Health, Art. XIII, Massage/Muscular Therapy.
43.Editor's Note: See the Use Regulation Schedule included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:299
MOTEL or HOTEL — A building or buildings intended and designed for
transient, overnight or extended occupancy, divided into separate units
within the same building, with or without accessory shops and services
catering to the general public such as a dining or recreational facility. If
such hotel or motel has independent cooking facilities, such unit shall
not be occupied by any guest for more than four continuous months,
nor may the guest reoccupy any unit within 30 days of a continuous
four-month stay, nor may the guest stay more than six months in any
calendar year. No occupant of such hotel or motel may claim residency
at such location. This term does not include a boarding- or rooming
house.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle self-propelled by a battery-powered,
electric or internal combustion engine, which is permitted and requires
a valid registration legally issued by a government authority in order
to be operated on a public way. A motor vehicle shall include, but
not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorcycles,
watercraft, motor scooters and tractors.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by
Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE, BODY REPAIR — An establishment, garage or work
area enclosed within a building where repairs are made or caused to be
made to motor vehicle bodies, including fenders, bumpers and similar
components of motor vehicle bodies, but does not include the storage
of vehicles for the cannibalization of parts. Motor vehicle towing is
permitted as an accessory use.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE FUELING STATION (gas station) — An
establishment principally used for the retail sales and dispensing of
motor vehicle fuels. Accessory uses may include general repairs,
related accessory retail sales and accessory retail sales of convenience
items such as prepackaged foods/beverages, but not including food
items that are prepared or individually proportioned to order.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE, GENERAL REPAIRS — Premises for the servicing,
maintenance and repair of motor vehicles. Related accessory retail
sales, such as motor oils, lubricants, travel aids and accessories, are
permitted. Fuel sales are prohibited. Motor vehicle towing is permitted
as an accessory use.44[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL — The use of any building, land
area or other premises for the display and sale of new or used motor
vehicles, including any warranty repair work and other repair service
conducted as an accessory use including motor vehicle towing.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE TOWING AND STORAGE — Establishment that
provides for the towing, carrying, hauling and temporary storage of
44.Editor's Note: The former definition of "motor vehicle, light service," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:300
motor vehicles, but does not include disposal, salvage or storage of
inoperable vehicles.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MOTOR VEHICLE WASHING FACILITY (car wash) — An establishment
providing washing, waxing, polishing and detailing of vehicles,
including self-service, automated and manned facilities.[Added
4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — Facilities owned or operated by the Town of
Chelmsford.
NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production of the photovoltaic system in direct current
(DC).[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 29]
NONFAMILY ACCOMMODATIONS — Boardinghouses, lodging houses,
guest houses, tourist homes, dormitories, halfway houses or similar
accommodations. Accommodations shall be considered hotels or motels
if they have a sign in excess of two square feet or other departure from
residential character or if they have specified a term of residence less
than one week. Accommodations individually having a stove and either
or both a refrigerator and a sink shall be considered dwelling units.45
NURSING/CONVALESCENT/REHABILITATION HOME — A statelicensed
facility for the infirm, chronically ill or convalescent whether
conducted for charity or profit, which is established to render
domiciliary care, custody, treatment or lodging for three or more
unrelated persons who require or receive assistance in ordinary daily
activities of life or who are confined to bed or chair. (This term does not
include hospitals and similar facility devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of disease, injury, maternity cases or mental illness.)
May also include rehabilitation services.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM
by Art. 25]
OFFICE — A building, or part thereof, in which work of a predominantly
administrative, professional, or clerical nature is performed for
purposes of providing direct transactions of business or services to
consumers, exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage or processing of
merchandise, other than limited incidental merchandise. Examples
include accounting, attorney, insurance, real estate or architectural.
Typically characterized by no walk-in retail consumer sales or
production/manufacturing of any physical products for sale. May also
include accessory use for the employees such as cafeterias, coffee
shops and other convenience-related services.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM
by Art. 25]
OPEN LOT STORAGE — Outdoor storage of bulk goods and products
for distribution but not for sale on the premises.
OPEN SPACE, LANDSCAPED — That part or parts of a lot designed and
developed with trees, plants, shrubs, flowers, grass, ground cover and
45.Editor's Note: The former definition of "nursery school," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25.
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:301
other landscape features, including natural features of the site, walks,
terraces and open areas otherwise free of any structures or pavement.
Such landscaped open space as is provided shall be maintained by the
owner throughout the duration of his or her tenure.
PARKING GARAGE/STRUCTURE — A structure of any combination of
materials assembled, constructed, erected or maintained at a fixed
location and placed permanently or temporarily in, on or above the
ground serving as an accessory use to a commercial or industrial
establishment and is primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles
operated by the customers, visitors and employees of such an
establishment. This term does not include municipal
structures.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
PARKING LOT/AREA — An off-street area, including parking spaces,
loading areas and all associated maneuvering areas such as aisles,
serving as an accessory use for the parking of vehicles and available
to the public as an accommodation for clients, customers or
employees.[Added 4-28-2008 ATM by Art. 20]
RECHARGE AREA — An area of geologic deposits through which water
from the surface can infiltrate through the soil to the groundwater.
These geologic deposits generally consist of stratified sand and gravels.
REFUSE INCINERATOR — An engineered apparatus with grate area in
excess of 10 square feet used to burn waste and in which all combustion
factors, temperature, retention time, turbulence and combustion can be
controlled and which is approved by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health and the Chelmsford Board of Health.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES — Are those used
primarily for research, development and/or testing of innovative
information, concepts, methods, processes, materials, or products. This
can include the design, development, and testing of biological,
chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical components
in advance of product manufacturing. The accessory development,
fabrication, and light manufacturing of prototypes, or specialized
machinery and devices integral to research or testing may be
associated with these uses. Research and development related
principally to computer software is not included in this
definition.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof containing tables and/
or booths which is designed, intended and used for the indoor sale
and consumption of food prepared on the premises and typically
characterized by table service with waiters and reusable dinnerware,
except that food may be consumed outdoors in landscaped terraces
designed for dining purposes which are adjuncts to the main indoor
restaurant facility. The term "restaurant" shall not include fast-food
establishments.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment whose principal
business is the sale of preprepared or rapidly prepared food directly
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:302
to the customer in a ready-to-consume state intended for large volume
with consumption either within the restaurant building or off premises
which, because of the nature of the operation, causes a large volume
or frequent turnover of customers. Typically characterized by ordering
food at a counter, self-service or semi-self-service, a menu board rather
than individual menus, payment prior to consumption of food, no table
service with waiters and disposable containers and utensils are
provided rather than reusable dinnerware.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM
by Art. 25]
RETAIL — A business that provides goods and/or services directly to
the consumer where such goods are available for immediate purchase
from the premises by the customer. This term includes electronic sales
of all kinds.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where horses are kept for
sale, riding, driving or stabling for compensation or incidental to the
operation of a club, association or similar establishment.
SALVAGE YARD — Property where motor vehicles are junked,
dismantled or stored for later dismantling or distribution.
SANITARY LANDFILL — A site for solid waste disposal approved by
the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of
Waste Prevention, and the Chelmsford Board of Health. Disposal of raw
sewage and similar waste items is not permitted.[Amended 4-25-2005
ATM by Art. 26]
SELF-STORAGE MINI WAREHOUSE — A building consisting of
individual self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage
of business and household goods. Business goods are limited to those
not associated with any office, retail or other business or commercial
use within the self-storage warehouse facility.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM
by Art. 25]
SENIOR or ELDER — An individual who is 60 years of age or over.
SIGN — Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of
persons not on the premises on which the device is located. Any
building surfaces other than windows that are internally illuminated or
decorated with gaseous tube or other lights are considered signs. The
following, however, shall not be considered signs within the context of
this chapter:
Flags and insignia of any government. A flag is defined as a piece of
cloth or similar material, varying in size, shape, color and design,
attached at one edge to a staff or cord, used as the symbol of a
nation, state or other governmental entity. [Amended 10-15-2018
ATM by Art. 16]
(1)
Legal notices or informational devices erected or required by
public agencies.
(2)
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:303
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest horizontally or vertically
oriented rectangle which could enclose all the display area of the sign,
together with any backing different in color or material from the finish
material of the building face, without deduction for open space or other
irregularities. Structural members not bearing advertising matter shall
not be included unless internally or decoratively lighted. Only one side
of flat, back-to-back signs need be included in calculating sign area.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY (COMMERCIAL) — A solar
photovoltaic system, as a principal use, with 250 kW or larger of rated
nameplate capacity that is mounted on the ground and used to generate
electric power onto the electrical grid principally for commercial
sale.[Added 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 29]
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY — A refuse transfer station,
composting plant, solid waste recycling operation and any other works
or use approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Solid Waste, and the Board of Health of the
Town of Chelmsford for processing, handling, treating and disposing
of solid or liquid waste materials, including garbage, rubbish, junk,
discarded bulk items and sludges but not raw sewage and similar waste
items.[Amended 4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 26]
STREET — An accepted Town way or a way established by or
maintained under county, state or federal authority or a way established
by a subdivision plan approved in accordance with the Subdivision
Control Law46 or a way determined by the Planning Board to have
sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide
for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the
Temporary devices erected for a charitable or religious cause,
provided that they are removed within seven days of erection.
(3)
Temporary displays inside windows, covering not more than 30% of
the window area, illuminated by building illumination only.
(4)
Standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form
the name, type and price of gasoline.
(5)
Integral decorative or architectural features of a building, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or parts internally illuminated or
decorated with gaseous tube or other lights.
(6)
Devices identifying a building as distinct from one or more of
its occupants, such device being carved into or attached in such
a way as to be an integral part of the building, not illuminated
separate from building illumination, without color contrasting with
sign background and not exceeding four square feet in area.
(7)
Address identification through numerals or letters not exceeding
three inches in height.
(8)
46.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:304
land and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land
and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed
location to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework,
retaining wall (over four feet in height), tent, deck, porch, sign,
swimming pools, flagpole, mast for radio antenna or the like. Excludes
paved surfaces such as parking areas, driveways, walkways and
patios.[Amended 4-30-2012 ATM by Art. 25]
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure without any foundation or
footings to be removed within a twelve-month time period. Said
structure shall conform to the requirements of the Table of Dimensional
Requirements47 and shall receive a permit from the Inspector of
Buildings.[Amended 4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 26]
TOXIC MATERIAL — A combination of pollutants, including diseasecarrying
agents, which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation and assimilation into any organism can cause death, disease,
mutations, deficiencies or malfunctions in such organisms or their
offspring.
TRANSPORT TERMINAL — Terminal facilities for handling freight, with
or without maintenance facilities.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials for distribution but not for sale on the premises.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICE — The provision of cellular
telephone service, personal communication service and enhanced
mobile radio service.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Monopoles, satellite
dishes over three feet in diameter, antennas and accessory structures
which facilitate the provision of wireless communication service.
WOOD OPERATION — Forests, wood lots, portable woodworking mills
and machinery located on the property for use in connection with the
forest and wood lot operations of the owner only, with products stored
not within 100 feet of the street line.
YARD — A space open to the sky, located between a building or
structure and a lot line, unoccupied except by fences, walls, poles,
paving and other customary yard accessories.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and the nearest point of the building.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear line of the lot and the nearest part of the main
building projected to the side line of the lot.
47.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Requirements is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 195-108 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-108
180:305
YARD, SIDE — A yard situated between the nearest point of the building
and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side
line.
§ 195-108 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-108
180:306
ARTICLE XXI
Community Enhancement and Investment Overlay District
[Added 10-21-2013 ATM by Art. 16]
§ 195-109. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of the Community Enhancement and Investment
Overlay District (CEIOD) are as follows:
To provide an incentive for property reuse and redevelopment through
regulatory flexibility and a streamlined permitting process that results
in reduced impacts in the community;
A.
To prevent deterioration of land and buildings that have become
obsolete for their original purposes by allowing reuse for other
economic and civic opportunities, including but not limited to
residential uses, commercial uses and mixed uses;
B.
To facilitate the redevelopment of vacant and underutilized commercial
and industrial properties in a manner that enhances the municipal tax
base while ensuring that redevelopment meets the Town's standards for
design and construction and neighborhood character;
C.
To encourage entrepreneurship, the expansion of small businesses,
and support the growth and enhancement of commercial districts in
Chelmsford;
D.
To encourage appropriate site design that enhances and promotes
desirable development patterns, improves internal accessibility and
connectivity, reduces curb cuts through shared access to public ways,
consolidates parcels and incorporates open space when appropriate
and feasible;
E.
To encourage high-quality development to protect and enhance the
value of real property, provide high-quality architecture that reflects
an appropriate community character, and site planning in a manner
compatible and in context with surrounding neighborhoods or business
districts;
F.
To encourage aesthetic enhancements where currently deficient,
including, but not limited to, improvements to landscaping along public
ways;
G.
To encourage environmental protection such as best practices in
stormwater management and redevelopment to ensure compliance
with Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
stormwater regulations to the maximum extent feasible; and
H.
To increase compliance with zoning standards particularly for those
sites and buildings that predate current zoning standards such as
landscaping, parking, lighting, and signage.
I.
§ 195-109 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-110
180:307
§ 195-110. Types of overlay district projects.
There are four types of Community Enhancement and Investment Overlay
District (CEIOD) projects as defined below. The Planning Board shall
determine whether the project is a qualified CEIOD project and which type
of CEIOD project a proposed development qualifies as in accordance with
§ 195-119B.
§ 195-111. Applicability.
Adaptive reuse project (ARP). This type of project involves the
renovation, rehabilitation and reuse of an existing building (or
significant portion thereof) and site. This may include a municipal,
institutional, residential, commercial, or industrial building or other
buildings originally designed or intended for uses that are no longer
viable due to certain building design characteristics or conditions.
A.
Commercial or industrial redevelopment project (CIRP). This type of
project involves the partial or complete demolition of an existing
building and/or parking area and the construction of a new building
and/or parking area.
B.
Residential reuse or redevelopment project (RRRP). This type of project
allows for the conversion of all or a portion of an existing commercial
property into a residential use. The purpose of RRRPs is to encourage
a range of housing opportunities to replace underutilized or obsolete
commercial or industrial properties to meet existing and anticipated
housing needs, where such residential use is appropriate and would
contribute to the livelihood or economic viability of the surrounding
neighborhood.
C.
Sustainable infill development project (SIDP). This type of project
involves new construction on infill and redevelopment sites with the
intent of fulfilling economic potential while providing a high-quality
development designed to improve the pedestrian environment through
sidewalks/footpaths, streetscape enhancements, and other amenities.
D.
Location of districts. The Community Enhancement and Investment
Overlay District (CEIOD) is hereby established as an overlay district
in the CA, CB, CC, CD and IA Zoning Districts and as shown on the
Town's Zoning Map. The various projects (ARP, CIRP, RRRP, or SIDP)
must satisfy the standards defined in this Article XXI. CEIOD projects
may be permitted only on eligible properties as defined below.
A.
Eligible properties for CEIOD projects. CEIOD projects may be
permitted under the following circumstances:
On a property where a CEIOD project will alter or change a
preexisting, nonconforming use, structure or parking lot.
(1)
B.
§ 195-110 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-111
180:308
On a site or building determined by the Planning Board to be
vacant, obsolete, underutilized and qualified as one of the CEIOD
project types in § 195-110 above.
(2)
CEIOD projects allowed by right. A CEIOD project is by right if it meets
all of the following criteria (as applicable):
If the project will alter or change a preexisting, nonconforming use
or structure, it will not increase the nonconforming nature of the
use or structure, as provided in § 195-8 of the Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
If the project involves a change of use from one use category to
another, the gross square footage of the use does not exceed the
original use.
(2)
The project is within 80% compliance with parking ratio standards
as provided in § 195-17.
(3)
The alteration of an existing parking lot that will be more compliant
than the existing conditions or the construction of a parking lot that
is within 50% of compliance with §§ 195-21A, 195-44A, 195-44C
and 195-45 pertaining to perimeter parking area setbacks and
landscaping.
(4)
If the project involves a conversion of existing gross square footage
from a nonresidential use to a residential use, the project shall not
include more than a maximum of eight dwelling units.
(5)
Total project building area does not exceed 20,000 gross square
feet.
(6)
(7) Not more than two primary structures on a lot.
The project is within 80% compliance with each of the underlying
and applicable dimensional requirements (see Table 1 below).48
(8)
Any project which involves the new construction of four or fewer
residential units.
(9)
C.
CEIOD projects requiring a special permit. A CEIOD project requires a
special permit if it meets any of the following criteria (as applicable):
The project will alter or change a preexisting, nonconforming use
or structure that will increase the nonconforming nature of the use
or structure as provided in § 195-8 of the Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
The project involves more than 20,000 gross square feet of total
development.
(2)
A conversion of existing gross square footage from a nonresidential
use to a residential use which exceeds eight new dwelling units.
(3)
D.
48.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-111 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-111
180:309
§ 195-112. Use regulations.
The existing Use Regulation Schedule (Chapter 195, Attachment 1) of the
Zoning Bylaw shall be applicable to CEIOD projects within the underlying
zoning districts. Where a CEIOD requires a special permit under the Use
Regulation Schedule, the Planning Board shall be the special permit
granting authority.
§ 195-113. Residential uses.
Within the CEIOD Overlay, multifamily residential units are permitted,
except in the IA Zoning District. Multifamily residential units may be
allowed in a separate building or in combination with commercial uses by
the Planning Board where the project is in keeping with the district and
surrounding neighborhood and otherwise in compliance with this article.
Single-family and two-family dwellings are not permitted. All multifamily
dwelling units shall comply with the following minimum gross floor area
requirements unless the Planning Board authorizes a reduction by special
permit.
(4) More than two primary structures on a lot.
The construction of a parking lot that is less than 50% compliant
with §§ 195-21A, 195-44A, 195-44C and 195-45 pertaining to
perimeter parking area setbacks and landscaping.
(5)
Any project which involves the new construction of five or more
residential units.
(6)
Relationship with other zoning provisions. Unless specifically governed
in the CEIOD Overlay, all other zoning provisions of the Chelmsford
Zoning Bylaw, Chapter 195, shall remain in full force and effect and
shall neither be modified, repealed nor amended by this article. This
includes, but is not limited to, Article XI, Major Business Complexes;
Article XIII, Wireless Communications Facilities; Article XIV, Aquifer
Protection District; and Article XV, Floodplain District. Where the
CEIOD provisions are silent on a zoning rule or regulation, the
requirements of the underlying district shall apply, unless another
interpretation was clearly intended. See § 195-119A(3) for procedural
requirements.
E.
Residential projects or four or more units, including increasing an
existing project by four or more residential units, or a conversion of
other uses to a residential use with four or more units, are subject
to the requirements of Article XXIII, Inclusionary Housing Bylaw, as
applicable. [Added 10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 17]
F.
A. Studio unit: 500 square feet.
B. One-bedroom unit: 700 square feet.
C. Two-bedroom unit: 900 square feet.
§ 195-111 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-113
180:310
§ 195-114. Dimensional regulations for buildings and structures.
[Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 18]
CEIOD projects shall be in compliance with the by-right dimensional
requirements as stated in § 195-111C(8) in accordance with Table 1 - Site
and Building Dimensional Standards for CEIOD Projects. However, the
Planning Board may, by special permit, provide further relief from the
dimensional requirements in Table 1 for any project under the following
conditions:
§ 195-115. Parking standards.
The existing parking standards in Article V shall remain applicable to
CEIOD projects with the exceptions as set forth in § 195-111C and D above.
The Planning Board may further reduce the standards by special permit
under the following conditions:
D. Three-bedroom unit: 1,200 square feet.
Side yard setbacks may be reduced to five feet where the project does
not abut a residential use.
A.
Adjacent to residential uses, minimum twenty-five-foot side and rear
yard setbacks shall be provided.
B.
A minimum frontage of 50 feet may be permitted where adjoining
lots have a legally binding agreement to share a single access to a
public street, or in larger developments where shared driveways on the
multiple parcels result in a more desirable redevelopment.
C.
A special permit from the Planning Board is required when proposing
to create new lots via subdivision. Any new lots created via the overlay
dimensional requirements shall be required to be permitted for
development in accordance with the overlay.
D.
Parking spaces. Residential off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the following minimum requirements:
Multifamily dwelling units: one space per studio unit, 1.5 spaces
per one-bedroom unit, two spaces per unit with two or three
bedrooms; plus one visitor space for every three units.
(1)
Age-restricted dwelling unit: 1.5 spaces per unit, except that for an
assisted living facility, there shall be an average of 0.5 space per
unit; plus one visitor space for every five units.
(2)
(3) Other uses: in accordance with Article V.
Mixed uses. Requirements for each use shall be added, unless the
Planning Board determines that a smaller number is adequate for
the proposed development, subject to the requirements of Article
V.
(4)
A.
§ 195-113 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-115
180:311
§ 195-116. Landscaping.
The existing landscape standards in Article IX shall remain applicable to
CEIOD projects with the exceptions as set forth in § 195-111C(4) and
195-111D(5) above. The Planning Board may further reduce the standards
by special permit under the following conditions:
§ 195-117. Signage.
Within a CEIOD project, signage shall comply with the standards in Article
VII and the applicable design standards in § 195-118C below. The Planning
Board may issue a special permit in relief of standards in Article VII.
§ 195-118. Performance standards.
Reduced parking. For a CEIOD project, the Planning Board may
authorize a decrease in the required number of off-street parking
spaces, subject to the requirements under Article V.
B.
Location of parking areas. No off-street parking shall be located
between the front facade of the building and the front property line,
except that the Planning Board may waive this requirement for an
existing parking lot serving a CEIOD project, based on the
requirements of Article V.
C.
Pedestrian safety. Walkways shall be provided in appropriate locations
on the site and shall be clearly recognizable through the use of raised,
textured or color surface treatments.
D.
Minimum of 10 feet along street frontage. This may include a
combination of streetscape, landscape and other treatments for the
purpose of outdoor seating and public amenities.
A.
Minimum of 15 feet along side and rear lot lines where abutting
residential uses.
B.
Minimum of five feet along side and rear lot lines where not abutting
residential uses.
C.
General. All CEIOD projects shall be consistent with the following
general performance standards:
The project is in harmony with the objectives and intent of the
Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw and more specifically the purpose and
intent set forth in § 195-109;
(1)
The project will not negatively impact developed areas in the
surrounding area, nor unreasonably impact existing streets,
municipal facilities, public utilities, drainage systems, soil and
other natural resources;
(2)
The project is superior to that possible under the conventional
standards and requirements of the underlying zone(s);
(3)
A.
§ 195-115 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-118
180:312
The project makes appropriate provisions for the preservation of
floodplains, wetlands, streams and stream banks, hillsides,
significant stands of trees, endangered and threatened species and
their habitat, and other natural resource areas;
(4)
The proposed development meets the stated intent of the particular
CEIOD project type as set forth in § 195-110; and
(5)
(6) The project is consistent with the Design Guidelines.
Specific. All CEIOD projects requiring special permits shall be
consistent with the following specific performance standards, as
applicable:
Housing, public transportation and parking improvements, and
utility infrastructure enhancements. The project offers long-term
public benefits to the Town and adjacent neighborhoods such as:
(a) Improved access and enhancements to public transportation;
(b) Enhancements to parking, traffic, and roadways;
On- and off-site improvements to pedestrian and bicycle
facilities, particularly as they facilitate access to the site by
foot or bicycle;
(c)
(d) Public safety improvements;
(e) Affordable housing opportunities; and
(f) Water and sewer infrastructure enhancements.
(1)
Compatibility and integration with its surroundings. The project
has been designed to ensure appropriate street- or ground-level
commercial uses. The integration requirements of this paragraph
shall apply to the various elements of the project in relation to each
other as well as to the project in relation to its neighbors.
(2)
Improved access nearby. Pedestrian and vehicular access routes
and driveway widths, which shall be determined by the Planning
Board, are appropriately designed between the project and
abutting parcels and streets, with consideration to streetscape
continuity and an intent to avoid adverse impacts on adjacent
neighborhoods from such traffic and other activities generated by
the project as well as to improve traffic and access in nearby
neighborhoods.
(3)
Excellence in place-making. The project provides a high-quality
architectural design so as to enhance the visual and civic quality of
the site and the overall experience for residents of and visitors to
both the project and its surroundings.
(4)
Comprehensive signage program. All signage for a project shall
be in accordance with a comprehensive signage plan and shall
(5)
B.
§ 195-118 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-118
180:313
§ 195-119. Application review procedures.
not be inconsistent with the architectural quality of the project or
character of the streetscape.
Pedestrian scale. The project provides building footprints and
articulations appropriately scaled to encourage outdoor pedestrian
circulation; features buildings with appropriately spaced streetlevel
windows and entrances; includes appropriate provisions for
crossing all driveway entrances and internal roadways; and allows
pedestrian access appropriately placed to encourage walking to
and through the development site.
(6)
Public gathering space. The project creates civic and publically
accessible spaces as pedestrian-oriented destinations that
accommodate a variety of uses and promote a vibrant street life
making connections to the surrounding neighborhood, as well as to
the commercial and residential components of the project to other
commercial activity, and to each other.
(7)
Pedestrian and neighborhood considerations. If the project
proposes any measures such as the measures listed below, and
if such measures, singly or in combination, create a substantial
negative impact on pedestrians or surrounding neighborhoods, the
applicant has proposed feasible mitigation measures to eliminate
such substantial negative impact:
Widening or addition of roadway travel or turning lanes or
conversion of on-street parking to travel lanes;
(a)
Removal of pedestrian crossings, bicycle lanes, or roadway
shoulder;
(b)
(c) Traffic signal additions or alterations; and
(d) Relocation or alterations to public transport access points.
(8)
Design standards. The project is compliant, as deemed applicable by
the Planning Board.
C.
General requirements.
No building permit shall be issued for any CEIOD project unless the
Planning Board has issued a decision.
(1)
Submission requirements and public hearing procedures shall be in
accordance with the Planning Board's Site Plan and Special Permit
Rules and Regulations (SPSPRR), the Planning Board's Design
Standards and Guidelines (DSG) and the requirements of this
article, as applicable.
(2)
For projects requiring one or more special permits related to use,
dimensions, parking, landscaping and any other provisions of this
(3)
A.
§ 195-118 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-119
180:314
Zoning Bylaw, the Planning Board shall conduct a consolidated
public hearing process. This provision pertains to all special
permits, whether associated with the CEIOD Overlay or other
sections of the Zoning Bylaw. All special permits shall be
incorporated into the CEIOD review and decision process. A single
special permit decision shall be issued.
The submission shall include any supplemental plans or drawings
necessary to demonstrate compliance with the Design Standards
and Guidelines (DSG).
(4)
Any project located within an Historic District shall be referred
to the Chelmsford Historic District Commission for review and
comment.
(5)
Any project that includes a building over 75 years of age shall be
referred to the Chelmsford Historical Commission for review and
comment.
(6)
Any project that proposes a residential use shall be referred to the
Housing Advisory Board for review and comment.
(7)
The Planning Board may adopt additional administrative
regulations and procedures to further implement this section.
(8)
All projects shall be submitted to the Chelmsford Commission on
Disabilities for review and comment for compliance with 521 CMR
Regulations.
(9)
Finding of applicability and preliminary concept plan review and
approval.
Finding of applicability. The Planning Board, upon preliminary
submission and presentation from the applicant, shall determine
whether the proposed type, size and location meet the criteria for
a CEIOD project under § 195-110. If a positive finding is made, the
project will be classified as a CEIOD project. This determination
shall specify that the proposed project shall be permitted by right
or reviewed under the special permit procedures. A preliminary
concept plan shall be submitted in order to make a finding of
applicability.
(1)
Preliminary submission elements. A CEIOD preliminary submission
shall include:
A vicinity map adequately depicting the proposed development
in context with the surrounding area.
(a)
A base map at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet
showing property lines and names of adjacent owners; general
topography, including steep slopes over 15% in grade; flood
hazard areas, designated inland wetlands and watercourses;
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 195-119 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-119
180:315
existing public utility lines and public facilities; and existing
street widths and general layout.
A concept layout of existing and proposed buildings and their
proposed uses, streets, parking areas, open spaces,
landscaping and screening, as well as any proposed
improvements to existing facilities.
(c)
Project narrative: evidence supporting a by-right or specialpermit
project and applicability of the CEIOD project type.
(d)
Evaluation. The Planning Board, based upon the preliminary
submission and presentation from the applicant, shall evaluate
the project for its appropriateness for the proposed location; to
demonstrate its effects and impacts on the surrounding area and
development, streets, and other municipal facilities, public utilities
and transportation, drainage systems, soil and other natural
resources; and to show compliance with this article.
(3)
Time to make finding. Within 60 days from the date the Planning
Board firsts meets to consider the preliminary submission, the
Planning Board shall file its finding of applicability in writing with
the Town Clerk. This time period may be extended by agreement of
the Board and the applicant.
(4)
In the event the applicant disagrees with such determination, it
may request a reconsideration supported by a statement of facts.
The Board's determination on such reconsideration shall be final.
The foregoing does not preclude an applicant from filing a proposal
for a different project on the same site.
(5)
Expiration. A finding of applicability shall be valid for two years
from the date of the Board's determination, within which time the
applicant must submit an application for final approval. If no such
application is filed, the determination shall lapse.
(6)
Decisions.
By-right projects. When no special permits are required, the
Planning Board shall close the public hearing within 90 days from
the opening of the public hearing and shall issue a decision within
30 additional days from the close of the hearing. The decision shall
be based upon the performance standards in § 195-118A.
(1)
Special-permit projects. The Planning Board shall close the public
hearing within 120 days from the opening of the public hearing
and shall issue a decision within 30 additional days from the close
of the hearing. The decision shall be based upon the performance
standards in § 195-118A and B. In addition, the decision shall
include specific findings, as applicable, under § 195-111E, for
special permits not specifically governed in this article.
(2)
C.
§ 195-119 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-119
180:316
§ 195-120. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
Decisions related to a project and any associated special permits
shall be reviewed in their totality rather than individually.
(3)
The above time periods may be extended by agreement of the
Planning Board and the applicant.
(4)
The Planning Board may include reasonable conditions as part of a
decision.
(5)
Modifications to approvals. A public hearing shall be required when
a modification to an approved project falls into one or more of the
following categories:
Substantial changes to the alignment of arterial or collector streets
and/or their off-site connection points;
(1)
Substantial changes in the composition of the various uses, such
that the proportion of any element such as retail or residential
increases or decreases by 10% or more;
(2)
Substantial changes to approved architectural design, building
types, or construction materials;
(3)
(4) Substantial changes to the transportation system;
Substantial changes to an approved phasing plan that have the
potential to negatively impact the provision of public services; or
(5)
Any other substantial changes to the character or intensity of an
approved application that the Community Development Director,
Building Commissioner, or Town Engineer cannot otherwise
interpret or approve.
(6)
D.
Expiration and completion. The approved project shall be substantially
commenced and diligently continued toward completion within two
years of approval. In the event the Planning Board determines that
substantial commencement and continued progress has not been made
within two years, the project approval shall become invalid and
construction shall cease unless and until the Planning Board reviews
and grants an extension of such construction period, with or without
additional conditions. The Planning Board may extend the time period
requirements of this section for up to two years, not to exceed 10
additional years in the case of a final approval.
E.
§ 195-119 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-120
180:317

ARTICLE XXII
Village Center Overlay District
[Amended 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 23]
§ 195-121. Purpose and intent.
The general purpose of Village Center Overlay District (VCOD) is to
maintain character and enhance vitality in Chelmsford's traditional village
center. These regulations are established to promote sustainable mixed-use
development as appropriate in the VCOD, in order that future development
will be compatible with the historic settlement patterns, traditional
architecture, and landscape character. These regulations are intended to
create strong relationships between building forms, civic spaces, and
streetscape design which are integrated, connected and complementary.
The VCOD regulations are intended to:
§ 195-122. Districts on Official Zoning Map.
The Village Center Overlay District is identified on the Town of Chelmsford
Official Zoning Map in § 195-3 of the Zoning Bylaw which is available at the
Town of Chelmsford Community Development Department, and is on file at
the Town Clerk's Office.
§ 195-123. Applicability.
Facilitate the development of an appropriate mix of uses within the
context of a traditional pedestrian-oriented development pattern;
A.
Create a safe, accessible, convenient, attractive and highly functional
environment that meets the needs of local residents and visitors as a
place to live, work, recreate, socialize, and obtain necessary goods and
services;
B.
Coordinate the safe circulation and access of private vehicles, public
transit, bicycles, and pedestrians through a network of streets,
sidewalks and paths connecting neighborhoods, employment centers,
open spaces, and areas of activity within the VCOD;
C.
Protect and expand opportunities for small locally owned businesses
and other entrepreneurial activity that primarily but not exclusively
serves local neighborhoods and surrounding community; and
D.
Encourage flexibility and variety in future development while ensuring
preservation of and compatibility with historic fabric.
E.
General application. The Village Center Overlay District (VCOD) is
hereby established as an overlay district and is applicable to the CV,
CC, CD, RC, RB and P Zoning Districts as identified within the VCOD
on the Official Zoning Map. Projects are allowed within the VCOD that
would not otherwise be allowed in the underlying zoning district, and
as such VCOD projects must satisfy the standards defined in this article
A.
§ 195-121 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-123
180:319
§ 195-124. Uses and performance standards.
and may be permitted by right or by special permit, with restrictions
and conditions, when certain thresholds are met as defined below.
Relationship with the Community Enhancement and Investment
Overlay District (CEIOD). Properties located within the VCOD are not
eligible for permitting within the CEIOD, Article XXI.
B.
Relationship with other zoning provisions. Unless specifically modified
by the requirements for the VCOD, all other zoning provisions of the
Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw, Chapter 195, shall remain in full force and
effect and shall neither be modified, repealed nor amended by this
article. This includes, but is not limited to, Article XI, Major Business
Complexes; Article XIII, Wireless Communications Facilities; Article
XIV, Aquifer Protection District; and Article XV, Floodplain District.
Where the VCOD provisions are silent on a zoning rule or regulation,
the requirements of the underlying district shall apply, unless another
interpretation was clearly intended. See § 195-130 for procedural
requirements.
C.
Residential projects or four or more units, including increasing an
existing project by four or more residential units, or a conversion of
other uses to a residential use with four or more units, are subject
to the requirements of Article XXIII, Inclusionary Housing Bylaw, as
applicable. [Added 10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 17]
D.
Table of uses. The existing Use Regulation Schedule (Chapter 195,
Attachment 1) of the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw shall be applicable to
VCOD projects within the underlying zoning districts. Where a VCOD
project requires a special permit under the Use Regulation Schedule,
the Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority.
A.
VCOD projects allowed by right. A project will be allowed by right
with an approved site plan if it meets all of the following criteria (as
applicable):
The project will alter or change a preexisting, nonconforming use
or structure, but will not increase the nonconforming nature of the
use or structure, as provided in § 195-8 of the Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
The project involves a change of use from one use category to
another, but the gross square footage of the new use does not
exceed the original use.
(2)
The project is within 50% compliance, if located within the
underlying CV district, or 80% compliance, if located outside the
underlying CV district, with parking ratio standards as provided in
§ 195-17.
(3)
B.
§ 195-123 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-124
180:320
The project involves a conversion of existing gross square footage
from a nonresidential use to an exclusively residential use, and
does not include more than eight dwelling units.
(4)
The total project building area does not exceed 10,000 gross
square feet.
(5)
The project does not include more than two primary structures on
a lot.
(6)
The project involves the new construction of four or fewer
residential units.
(7)
VCOD projects requiring a special permit. A project requires a special
permit with an approved site plan if it meets any of the following
criteria (as applicable):
The project will alter or change a preexisting, nonconforming use
or structure, and will increase the nonconforming nature of the use
or structure, as provided in § 195-8 of the Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
The project involves more than 10,000 gross square feet of total
development.
(2)
The project involves a conversion of existing gross square footage
from a nonresidential use to a residential use which exceeds eight
new dwelling units.
(3)
(4) The project includes more than two primary structures on a lot.
The project involves the new construction of five or more
residential units.
(5)
C.
Residential dwelling unit performance standards. Within the VCOD,
residential housing is permitted per Tables 1 and 2.49 All dwelling units
shall comply with the following minimum net floor area requirements,
measured as living area, unless the Planning Board authorizes a
reduction by special permit.
(1) Studio unit: 500 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom unit: 700 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom unit: 900 square feet.
(4) Three-bedroom unit: 1,200 square feet.
D.
Frontage zones and ground floor limitations. The VCOD map includes
frontage zones which are the contiguous land area along the primary
public streets within the underlying CV district. Buildings fronting
and oriented toward these streets are targeted for commercial and
mixed commercial/residential use. These properties shall have a ground
E.
49.Editor's Note: Tables 1 and 2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 195-124 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-124
180:321
floor limitation (See diagram below.) allowing only commercial uses
permitted by right or special permit to occupy the ground floor area.
Residential uses shall not occupy the ground floor of a building in the
portion of said building within the first 40 feet of lot depth measured
from the public street right-of-way. Residential and other uses allowed
in the underlying zoning district may be located in the upper floors
within the frontage zone and at ground level at more than 40 feet in lot
depth and outside the frontage zone. Street entrances may be allowed
to residential uses above the ground floor within the frontage zone or
at the side or rear of the building beyond the frontage zone.
Example Frontage Zone and Commercial Ground Floor
Limitation Diagram
The purpose of the frontage zone and ground floor limitations is to
maintain and preserve the commercial character and opportunity
along designated public street corridors within the Center Village
Zoning District.
Property fronting on Beaver Brook. In accordance with the Center
Village Master Plan Report, dated December 3, 2013, public access to
Beaver Brook is deemed a public interest and a high priority. As such,
properties with frontage on Beaver Brook shall be required to set back
all new buildings and parking a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the
bank, as defined in the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act50 and
its regulations. In exchange for providing a public benefit the applicant
shall receive a benefit of a residential unit and/or commercial squarefoot
build-out bonus, beyond the by-right and special permit project
thresholds in § 195-124B and C as applicable, may be granted by the
Planning Board under the following conditions:
Up to 25% if an easement for public use is granted to the Town a
width of 25 feet from the top of the bank.
(1)
In addition to Subsection F(1) above, up to an additional 25% if a
multipurpose pathway is constructed, by the applicant, within the
(2)
F.
50.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A.
§ 195-124 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-124
180:322
§ 195-125. Building and lot development standards.
easement, a minimum width of 12 feet and of an acceptable base
and surface material.
Up to 50%, where an existing property is modified, such as the
removal or portion thereof of a building and/or parking area, that
would result in Subsection F(1) and/or (2) above.
(3)
The Planning Board may approve a payment in lieu of option
Subsection F(1) and (2) above. Such payment to the Town will be
for the specific purpose of furthering the implementation of the
Beaver Brook riverfront.
(4)
Bruce Freeman Trail frontage. All new development or redevelopment
on properties abutting the Bruce Freeman Trail shall provide direct
access to the trail for those using the property. If a public easement
and clear passage is granted to the Town a width of eight feet from
the public street right-of-way to the Bruce Freeman Trail right-of-way,
a density bonus of 10% for all commercial and residential development
allowed by right or special permit in the VCOD may be granted by the
Planning Board. The Planning Board may also waive any of the above
requirements.
G.
Permitted building and lot types. These standards primarily regulate
the way that buildings in the VCOD are placed and oriented on their lots
to positively address and complement other buildings as well as streets
and civic spaces. There are seven permitted building and lot types as
identified below:
Small mixed-use building (maximum of 10,000 G.F.A of combined
commercial and residential use).
(1)
Medium mixed-use building (maximum of 20,000 G.F.A. combined
commercial and residential use).
(2)
(3) Commercial building.
(4) Live/work unit.
(5) Rowhouse or townhouse.
(6) Multifamily building.
(7) Community building and spaces.
A.
§ 195-124 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-125
180:323
Specific building and lot types and standards applicable to
projects under the VCOD are defined in Tables 1 and 251 and
indicate the building and site types permitted with a short
description of the intent, applicable underlying zoning districts,
and dimensional and design standards for each. These tables are
applicable only to the VCOD and displace Chapter 195,
Attachment 2. Character examples are provided for each building
type for illustrative purposes only. See Figure 152 for diagrams
that illustrate lot placement terminology. Except as noted, parking
spaces are to be provided on street, to the rear of the lot, or as
otherwise provided in § 195-126 below.
Building and lot requirements terminology. Table 2 contains a range of
building and lot dimensions and design requirements, some of which
are not included on the Table of Dimensional Requirements (Chapter
195, Attachment 2) which are defined below:
Side-street yard for corner lots: minimum length (in feet) between
the side-street lot line and the foundation line of an allowed
building.
(1)
Build-to-zone: the minimum and maximum distance (in feet) in
which the outermost foundation of a primary building is permitted
to sit, as measured from the back of the front yard and side-street
yard lines.
(2)
Build-to-zone occupancy: the percentage of the build-to-zone that
the primary facade is required to occupy. The minimum percentage
of building frontage required to be located in the build-to-zone
is typically increased along streets where a consistent building
face is important in creating an inviting pedestrian environment by
enclosing the street and providing an attractive streetscape.
(3)
Front parking setback: the minimum length (in feet) to the rear
of a street-facing primary building facade that any form of vehicle
parking is permitted to locate. For specific requirements regarding
the placement of parking, refer to § 195-126.
(4)
(5) Side and rear parking setback: See § 195-126.
Open space on site: the minimum and maximum percentage of lot
in open space use. See § 195-129 below.
(6)
Permitted open space types: See Section 7.0 of the Chelmsford
Design Guidelines and Standards.
(7)
Finished ground floor elevation: height (in inches) that the ground
floor at the front-facing entry must be above finished grade within
the build-to-zone.
(8)
B.
51.Editor's Note: Tables 1 and 2 are included as attachments to this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-125 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-125
180:324
Ground floor height: height (in feet, floor-to-floor) of the ground
floor of the main body of a building.
(9)
Upper floor height: height (in feet, floor-to-floor) of any non-ground
floor of the main body of a building.
(10)
Roof pitch: indicates the range of roof pitches (rise/run in inches)
permitted.
(11)
Ground floor transparency: the percentage of a building's ground
floor facade that must be glazed within the build-to-zone.
(12)
Upper floor transparency: the percentage of a building's upper
floors that must be glazed within the build-to-zone.
(13)
Front wall offset: a break in the length of a front wall where a
segment of the building facade is articulated into a specified depth
and length from the main facade. The purpose of this offset is to
reduce the scale of the building and add visual interest.
(14)
Maximum entry spacing. The length (in feet) between a building
and an adjacent building's main body entrance.
See Figure 153 for diagrams that illustrate building placement
terminology.
(15)
Use of yards and setbacks. Active uses of setback areas in the VCOD
shall be permitted for pedestrian access, outdoor accessory uses, or to
facilitate access to rear of the lot for parking and loading. Site plans
shall demonstrate that the setback area accomplishes these objectives
and creates an inviting environment for pedestrians.
Outdoor activity zones. Outdoor activities, such as dining or pocket
parks, shall be allowed and encouraged in setback areas where
applicable as accessory uses. Outdoor areas shall be attractively
designed and furnished to enhance the pedestrian environment.
Outdoor areas may be extended onto the public sidewalk with a
special permit from the Planning Board. Where outdoor dining is
located on a public sidewalk, a minimum of six feet of unobstructed
passage shall be provided for pedestrian use.
(1)
Outdoor display. Outdoor display of products available for sale
shall be permitted in association with any permitted nonresidential
principal ground floor use in accordance with the following
provisions:
Outdoor display shall occupy no more than 30% of the
horizontal length of the building facade.
(a)
Outdoor display may be located within the street yard setback
area.
(b)
(2)
C.
53.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-125 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-125
180:325
§ 195-126. Parking and loading standards.
Outdoor display may be located on a public sidewalk with
a special permit from the special permit granting authority.
Where located on a public sidewalk, the display area shall be
located within six feet of the primary building, and a minimum
of six feet of unobstructed passage shall be provided for
pedestrian use.
(c)
Outdoor display shall be removed and placed inside a fully
enclosed building at the end of each business day.
(d)
Outdoor display shall require the approval of the Historic
District Commission as applicable.
(e)
Permitted building element encroachments.
Protruding building elements in the public R-O-W. Allowable
protruding building elements include awnings, marquees,
balconies, terraces, and projecting signs. These building structures
are allowed to protrude up to four feet past the property line
into the public right-of-way provided that they are not in conflict
with parking and travel lanes, street trees, and other streetscape
furnishings. All awnings, marquees, open air balconies, and
associated projecting signs shall be a minimum of eight feet above
the ground. (Additional permits may be required from the Town of
Chelmsford.)
(1)
Front porches. Front porches may extend into the front yard
setback. Partial walls, screened areas, and railings on porches that
extend into the street yard may be no higher than 42 inches. Fully
enclosed porches are not permitted in the front yard. Porches must
remain set back at least five feet from a public street right-of-way.
(2)
Stoops. Stoops may extend into front yard setbacks up to the public
street right-of-way provided their upper platform is no higher than
42 inches above the sidewalk.
(3)
D.
Additional building and lot types. Additional building and lot types are
not permitted except by special permit from the Planning Board and
where consistent with the VCOD special permit criteria in § 195-131.
E.
Applicability. The existing parking standards in Article V shall remain
applicable unless otherwise indicated below.
A.
Parking placement. The location of parking shall be consistent with the
following requirements:
On-site parking placement. On-site parking placement shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Table 1,54
(1)
B.
54.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 195-125 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-126
180:326
permitted building and lot standards in § 195-125 above for the
applicable building and lot type.
Parking in front yard area/nonresidential and mixed use. As an
exception, parking may be allowed by special permit from the
Planning Board in the front yard under the following conditions:
Where not provided within the public street right-of-way,
parallel or angled parking may be provided on a privately
owned lot directly adjacent to the public street right-of-way.
(a)
Parking shall be in combination with a five-foot planting strip
(minimum) with street trees planted 40 feet on center; and a
five-foot minimum concrete sidewalk connecting/extending to
abutting lots and to the primary building on site.
(b)
A public easement shall be provided to the Town for use of the
internal sidewalk on private property.
(c)
(2)
Minimum off-street parking requirements. Within the underlying
Center Village Zoning District, required parking shall be reduced by
50% per § 195-98.3A. All other parking within the VCOD shall comply
with the standards and requirements of this bylaw and Article V except
for the following exceptions:
Multifamily dwelling units parking requirement: one space per
studio unit, 1.5 spaces per one-bedroom unit, two spaces per unit
with two or more bedrooms; plus one visitor space for every five
units.
(1)
Age-restricted dwelling unit parking requirement: 1.5 spaces per
unit, except that for an assisted living facility, there shall be an
average of 0.5 space per unit; plus one visitor space for every five
units.
(2)
(3) Other uses: in accordance with Article V.
Mixed uses. Requirements for each use shall be added, unless the
Planning Board determines that a smaller number is adequate for
the proposed development, subject to the requirements of Article
V.
(4)
C.
Curb cut access and management.
Number of access drives. No more than one access drive to a public
street shall be allowed per parcel. Where a parcel is located at
the corner of two public streets, access to the secondary or side
street shall be required where feasible. The Planning Board may
consider allowing up to two access drives per parcel through site
plan review.
(1)
Common access drives. Common driveways are permitted in the
VCOD and are highly encouraged.
(2)
D.
§ 195-126 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-126
180:327
§ 195-127. Landscaping.
The intent of this section is to enhancement the pedestrian experience
and provide buffers where necessary in the VCOD through landscape and
streetscape design that may include, but is not limited to: planting of trees;
pedestrian furnishings; and landscaped areas that provide a coordinated
transition between public and private space. The landscaping requirements
of this section supersede the requirements under Article IX and apply
specifically to the VCOD. The Planning Board may further reduce the below
standards by special permit.
Internal access to public ways. All VCOD developments shall
demonstrate to the Planning Board a safe means of pedestrian,
bicycle and vehicular ingress and egress from and to a public
street, sidewalk or an adjoining site where applicable.
(3)
Internal access to adjoining lots. Internal access between adjoining
lots is permitted in the VCOD and is highly encouraged. Where
shared access is combined with shared parking between adjoining
properties, buffer requirements between the lots are waived for the
purpose of designing the parking lot shared internal circulation and
shared use.
(4)
General on-site landscaping buffer requirements. Where building and/
or parking is not approved with a zero-foot setback, as applicable:
(1) Minimum of 10 feet along front yard street frontage.
(2) Minimum of five feet along the side and rear yard.
A.
Transitional buffers. The following transitional buffer requirements
apply along a perimeter lot line of the VCOD that abuts a residential
zoning district. These requirements may be waived and/or or reduced
by the Planning Board.
A required transitional buffer must be located within the outer
perimeter of the lot, parallel to and extending to the property
boundary line and must be provided along the entire frontage
immediately abutting the property line.
(1)
The width of the buffer strip is determined exclusive of any
required setback; however, the required buffer may be located
wholly or partially within a required setback.
(2)
The parking of vehicles and the placement of buildings is not
allowed in a required buffer. All required setbacks apply.
(3)
(4) No building may be located closer than 10 feet to a required buffer.
Breaks for pedestrian and vehicle access are allowed subject to
approval by the Planning Board.
(5)
B.
§ 195-126 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-127
180:328
§ 195-128. Functional design standards.
The following elements of the development proposal shall be consistent with
the Chelmsford's Planning Board Design Guidelines.
Transitional Buffer Standards
Depth (minimum) 20 feet
Wall Height (minimum) 6 feet
Shade trees (minimum per 100
feet)
5
Understory trees (minimum per
100 feet)
4
Shrubs (minimum per 100 feet) 40
Shrub height (minimum) 4 feet
Buffer walls must be constructed of high quality materials,
including one or a combination of the following: decorative blocks;
brick; stone; cast-stone; split-faced block; stucco over standard
concrete masonry blocks; glass block; or other material approved
by the Planning Board.
(6)
In the transitional buffer, 50% of required trees must be locally
adapted evergreen species. Shrubs must be evergreen and be of a
species that under typical conditions can be expected to reach a
height and spread of four feet within three years of planting. All
shrubs must be a minimum of 18 inches tall when planted.
(7)
Building and site design standards: Sections 3.0 to 4.4, 4.6 and 5.0 and
6.0 as applicable.
A.
Lighting. Outdoor site lighting shall primarily be used to provide safety
and secondarily to accent key building and landscape features. Light
fixtures shall be designed as an integral element of site design and
may be expressed through style, material or color. All lighting fixtures
designed or placed to illuminate any portion of a VCOD project shall
meet the requirements of the Chelmsford Design Guidelines and
Standards Section 4.5.
B.
§ 195-127 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-128
180:329
§ 195-129. Public and private civic space standards.
§ 195-130. Application and development review procedures.
Signage. Within the VCOD, signage shall comply with the standards
in Article VII and Section 4.7 of the Design Guidelines. The Planning
Board may issue a special permit in relief of standards in Article VII.
C.
Building systems: Section 4.8.
Roof-/wall-/ground-mounted equipment: must be screened (not visible)
from the ground level view from adjacent property or adjacent public
street right-of-way. New buildings must provide a parapet wall or
other architectural element that screens roof-mounted equipment from
ground level view. Wall-mounted equipment cannot be located on any
surface that directly faces a public right-of-way.
D.
Fences and walls. Walls and fences located outside of a required buffer
must be closed and be constructed of high quality materials, including
one or a combination of the following: wood, composite fencing;
wrought iron, PVC vinyl; or other material approved by the Planning
Board.
E.
Utilities and services. Existing aboveground utility lines and poles shall
be buried underground, or moved behind buildings where practical. All
new electrical and communication utilities in VCOD projects shall be
placed underground.
F.
Intent. The intent of these standards is to provide for a combination
of viable public and private open spaces and civic gathering areas
that benefit the community and enhance the pedestrian experience
in Chelmsford's Village Centers. Public and private civic spaces are
meant to be spaces available for the use of the property's residents or
customers.
A.
Civic and open space types. Specific public and private open space
types are allowed within the VCOD as identified in Section 7 of the
Chelmsford Design Guidelines and Standards, and are intended for the
gathering of people for passive or active recreation, entertainment, and
organized communal activities.
B.
Open space requirements. Individual property owners shall utilize a
minimum of 5% of their lot to civic or open space in one of the types
identified in Section 7 of the Chelmsford Design Guidelines and
Standards. Two or more property owners within the VCOD may create
a joint civic or open space as long as the dedicated space is accessible
to the public and amounts to a minimum of 5% of the land area of all
the properties involved.
C.
General requirements. The application and development review
requirements of Article XXI, Community Enhancement and Investment
Overlay District (CEIOD), § 195-119, shall apply to the VCOD.
A.
§ 195-128 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-130
180:330
§ 195-131. Performance standards and special permit criteria.
VCOD projects shall be consistent with § 195-118A and B, general
performance standards and special permit review criteria of the Community
Enhancement and Investment Overlay District (CEIOD) bylaw.
§ 195-132. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
Alternative compliance. In order to encourage creativity, diversity, and
best practices for public and private design and development in the
VCOD, the Planning Board may waive, modify or vary standards for
building and lot types, parking, landscaping, and open and civic space
types as set forth in this bylaw. The granting of any alternative
compliance waiver shall be based upon a finding by the Planning Board
that the proposed alternative will be generally consistent with the
purpose and intent statements in § 195-121 of this bylaw, as well as the
general and supplemental special permit criteria in § 195-131 below.
B.
§ 195-130 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-132
180:331

ARTICLE XXIII
Inclusionary Housing Bylaw
[Added 10-19-2015 ATM by Art. 17]
§ 195-133. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide for the development of affordable
housing in compliance with MGL c. 40B, § 20-23, so that the Town's stock of
affordable housing is not diluted by the creation of additional market-rate
units. It is intended that any affordable housing unit created pursuant to
this bylaw will qualify for inclusion in the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing
Inventory (SHI) under the regulations and guidelines of the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), and
therefore units must comply with these guidelines.
§ 195-134. Applicability.
This section shall apply to all projects proposed within the Article XXI,
Community Enhancement and Investment Overlay District (CEIOD), and
Article XXII, Village Center Overlay District and the Residential Multifamily
(RM) District, which involve four dwelling units or more. The Planning
Board shall, as a condition of approval, via majority vote, of any such
development require that the applicant provide affordable housing pursuant
to this bylaw and more fully described in § 195-137 below. All projects shall
be forwarded for review and comment to the Chelmsford Housing Advisory
Board and the Chelmsford Housing Authority.
§ 195-135. Definitions.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing which is restricted for sale or rent
to individuals and families within specific income ranges and sales prices
as defined by the Massachusetts Division of Housing and Community
Development (DHCD). Affordability shall be perpetual and shall be secured
by the use of an affordable housing restriction as defined in MGL c. 184,
§ 31. Affordable housing units shall count as very-low- or moderate-income
units on the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory SHI, subject to the
approval of DHCD.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION — A deed restriction for affordable
housing meeting the statutory requirements of MGL c. 184, § 31.
DEPARTMENT OR DHCD — The Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) or any successor agency.
OWNERSHIP UNITS — Shall be affordable to families with incomes not
exceeding the HUD published low-income limit (80%) for the applicable
metropolitan statistical area for Chelmsford, as published by HUD and
utilized by DHCD for regulating affordable housing programs.
RENTAL UNITS — Shall be affordable to families with incomes not
exceeding the HUD published very-low-income limit (50%) for the Lowell,
MA, HUD Metro FMR area.
§ 195-133 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-136
180:333
§ 195-136. Segmentation prohibited.
It is the intent of this bylaw to prohibit the subdivision of land or phasing
of development to avoid the application of this section. It shall be presumed
that land held in common ownership at the time of enactment of this bylaw
should be included for the purposes of calculating the number of affordable
units to be provided. It shall also be presumed that phased development
of land held in common ownership shall be considered in its totality rather
than as separate projects. These presumptions are rebuttable only upon
credible evidence to the contrary.
§ 195-137. Provision of affordable units.
The Planning Board shall require that any development, as applicable per
§ 195-134, for four or more dwelling units in a residential or mixed use
project shall be conditioned upon at least 25%, prior to any consideration
of density bonus per § 195-138E, of the units subject to this bylaw be
restricted as affordable housing units in any one or combination of methods
provided for below:
§ 195-138. Provisions applicable to affordable housing.
By constructing, rehabilitating or designating affordable housing
unit(s) on the locus subject to the application; or
A.
By constructing, rehabilitating or designating affordable housing
unit(s) on a locus different than the one subject to the application,
which is not presently included in the SHI; or
B.
By offer to and approval by the Planning Board, with input from the
Housing Advisory Board (and acceptance by the Selectmen on behalf
of the Town), of a donation of land to the Town or its designee in
fee simple, on- or off-site, that the Planning Board in its discretion
determines is suitable for the construction of affordable housing units.
Where this option is used, said land shall be compliant with zoning to
support a number of affordable housing units equal to two times the
number of units otherwise required by § 195-138C; or
C.
By offer to and acceptance by the Planning Board, with input from the
Housing Advisory Board, of a payment-in-lieu of money to the Town of
Chelmsford's Housing Stabilization Fund.
D.
At the discretion of the Planning Board, with input from the Housing
Advisory Board, and compliance with statutory requirements for the
disposition and use of Town property, by development of a qualifying
affordable housing unit on Town-owned land through rehabilitation or
new construction.
E.
Any combination of the above requirements in Subsections A through
E, provided that in no event shall the total number of units or land
area or funds provided be less than the equivalent number or value of
affordable units required by this bylaw.
F.
§ 195-136 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-138
180:334
Siting of affordable units. All affordable units constructed, rehabilitated
or designated under this bylaw shall be dispersed throughout the
development and/or community and shall, on average, be no less
accessible to public amenities, such as open space or services, than the
market-rate units.
A.
Minimum standards for affordable units. Affordable housing units
within market-rate developments shall be integrated with the rest of
the development and shall be compatible in size, number of bedrooms,
design, appearance, construction and quality of materials with other
units. Interior features of affordable units shall include similar
amenities. Off-site affordable units shall be integrated with the
neighborhood in which they are situated.
B.
Calculation and distribution of number of affordable units.
A number of affordable units equal to 25% of the total number of
units shall be provided. Fractions of units shall be rounded up to
the nearest round number.
(1)
Affordable units shall be proportionately distributed throughout
the project, in terms of location, unit numbers, size, type and
number of bedrooms.
(2)
C.
Calculation of payment in lieu of provision of affordable units.
Payment-in-lieu is intended to approximate the difference between
value of a market-rate rental or sale unit and a sale/rent-restricted
affordable unit. The table below establishes the initial payments
for each affordable unit for which a payment-in-lieu of construction
shall be made.
Type of Affordable Unit Payment in Lieu
Rental
1 bedroom $50,000
2 + bedrooms $70,000
Ownership
1 bedroom $100,000
2 + bedrooms $125,000
(1)
Annually, the Planning Board may by majority vote modify these
per-unit fees to reflect current market conditions, following a duly
noticed public hearing and consultation with the Chelmsford
Housing Authority. The schedule of fees shall be kept on file in the
Planning Office. Additionally, the Board may adjust the fee on a
project by project basis based upon evidence from the applicant
and a finding from the Board that the required fee would result
in the project being uneconomic. Prior to any finding, the Board
shall seek the input from the Housing Advisory Board and the
Chelmsford Housing Authority.
(2)
D.
§ 195-138 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-138
180:335
Density bonus. Upon a showing of exceptional design and/or public
benefits, the Planning Board may, by a special permit, authorize a
density bonus of up to 20% of the total number of dwelling units
permitted in a project. Fractions of units shall be rounded up to the
nearest round number. The affordability requirements of this bylaw do
not apply to density bonus units. The Planning Board shall consider
factors such as consistency with the Chelmsford Affordable Housing
Plan, dated December 2011, or other planning documents, unit type,
population served, site design amenities and public benefits that
integrate the project into the neighborhood in which it is located.
Density bonus units as allowed by this section shall not be applied in
addition to density bonus units permitted by other sections of the bylaw.
E.
Timing of construction or provision of affordable units or lots or
payment-in-lieu. Affordable units or the payment-in-lieu shall be
developed/provided concurrently with the development of market-rate
units. Upon a showing of good reason, the Planning Board may allow
the affordable unit(s) to be developed or restricted prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for the unit that represents 50% of the
number of units permitted in the proposed project.
F.
Marketing plan for affordable units. Applicants under this bylaw shall
submit a marketing plan, consistent with DHCD guidelines, to the
Planning Board for its approval, with advice from the Housing Advisory
Board. The plan shall describe how the affordable units will be
marketed to potential homebuyers or tenants. Subject to the approval
of DHCD, this plan shall include a lottery to be conducted by the
Chelmsford Housing Authority (or successor agency) for selecting
buyers or tenants.
G.
Local preference. At the discretion of the Planning Board, and subject
to the approval of DHCD for consistency with state and federal fair
housing requirements, up to 70% of the affordable units shall be
reserved for Chelmsford residents or employees of the Town of
Chelmsford. In the event that the applicant or future owner is unable
to sell or lease the unit to a Chelmsford resident or employee, the
Planning Board may waive this provision.
H.
Provision of affordable housing units off site. As an alternative to on-site
provision of affordable housing, an applicant subject to the bylaw may
develop, construct, rehabilitate or dedicate affordable units off site. All
requirements of this bylaw that apply to on-site provision of affordable
units shall apply to provision of off-site affordable units. The location
of the off-site units to be provided shall be approved by the Planning
Board, which shall have discretion to approve the appropriateness of a
proposed unit to be designated as off-site affordable housing.
I.
§ 195-138 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-139
180:336
§ 195-139. Maximum incomes and selling prices.
The maximum housing purchase price or rent for affordable units created
under this bylaw shall be consistent with affordability guidelines
established by DHCD or a successor agency.
§ 195-140. Preservation of affordability.
The Planning Board shall require, as a condition for approval under this
bylaw, that the applicant comply with the mandatory affordable housing
provisions and accompanying restrictions on affordability, including the
execution of a DHCD Local Initiative Program Regulatory Agreement (for
rental and homeownership units) and deed rider (for homeownership units).
The Building Inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any unit in
the project subject to this bylaw until the regulatory agreement is recorded.
§ 195-141. Project changes.
The applicant may seek modifications to an approved project by submitting
a written request for the same to the Planning Board. If the Planning Board
determines that the change is minor in nature, it may approve the change by
a simple majority vote of the Board at a regular public meeting. If the Board
determines that the change is significant, it shall hold a public hearing to
consider the change.
§ 195-142. Conflict with other bylaws.
The provisions of this section shall be considered supplemental to other
zoning bylaws. To the extent that a conflict exists between this section and
others, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
§ 195-139 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-142
180:337

ARTICLE XXIV
Route 129 Business Amenities Overlay District (BAOD)
[Added 10-24-2016 ATM by Art. 13]
§ 195-143. Purpose and intent.
The Route 129 Business Amenities Overlay District is intended to achieve
the following strategic goals and objectives:
§ 195-144. Establishment of overlay district
The location and boundaries of this overlay district are hereby established
and made part of this bylaw as shown on the Business Amenities Overlay
District Map, dated August 24, 2016.55
§ 195-145. Use regulations.
Address changing Town and regional market conditions, specifically the
desire by employers and employees within the Limited Industrial (IA)
Zoning District to have local access to goods and services, and housing;
A.
Provide access to business amenities that are limited in scope and scale
for purposes of preserving Route 129's underlying and surrounding
IA Zoning District which functions as an office and research and
development park;
B.
Promote orderly, effective and quality development and redevelopment
of Route 129;
C.
Provide housing opportunities that will be compatible and
complementary;
D.
Preserve and enhance the aesthetic qualities and characteristics of
Route 129, such as architectural style, streetscape character, open
space, connectivity, and overall business office park setting in a manner
that protects and enhances the value of real property; and
E.
Not to disturb residential neighborhoods or detract from the
appearance of the Town and will result in the maintenance of a balance
and workable relationship between the existing office / business park,
new business amenities and adjacent residential neighborhoods.
F.
The existing use Regulation Schedule (Chapter 195, Attachment 1) shall
be applicable within the underlying zoning district.
A.
Within the overlay the following uses are permitted by right:
(1) Licensed day-care facilities.
Retail stores and services; drive-throughs are permitted (excluding
single-tenant freestanding), cannot be freestanding and must be
(2)
B.
55.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Town offices.
§ 195-143 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-145
180:339
§ 195-146. Special provisions.
§ 195-147. Applicability of CEIOD to overlay district.
attached or an integral part of a principal structure, including
order panels / windows. Overhead canopies / roofs are permitted.
(3) Restaurant; no drive-throughs.
(4) Restaurant, fast-food; no drive-throughs.
Bank or financial agency; (drive-throughs are permitted (excluding
single-tenant freestanding).
(5)
(6) Health club.
(7) Car rental service; no on-site vehicle repair or light service.
(8) Parking garages / structures: accessory use / structure only.
(9) Hotel/motel.
The following uses are permitted by special permit:
(1) Multifamily (shall be subject to Article XXIII).
Retail store and services: drive-throughs for single-tenant
freestanding, may provide freestanding order panels and / or
multiple drive-throughs.
(2)
Bank or financial agency: drive-throughs for single-tenant
freestanding, may provide freestanding order panels and / or
multiple drive-throughs.
(3)
C.
The above uses Subsections B(1) through (9) and C(2) and (3) are not
permitted in the Commercial Exclusion Zone as defined in the overlay
district map.
D.
Building height. For lots directly abutting Billerica Road, in the section
from Alpha Road to the Chelmsford-Billerica Town line, as shown on
the overlay map dated August 24, 2016, nonresidential buildings may
of right be six stories but not exceeding a maximum height of 90 feet,
except by special permit.
A.
Parking garages / structures shall not be counted towards the floor area
ratio.
B.
No more than 20% of existing gross square feet of any building may
be converted to commercial uses, per § 195-145B, except by special
permit.
C.
Article XXI, Community Enhancement and Investment Overlay District
(CEIOD), shall apply to projects in the BAOD.
A.
§ 195-145 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-147
180:340
All provisions in Article XXI shall have precedence over other sections
of the Zoning Bylaw.
B.
§ 195-147 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 195-147
180:341
Part II, Regulations
Chapter 200
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 195-147 CHELMSFORD CODE § 195-147
200:342
ARTICLE I
Acceptance by Board of Health
[Adopted 10-4-1999]
§ 200-1. Acceptance of renumbering of regulations.
The Health Regulations of the Town of Chelmsford, Middlesex County,
Massachusetts, adopted by the Board of Health of the Town of Chelmsford,
as renumbered, revised and codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and
consisting of Chapter 201, Health Regulations, of the Code of the Town of
Chelmsford, are hereby approved.
§ 200-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of Chapter 201, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of regulations in force immediately prior to this acceptance of
Chapter 201, are intended as a continuation of such regulations and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior regulation. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Health of the Town of Chelmsford, and it is the
intention of said Board of Health that each such provision contained in
Chapter 201 of the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in the Code.
§ 200-3. Changes in previously adopted regulations.
In compiling and preparing the Health Regulations for renumbering
and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical and other minor
changes were made in said regulations. It is the intention of the Board
of Health that all such changes be accepted as part of the regulations
as if the regulations so changed had been previously formally adopted
to read as such.
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this enactment.
(Chapter and section number references are to the regulations as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
In § 201-7, Subsection B is amended to conform to the current
wording of MGL c. 111, § 111, and the following wording is deleted:
"When a householder knows that a person within his family or
house is sick with a disease dangerous to the public health, he
shall immediately give notice thereof to the board of health in
the manner required by the statute, (General Laws, Chapter 111,
Section 109, as amended by Chapter 265 of the Acts of 1938)
provided, however, that in cases in which a physician has been
called in his notification will be accepted in place of the
householder's notification."
(1)
B.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
200:343

ARTICLE II
Acceptance by Planning Board
[Adopted 10-13-1999]
§ 200-4. Acceptance of renumbering of regulations.
The Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Chelmsford, Middlesex County,
Massachusetts, adopted by the Planning Board of the Town of Chelmsford,
as renumbered, revised and codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and
consisting of Chapter 202, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of the Town of
Chelmsford, are hereby approved.
§ 200-5. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of Chapter 202, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of regulations in force immediately prior to this acceptance of
Chapter 202, are intended as a continuation of such regulations and not
as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date
from the date of adoption of the prior regulation. All such provisions are
hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Planning Board of the Town of Chelmsford, and it is
the intention of said Planning Board that each such provision contained in
Chapter 202 of the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in the Code.
§ 200-6. Changes in previously adopted regulations.
In compiling and preparing the Subdivision Regulations for
renumbering and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical and
other minor changes were made in said regulations. It is the intention
of the Planning Board that all such changes be accepted as part of
the regulations as if the regulations so changed had been previously
formally adopted to read as such.
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this enactment.
(Chapter and section number references are to the regulations as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
Section 202-9C is amended to delete "Planning Board Engineer"
and "Superintendent of Streets" and to add "Director of Public
Works."
(1)
Section 202-19B is amended to change "Tree Warden" to
"Department of Public Works."
(2)
B.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
200:345

ARTICLE III
Acceptance by Board of Selectmen
[Adopted 10-4-1999]
§ 200-7. Acceptance of renumbering of regulations.
The Traffic Rules and Orders of the Town of Chelmsford, Middlesex County,
Massachusetts, adopted by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Chelmsford, as renumbered, revised and codified by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapter 203, Traffic Rules and Orders,
of the Code of the Town of Chelmsford, are hereby approved.
§ 200-8. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of Chapter 203, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of regulations in force immediately prior to this acceptance of
Chapter 203, are intended as a continuation of such regulations and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior regulation. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Chelmsford, and it is the
intention of said Board of Selectmen that each such provision contained in
Chapter 203 of the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in the Code.
§ 200-9. Changes in previously adopted regulations.
In compiling and preparing the Traffic Rules and Orders for
renumbering and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical and
other minor changes were made in said regulations. It is the intention
of the Board of Selectmen that all such changes be accepted as part
of the regulations as if the regulations so changed had been previously
formally adopted to read as such.
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this enactment.
(Chapter and section number references are to the regulations as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
In § 203-1, Definitions:
The definition of "official traffic signals" is amended to change
"not inconsistent and orders" to "not inconsistent with these
rules and orders."
(a)
The definition of "official traffic signs" is amended to change
"inconsistent with these rules and order" to "not inconsistent
with these rules and orders."
(b)
The definition of "safety zone" is amended to delete "which set
apart as a safety zone."
(c)
(1)
B.
§ 200-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
200:347
In § 203-7, the wording "shall so far as practicably to uniform" is
amended to "shall so far as practicable be uniform."
(2)
Section 203-19G is amended to delete "nor within the intersection
of any street or road."
(3)
In § 203-30, the entry "Parking so as not to leave 10 feet of
unobstructed travel" is amended to add "in an alley" after
"parking," and the following new entry is added: "Parking in a
street, other than an alley, so as not to leave 18 feet of unobstructed
travel: $25."
(4)
Section 203-47, Violations and penalties, is amended to read as
follows: "Except as otherwise provided in these rules and orders,
any person violating any of the provisions of these rules and orders
or any rule or regulation made by the Board of Selectmen pursuant
thereto shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $20."
(5)
§ 200-9 CHELMSFORD CODE § 200-9
200:348
ARTICLE IV
Other Regulations
[The
following
regulations
are
not
included
in
the
Code
but
are
available
through
the
office
of
the
Town
Clerk:
the
Board
of
Appeals
Rules
of
Procedure;
the
Regulations
for
Cemeteries;
the
Historic
District
Standards;
and
the
Sewer
Commission
Regulations.]
{END OF CHAPTER}
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
200:349
Chapter 201
HEALTH REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 11.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 63.
Littering — See Ch. 84.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 132.
Solid waste — See Ch. 137.
§ 200-9 CHELMSFORD CODE § 200-9
200:350
ARTICLE I
Enforcement
§ 201-1. Inspections.
Any person, firm or corporation given a permit or issued a license in the
Town by the Board of Health shall be open at all times for inspection by said
Board or its agents.
§ 201-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of these rules and regulations shall forfeit a sum
not exceeding $100, except when otherwise provided by law or by these
regulations.
§ 201-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-2
200:351

ARTICLE II
Domestic Animals
[Amended 12-10-2018; 1-7-2019]
§ 201-3. (Reserved)
§ 201-3.1. Authority; purpose; applicability.
These regulations are adopted under the authority of MGL c. 111, § 31, as
reasonable health regulations designed to protect the health and quality
of life of those who reside within the Town of Chelmsford, the control
of disease, the abatement of nuisances, the promotion of sanitary living
conditions, and the protection of the environment from damage and
pollution. These regulations shall take effect as of the date of their approval
as indicated below. These regulations are not intended to apply to any
parcel or parcels of land used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, or accessory thereto, the use of which is governed by the
provisions of Chapter 127, Right to Farm, of the Town of Chelmsford
Bylaws. Nothing herein shall obligate the Chelmsford Board of Health to
enforce any provision of the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaws.
§ 201-3.2. Permit required; enforcement.
No person shall keep a domestic animal, as defined herein, within
the limits of the Town of Chelmsford, in any commercial structure or
residential dwelling or on any parcel of land of which he/she is the
owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, (hereinafter the "premises") without
annually obtaining a permit for the keeping of domestic animals,
(hereinafter the "permit") from the Board of Health. Said permit shall
not be transferrable as to other animals nor assignable for the use of
other persons, nor for use at other premises.
A.
In order to be granted a permit each of the following requirements must
be met at the time of the filing of the initial application, and at the time
of each annual refiling of an application as may be required hereinafter:
(1) The premises must be a single-family residential dwelling.
A fully completed application in the form to be provided by the
Board of Health to be filed together with:
At the time of the filing of an initial application, a certified
plot plan showing the location of the proposed structures, and
which confirms lot size and property lines, the location of any
drains and wells providing potable water to the premises or
any other property and compliance with these regulations of
the location upon said premises of the facility, as hereinafter
defined, to be used for the keeping or restraining of any
domestic animal for which a permit is being sought. Upon
completion of construction of the structure, an as-built plan
shall be submitted within 30 days to confirm the structure was
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 201-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3.2
200:353
constructed in the location shown on the plot plan. At the time
of each renewal of the permit the applicant will be required to
certify the continuing accuracy of such plot plan, which plot
plan and subsequent certification shall be an integral part of
the application and will be relied upon by the Board of Health
in the granting of the permit. On a case-by-case basis, the
Board of Health for good cause may require an updated or
more detailed as-built plot plan from any applicant;
A written maintenance plan detailing the facility cleaning
schedule, rodent, pest and predator control measures, manner
of the systematic collection, storage and disposal of animal
solid waste, manner of the storage and disposal of feed and
nuisance prevention measures. At a minimum, rodent control
measures must provide for the inspection of the premises for
potential rodent infestation at regular intervals. At the time
of each renewal of the permit the applicant will be required
to certify continuing compliance with such maintenance plan;
which written maintenance plan and subsequent certification
shall be an integral part of the application and will be relied
upon by the Board of Health in the granting of the permit. On
a case-by-case basis the Board of Health, for good cause, may
require an updated or more detailed written maintenance plan
from any applicant;
(b)
Correspondence of the Chelmsford Building Department
confirming compliance of the premises with the minimum lot
size required by § 195-6E, Animals accessory to dwellings, or
any successor section thereto, of the bylaws of the Town of
Chelmsford at such time;
(c)
Certification by the Chelmsford Conservation Commission of
the location of wetlands upon or adjacent to the premises;
(d)
Such licensing fee as the Board of Health may establish from
year to year; and
(e)
Such additional information or substantiation as the Board of
Health may deem necessary or appropriate in the evaluation of
each application.
(f)
Permits shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless sooner
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health upon violation of any
of the provisions of these regulations.
(3)
These regulations may be enforced by the use of the noncriminal
disposition pursuant to MGL. c. 40, § 21D. If enforced by means of
noncriminal disposition, fines shall be $50 for the first violation, $100
for the second violation and $150 for the third violation and any
subsequent violation. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a
separate and new offense.
C.
§ 201-3.2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-3.2
200:354
§ 201-3.3. (Reserved)
§ 201-3.4. Inspections.
§ 201-3.5. Definitions
As used in this Article II, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTER — The owners or tenants of property which adjoins the premises
upon which domestic animals are to be kept whether or not said properties
are separated by a public way.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal, including but not limited to poultry,
bird, reptile, hog, cow, horse, ponies, goats, swine, cattle, sheep, turkeys,
ducks, geese, pigeons, rabbits, game birds, donkeys, llamas, alpacas, and
mules, but excluding typical household pets which are housed primarily
inside a residential dwelling.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The appropriate and legally designated health
authority of the Town of Chelmsford or its authorized agent or
Persons who have had a permit denied, suspended or revoked shall be
ordered to remove all unlicensed animals from the premises within a
time frame determined by the Board of Health.
D.
Permits shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous and public area of
the facility.
E.
The maximum number of permitted domestic animals per premises
shall be 20.
F.
It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant prior to the filing of an
application to ensure that all applicable building permits are obtained
for construction of a facility and to verify that all applicable zoning laws
are adhered to, including without limitation § 195-6E of the Chelmsford
Zoning Bylaws.
G.
At the time of the filing of any application for a permit, the Board of
Health, its agent or representative, with or without prior notice to the
applicant, may enter upon the applicant's premises without hindrance
to confirm the accuracy of the applicant's application.
A.
The premises of any individual granted a permit pursuant to these
regulations shall be open at all times for inspection by the Board of
Health, its agent or representative, and with or without prior notice
to the individual, the Board of Health, its agent or representative,
may enter upon such premises without hindrance or delay to confirm
compliance of the individual with these regulations or to respond to
a complaint filed with the Board of Health concerning the keeping of
domestic animals upon such premises. Except in situations of a public
health emergency, such inspections shall be conducted during normal
business hours.
B.
§ 201-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3.5
200:355
representative, having the usual powers and duties of a Board of Health
within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
CATTLE — All kinds of domesticated ruminates, such as but not limited to
sheep, goats, and bovine animals.
COOP — A structure for the keeping or housing of poultry, pigeons, or other
types of fowl, sometimes referred to herein as a "henhouse."
CORRAL — A pen or enclosure for confining animals.
EQUINE — All animals of the equine family such as but not limited to
horses, mules, and donkeys.
FACILITY — Any corral, building, dry lot, enclosure, run, shed, stable,
stall, coop, pen, or structure used for the keeping or restraining of any
domestic animal except such of those that are subject to regulation under
the provisions of:
FEED — A food mixture or preparation used for consumption by domestic
animals kept at a facility.
MALODOR — An unpleasant or offensive odor.
OTHER ANIMALS — Animals that include but are not limited to feral
animals.
OWNER —
PASTURE — A plot of land used for grazing and/or feeding of animals.
PEN — A structure for the keeping or housing of one or more animals.
Section 2B of Chapter 128 of the General Laws pertaining to
commercial riding stables;
A.
Section 39A of Chapter 129 of the General Laws pertaining to pet
shops; and
B.
Sections 136A through 175 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws
pertaining to dogs.
C.
D. Chapter 127, Right to Farm, of the Town of Chelmsford Bylaws.
Every person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others:
(1) Has a legal title to any permitted premises; or
Has care, charge, or control of any permitted premises as agent,
executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, lessee, or guardian of
the estate of the holder of legal title. Each such person thus
representing the holder of legal title is bound to comply with the
provisions of these regulations as if he were the owner.
(2)
A.
Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, or group,
including a city, town, county, or other governmental unit, owning
property or carrying on activities subject to these regulations.
B.
§ 201-3.5 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-3.5
200:356
POULTRY — All domesticated or semidomesticated edible birds, such as,
but not limited to, chickens, turkeys, ducks, guinea fowl, pheasants, and
pigeons.
RODENT — Any animal of the order of Rodentia, such as but not limited
to rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chinchillas, squirrels, rats, mice, and
gerbils.
ROOSTER — An adult male chicken.
RUN — The fenced or enclosed outdoor space adjacent to a chicken coop or
henhouse.
RUNOFF — Any liquid, from any source, that flows over the surface of the
ground.
STABLE — A building or structure in which animals are sheltered and/or
fed.
STALL — A compartment in a stable used for the keeping of one or more
animals.
SWINE — Any hoofed mammal of the porcine species.
UNSANITARY CONDITIONS — The state of being of a facility, or the area
adjacent to a facility, which, in the opinion of the Board of Health, is
conducive to or results in breeding of flies; creation of malodors; vermin
infestation; liquid effluent; runoff; disease carriers; and/or noise in such
concentrations and of such duration as to cause a nuisance; be injurious or,
on the basis of current information, potentially injurious to human health;
or an unreasonable interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property by the owner or an abutter.
VERMIN — Any of various destructive insects, or small animals, including
but not limited to flies, mosquitoes, lice, mice, and rats.
WETLAND — Any jurisdictional wetland as defined by MGL c. 131, § 40,
and/or the Chelmsford Wetlands Bylaw.56
§ 201-3.6. Permit requirements; facilities requirements.
No person, firm, or corporation shall exhibit, raise, board, train, or
keep within the limits of the Town of Chelmsford, in any building, or
on any premises on which he may be the owner, lessee, tenant, or
occupant, any cattle, equine, swine, poultry or other animal as defined
in § 201-3.5 above without a permit.
A.
The permit shall specify the maximum number of domestic animals
which may be kept on any premises. No animals in excess of the
number specified in the permit shall be kept therein even temporarily.
Currently the maximum number of domestic animals per premises is
20.
B.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Wetlands.
§ 201-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3.6
200:357
§ 201-3.7. Construction and maintenance of facilities.
No person shall maintain equines or cattle anywhere within the Town
of Chelmsford without providing approved facilities as described in
§ 201-3.7 hereinafter of these regulations.
C.
The procedure for obtaining a permit for a stable in accordance with
these regulations pertains to adherence with relevant state sanitary
codes and conditions only. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant to ensure that all applicable building permits are obtained
for construction of any stable or other structure and to verify that
all applicable zoning laws are adhered to (including § 195-6E of the
Chelmsford Zoning Bylaws).
D.
No person shall keep an animal in the Town of Chelmsford except
in compliance with these requirements. Animals not normally found
or kept as domesticated animals (such as, but not limited to, feral
animals, reptiles and wildlife) shall not be permitted within the Town of
Chelmsford.
E.
These regulations shall not apply to a parcel of land defined as a farm
by any local, state, or federal law or regulation, including without
limitation the provisions of Chapter 127, Right to Farm, of the Town of
Chelmsford Bylaws.
F.
The minimum requirement for a facility shall be an open shed with
proper drainage provided, offering maximum protection with a
weatherproof room, excepting henhouses, and at least three sides,
enough head room for the animal to be housed and floored with
material that can be kept clean and dry.
A.
The owner or other person or persons having control of any existing
building or buildings hereafter erected or converted into a facility for
the keeping of domestic animals, shall maintain said facility in a clean
and sanitary condition and in accordance with the written maintenance
plan on file with the Board of Health, free from decaying food, vermin,
feces, and stagnant water.
B.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or person or persons having
control of the facility to rodent-proof the facility which requires that
the facility be built and maintained in such a manner as to deny access
by rodents and eliminate the conditions that make rodents comfortable
and provide shelter for rodents. Routine inspection and treatment by a
commercial pest company is recommended, and may be required as a
condition of the granting of a permit at the discretion of the Board of
Health.
C.
A corral shall be dry, well-drained, kept clean and fenced. A pasture
must also be adequately fenced to contain the animals therein. Fencing
may be of wood, smooth woven wire, or charge electric wire. In the
case of the use of charge electric wire, there shall be at least one
D.
§ 201-3.6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-3.7
200:358
§ 201-3.8. Sanitary requirements.
warning label where the fence is located on street frontage, and at fiftyfoot
intervals if the frontage exceeds 100 feet. All fencing shall be high
enough to discourage dumping or reaching over by third parties. If a
corral is not grassed, dust-control measures shall be implemented.
To minimize the opportunity for injury to third parties, property
barriers, such as fencing or closely planted trees or shrubs, shall be
installed or other necessary or appropriate measures taken to
discourage third parties, particularly unaccompanied minor children,
from entering into the area of the facility.
E.
Property barriers, such as fencing or closely planted trees or shrubs,
shall be installed, or other appropriate screening measures taken, on
lots where the location of the facility will ordinarily interfere with the
comfortable and uninterrupted enjoyment by an abutter of his property.
F.
An adequate supply of potable water shall be available at or near the
facility for feeding, cleaning, and fire protection purposes.
G.
No owner or person or persons having control of the facility, shall
willfully or through negligence, cause, suffer, allow or permit:
The floor and/or the ground of the facility to be designed,
constructed and/or maintained so as to cause or contribute to
unsanitary conditions at said facility.
(1)
Permit or facilitate the drainage or liquid effluent containing urine
and/or fecal matter from any animal kept at the facility to be
discharged in runoff, or to flow over the surface of the ground onto
abutting property, public ways, or wetlands.
(2)
A.
Management and disposal of manure and soiled bedding shall be such
as to minimize odors, rodents and breeding of flies. Without limitation:
The owner shall provide a pit constructed of cement or other
impermeable material for the reception of manure and other refuse
and by-products of the domestic animals. The Board of Health
may accept alternative storage options proposed by an owner at
its discretion, provided that such option provides equal protection
against discharge in runoff, or any flow over the surface of the
ground onto abutting property, public ways, or wetlands.
(1)
Manure shall not be stockpiled between the period of April 15 and
October 15.
(2)
During warm weather, manure shall be treated with lime or
superphosphate or other appropriate material to minimize odors
and shall be treated with approved insecticides or other means for
fly control.
(3)
B.
§ 201-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-3.8
200:359
The dimensions, topography and/or drainage conditions of any
particular premises may, in the opinion of the Board of Health,
require off-premises disposal of the manure. In such cases it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to dispose of the manure in a safe
and sanitary manner. The manure shall not be put out for general
Town trash collection.
(4)
Manure shall be stored not less than 50 feet from abutting front,
side and rear property lines.
(5)
Animals shall be maintained in a clean and healthy condition. The
animals shall be protected from vermin, such as but not limited to
sucking insects which may transmit diseases to humans.
C.
Any feed that is stored on, at, or proximate to the facility shall be
stored in closed and secured, moisture-, vermin- and rodent-resistant
containers, such as galvanized steel.
D.
No owner of a facility shall willfully or through negligence cause, suffer,
allow, or permit an infestation of vermin at said facility. The owner or
person or persons having control of the facility may be held responsible
for expenses incurred by the Town of Chelmsford, abutters or third
parties upon the failure of such owner or person or persons to verminproof
the facility.
E.
Dead animals shall be buried, incinerated, or otherwise disposed of in
such a way as to prevent the attraction of flies and prevent odors. If
buried, the animal shall be put in a hole, the bottom of which shall
be a minimum of four feet above high water and covered with at least
four feet of compacted dirt. The burial site shall be at least 15 feet
from any lot line and 100 feet from any wetland and must have prior
written approval of the Board of Health. In an emergency situation,
an owner may bury an animal prior to written approval by the Board
of Health, but must notify the Board of Health within 48 hours that
such has occurred and must confirm that the burial site meets these
requirements.
F.
Proximity to wetlands and potable water.
No portion of a facility shall be located within 50 feet of a wetland
area, nor less than 200 feet upstream from the high-water mark of
any known source of drinking water supply nor less than 100 feet
from any well providing potable water for human consumption or
within Zone 1 of a public water supply.
(1)
No manure storage area shall be located within 100 feet of a
wetland area, nor less than 200 feet upstream from the highwater
mark of any known source of drinking water supply nor less
than 100 feet from any well providing potable water for human
consumption or within Zone 1 of a public water supply.
(2)
G.
§ 201-3.8 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-3.8
200:360
§ 201-4. (Reserved)
§ 201-4.1. Keeping of equines/cattle.
§ 201-4.2. Keeping of poultry.
The maintenance of a facility in an unsanitary condition as defined in
this § 201-3.5 may result in a fine and/or the revocation or suspension
of the permit.
H.
Upon revocation of a permit by the Board of Health, the owner shall
not be obligated to remove the facility but may repurpose the facility in
compliance with the then Zoning Bylaws and Building Code of the Town
of Chelmsford.
I.
No domestic animal as herein defined shall be housed within any part
of a residential dwelling.
J.
No permit shall be issued to keep a horse, sheep, goat, cow (or other
bovine animals) unless the usable area, drainage conditions and
dimensions of the lot are acceptable to the Board of Health and the
Chelmsford Animal Control Officer.
A.
Under no circumstances shall a horse, sheep, goat, cow (or other
bovine animal) be allowed to roam free; nor should it be left tethered,
unless attended by a responsible person. Repeated violation of these
regulations will result in revocation or suspension of the permit.
B.
No horse, sheep, goat, cow (or other bovine animal) shall be kept in
the Town of Chelmsford without having the necessary immunization
certificate as required by the Division of Animal Health, Department of
Agriculture, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
C.
No permit shall be issued to keep poultry unless the usable area,
drainage conditions and dimensions of the lot are acceptable to the
Board of Health. The Board of Health Agent shall notify the Animal
Control Officer of all permits issued.
A.
No poultry shall be allowed to forage, stray or roam unrestricted at the
premises or elsewhere; hens must at all times be confined to the coop/
henhouse and run.
B.
No rooster shall knowingly be kept except on a parcel of land defined
as a farm by any local, state, or federal law or regulation, including,
without limitation, the provisions of Chapter 127, Right to Farm, of
the Town of Chelmsford Bylaws. Once a rooster is identified in a flock,
the Board of Health shall be immediately so advised in writing and
the rooster must be permanently removed from within the Town of
Chelmsford.
C.
§ 201-3.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-4.2
200:361
The number of hens per a single premises shall not exceed six per lot,
except that an additional two hens may be added per every five feet of
additional setback provided, up to a maximum of 20 hens.
D.
Perceptible noise from chickens at the premises boundary must
conform to all existing bylaws.
E.
Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken-related
substances shall not be perceptible at the premises boundaries.
F.
Henhouses and runs shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent
the spread of infectious or contagious diseases, and shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition, free from decaying food, filth, feces,
vermin infestation and stagnant water. Henhouses and runs must be
routinely cleaned pursuant to the written maintenance plan on file with
the Board of Health or more frequently as may be required to prevent
odor and disease.
G.
The location of the henhouse and run must conform to all relevant
lot area and setback and other zoning requirements. In an instance
of a conflict between these regulations and a Zoning Bylaw, the more
restrictive shall control.
H.
I. Hens must be enclosed and segregated from wild migratory fowl.
Henhouses and runs.
All henhouses and runs shall be located not less than 50 feet
from any wetland area as defined in the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and/or the Chelmsford Wetlands
Bylaws.
(1)
All henhouses and runs shall be located not less than 25 feet from
any side abutting property lot line and not less than 30 feet from
any rear abutting property lot line, and not less than 40 feet from
the front lot line.
(2)
Reasonable efforts shall be made to screen the henhouse and runs
from street view, and the Board of Health may in its discretion
require fencing or screening as part of its permitting process.
(3)
Except as otherwise herein provided, henhouses and runs shall not
be situated in the front or side yards of the premises. Henhouses
and runs situated in the side yard of a premises, which are
otherwise in compliance with these regulations, may be permitted,
provided that the henhouse and run were situated in the side yard
in 2018 and further provided that the owner of the premises had
been issued a permit for domestic animals in 2018. The opportunity
to retain the henhouse and run in the side yard of a premises
shall lapse should the Board of Health determine that the applicant
is at any time in violation of these regulations and shall not be
transferable to any subsequent owner of the premises.
(4)
J.
§ 201-4.2 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-4.2
200:362
§ 201-4.3. Keeping of swine.
The keeping of swine is not allowed except on a parcel of land defined as
a farm by any local, state, or federal law or regulation, including without
limitation the provisions of Chapter 127, Right to Farm, of the Town of
Chelmsford Bylaws.
§ 201-5. (Reserved)
§ 201-5.1. Nonconforming preexisting permits.
For lots with frontage on multiple streets, front yards shall be
determined based upon the legal address for the premises, unless
the Board of Health in its discretion determines that the front yard
should be based upon another street.
(5)
The Board of Health or its agents may order the removal of the chickens
upon a determination that the chickens pose a health risk to the owner,
his/her family or the residents of Chelmsford.
K.
Deceased chickens shall be disposed of by incineration or burial or
otherwise in compliance with applicable law and best practices, within
a reasonable time but in no event more than 48 hours after death.
L.
The owner of the facility shall comply with all applicable provisions of
MGL c. 129 regarding livestock disease control.
M.
Feed shall be disbursed to the hens only within the confines of the
henhouse and run. Any spillage of food outside of the henhouse and run
shall be immediately cleaned up.
N.
The Board of Health, following a public hearing and upon written notice
to all abutters, may award a nonconforming preexisting permit to an
owner with a lot size not conforming to the provisions of § 195-6E of the
Chelmsford Zoning Bylaws, provided that such owner had been issued
a permit for domestic animals in 2018, but only if the Board of Health
determines:
That unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application
of the provisions of § 195-6E of the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaws to
the applicant;
(1)
That the applicant had been issued a permit in 2018 and that the
permit in 2018 had been issued in error; and
(2)
That there has been no change in owners or the size or
configuration of the applicant's lot since the date of the issuance of
the 2018 permit.
(3)
A.
The applicant must demonstrate that issuance of a nonconforming
preexisting permit is not otherwise in conflict with any other regulation
or bylaw of the Town of Chelmsford, is consistent with the intent of
B.
§ 201-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-5.1
200:363
§ 201-5.2. Application of regulations.
§ 201-5.3. Severability; amendment
and is otherwise in compliance with these regulations and that granting
of a nonconforming preexisting permit shall not be burdensome or
detrimental to the neighborhood or abutters.
Special conditions may be imposed by the Board of Health as a
prerequisite to the issuance of a nonconforming preexisting permit
and may include, without exception, the exclusion of certain domestic
animals, the limitation of the number of domestic animals to be
permitted, routine commercial pest control inspections and reporting
to the Board of Health, and fencing and screening requirements.
C.
Timely application for a nonconforming preexisting permit must be
requested each consecutive year commencing 2019, failing which the
opportunity to request a nonconforming preexisting permit shall lapse.
The opportunity to request a nonconforming preexisting permit shall
also lapse should the Board of Health determine that the applicant is at
any time in violation of these regulations.
D.
The opportunity to request such nonconforming preexisting permit
shall not be transferable to any subsequent owner of the premises.
E.
The applicant for such nonconforming preexisting permit shall pay the
cost of all publications and mailings and shall have timely filed an
application for a permit as required by the terms hereof, and shall have
been denied a permit solely by reason of the size of the applicant's lot.
F.
Any previously validly issued permits, meaning permits meeting all
applicable Board of Health regulations and the provisions of § 195-6E
of the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaws when issued, may be renewed for
2019 without meeting the requirement of submitting a certified as-built
plot plan, provided that neither the owners, conditions, and agreements
contained in the original application nor the size or configuration of
the applicant's lot have changed. All other requirements must be met.
Such applicants shall be required to submit a certified as-built plot plan
showing compliance with these regulations at renewal for 2020.
A.
All other individuals requesting permits in 2019 and thereafter must
comply with these regulations in totality.
B.
All renewal of permits subsequent to the adoption of these regulations
shall be subject to the adopted schedule of fees.
C.
Each section of these rules and regulations shall be construed as
separate to the end that if any section, item, sentence, clause or phrase
shall be held invalid for any reason the remainder of these rules and
regulations shall continue in full force and effect.
A.
§ 201-5.1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-5.3
200:364
§ 201-5.4. Effective date.
These regulations were accepted and approved by vote of the Chelmsford
Board of Health, at a regularly scheduled meeting held on December 10,
2018, and were revised at a regularly scheduled meeting held on January
7, 2019. A public hearing was held on December 3, 2018, and another
public hearing was held on January 7, 2019 for the further revisions. These
regulations are to be in full force and effect retroactive to January 1, 2019
(and shall thus be applicable to all permit applications for 2019), and shall
be available in the office of the Chelmsford Board of Health and the Town
Clerk.
These regulations or any portions thereof may be amended,
supplemented or repealed from time to time by the Board of Health, as
provided by law and applicable regulations.
B.
§ 201-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-5.4
200:365

ARTICLE III
Communicable Diseases
§ 201-6. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this article, unless a different meaning is
required by the context or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following
meanings:
BOARD OF HEALTH — Includes the board, department or officer having
like powers and duties in cities or towns.
CARRIER — A person who, without symptoms of a disease dangerous to the
public health, harbors and may disseminate the specific microorganisms of
that disease.
CONTACT — Any person known to have been sufficiently near an infected
person or animal to have been presumably exposed to transfer of infectious
material directly or by articles freshly soiled with such material.
IMMUNE — An immune person is one who has had the disease or has
been artificially immunized against it and is presumably protected against
another attack.
INCUBATION PERIOD — The usual period of time which elapses between
the exposure of a person to infection and the development of the symptoms
of the disease to which the person may have been exposed.
ISOLATION — The separation of persons suffering from any disease
dangerous to the public health or carriers of the infecting microorganisms
from other persons in such places and under such conditions as will prevent
the direct or indirect conveyance of the infectious agent to susceptible
persons. [Note: In view of the various ambiguous and inaccurate uses to
which the word "isolation" is frequently put, it has seemed best to adopt
arbitrarily the word "isolation" as describing the limitations put upon the
movements of an individual (or animal) known to be sick or to be a carrier.]
LAST EXPOSURE — The date of the removal to a hospital or the recovery
or death of the patient or the date on which the nonimmune contact leaves
and remains out of the house where the patient is isolated.
PLACARD — An official notice, written or printed, posted as a warning of
the presence of a disease dangerous to the public health on the premises or
in the apartment or room so placarded.
QUARANTINE — The restriction of the premises, house or apartment of
materials and persons that presumably have been exposed to a disease
dangerous to the public health. [Note: In view of the various ambiguous
and inaccurate uses to which the word "quarantine" is frequently put, it has
seemed best to adopt arbitrarily the word "quarantine" as describing the
limitations put upon individuals exposed ("contacts") to disease.]
SUSCEPTIBLE OR NONIMMUNE — A susceptible or nonimmune person
is one who is not known to have acquired immunity to the particular
communicable disease in question.
§ 201-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-7
200:367
§ 201-7. Diseases dangerous to public health. [Amended 10-4-1999]
Diseases declared by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
to be dangerous to the public shall be reported under the provisions of
MGL c. 111, §§ 6, 7, 109, 111 and 112, as amended by Chapter 265 of
the Acts of 1938, and notice of the occurrence of each case must be sent
to the Board of Health in the manner required by the statutes. Section
6 of MGL c. 111 provides as follows: "The department shall have the
power to define, and shall from time to time define, what diseases shall
be deemed to be dangerous to the public health, and shall make such
rules and regulations consistent with law for the control and prevention
of such diseases as it deems advisable for the protection of the public
health."
A.
According to MGL c. 111, § 111, as amended by Chapter 265 of the
Acts of 1938: "If a physician knows or has cause to believe that a
person whom he visits is infected with a disease dangerous to the
public health...he shall immediately give written notice thereof, signed
by him, to the board of health of the town where the patient is being
attended by him." Said section also provides that "If a physician or
such a hospital medical officer refuses or neglects to give the notice
required by this section he shall be punished by a fine of not less than
fifty nor more than two hundred dollars." The act further provides that
"The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to tuberculosis,
nor shall the foregoing provisions of this section and the provisions of
section one hundred and nine apply to venereal diseases as defined
under section six, except in the case of eye infections in infants under
two weeks of age. Any person having tuberculosis or a venereal disease
shall be reported to local boards of health either directly or through the
department in accordance with such special rules and regulations as
the department may make, having due regard for the best interests of
the public."
B.
Section 110 of MGL c. 111, as amended by Chapter 180 of the Acts
of 1932, provides that "If either eye of an infant becomes inflamed,
swollen and red, or shows an unnatural discharge within two weeks
after birth, the nurse, relative or other attendant having charge of such
infant shall report in writing, within six hours thereafter, to the board of
health of the town where the infant is, the fact that such inflammation,
swelling and redness of the eyes or unnatural discharge exists. On
receipt of such report, or of notice of the same symptoms given by a
physician, or a hospital medical officer registered under section nine of
chapter one hundred and twelve, as provided by the following section,
the board of health shall take such immediate action as it may deem
necessary, including, so far as may be possible, consultation with an
oculist and the employment of a trained nurse, in order that blindness
may be prevented."
C.
Section 109 of MGL c. 111, as amended by Chapter 265 of the Acts of
1938, provides that when a householder knows that a person within his
or her family or house is sick with a disease dangerous to the public
D.
§ 201-7 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-7
200:368
§ 201-8. Period of isolation.
A person who is sick with any of the diseases dangerous to the public health
shall be isolated in the manner and for the periods prescribed in the rules
and regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
§ 201-9. Method of isolation for certain diseases.
Whoever is sick with anterior poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), diphtheria,
menigococcus meningitis, scarlet fever, smallpox or typhoid fever, or any
other of the diseases declared dangerous to the public health that the Board
of Health may designate, shall be immediately isolated in a place or room
approved by the Board of Health or its agent or shall be moved to a hospital
set apart for the treatment of such diseases, and no person so isolated shall
leave such room or hospital until the period of isolation for the disease with
which he or she is sick shall have elapsed and until the Board of Health or
its agent shall permit him or her to do so.
§ 201-10. Placards.
Houses or portions of houses (in the case of tenement houses, apartment
houses or like structures, as much of the building shall be placarded as in
the judgment of the Board of Health is consistent with the best interests
of the public) in which there is a person sick shall be placarded for those
diseases dangerous to the public health for which placarding is required
under the minimum isolation and quarantine requirements of the State
Department of Public Health. The card shall not be removed except on the
authority of the Board of Health.
§ 201-11. Entering place of isolation.
No person, except physicians, nurses and those whose duty it is to minister
to the patient, shall be allowed to enter the place of isolation during the
continuance of the disease unless permitted to do so by the Board of Health
or its agent.
§ 201-12. Persons caring for isolated patients.
Nurses and others caring for a person isolated as above shall wash their
hands thoroughly with hot water, soap and scrubbing brush immediately
after handling the patient, his or her discharges and any articles soiled by
his or her discharges before mingling with others. They shall change their
outer clothing before going out.
health, he or she shall immediately give notice thereof to the board of
health of the town where such householder dwells, unless a physician
is in attendance.
A list of diseases declared to be dangerous to the public health may be
obtained from the local Board of Health.
E.
§ 201-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-13
200:369
§ 201-13. Articles used by patient.
All eating utensils and linen used by the patient shall be boiled for at least
15 minutes immediately after being taken from the room. Upon release of
the patient, woolen articles shall be exposed to sunlight and air for at least
eight hours.
§ 201-14. Discharges.
The discharges of a person sick with typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever or
dysentery shall be mixed with chloride of lime or other disinfectant
approved by the Board of Health and shall be kept in contact therewith for
at least 30 minutes before being emptied into the hopper or privy vault.
§ 201-15. Contacts.
Contacts shall be under the restrictions prescribed in the rules and
regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (Chapter 265
of the Acts of 1938).
§ 201-16. School certificates.
Children who have recovered from or have been exposed to any diseases
declared dangerous to the public health (see § 201-7) may return to school
only after certification by the Board of Health or after examination by the
school physician as prescribed in MGL c. 71, § 55, as amended by Chapter
265 of the Acts of 1938.
§ 201-13 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-16
200:370
ARTICLE IV
Pigs and Piggeries
§ 201-17. Permit required.
No individual or individuals, partnership, company or corporation shall keep
a pig or swine within the limits of this municipality without first obtaining a
permit from the Board of Health. All such permits shall expire on December
31 of each year unless sooner revoked. Any permit may be revoked at any
time by the Board of Health for cause.
§ 201-18. Transportation of garbage or other offensive material.
A license to transport garbage, offal or other offensive substances along
the public highways of this municipality must be obtained from the Board
of Health in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 31A, and no such materials
shall be so transported without such a license. All licenses shall expire on
December 31. Any license may be revoked at any time by the Board of
Health for cause. Garbage and other offensive material shall be transported
only in watertight vehicles or containers and shall be securely covered with
a wood, iron or canvas cover while the vehicle is in motion.
§ 201-19. Location and maintenance.
All piggeries shall be suitably isolated and maintained in such a manner
that no nuisance shall be created thereby. No pen or enclosure shall be
located within 150 feet of any public highway.
A.
All piggeries will be examined frequently by a representative of the
Board of Health, who will make such recommendations to the owner as
are necessary to maintain the piggery in proper condition.
B.
Buildings shall be properly ventilated and of substantial construction,
preferably painted white or whitewashed, well lighted and so designed
that accumulations of offensive material can be readily removed. For
indoor pens, watertight troughs of cement or metal kept in good repair
shall be provided for feeding purposes, and these troughs must be
thoroughly cleaned every day.
C.
All buildings used for the housing of swine shall be kept in a clean and
satisfactory condition. Brood houses shall be cleaned daily.
D.
If outdoor pens or runs are provided, the swine shall be fed from
platforms built of heavy watertight material flat on the ground or on
skids one foot above the ground so arranged that the platform can be
readily moved and the ground at the earlier location ploughed in. If
the feeding platform is elevated, the space between the ground and the
platform shall be kept clear and clean, and no food shall be allowed to
accumulate about the platform or on the ground.
E.
A bin for receiving garbage shall be provided, which shall be covered
during warm weather.
F.
§ 201-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-19
200:371
Garbage cans, wagons and trucks shall be thoroughly cleansed after the
garbage has been removed therefrom.
G.
Manure and refuse in outdoor pens shall be cleaned out at least twice
weekly and must either be immediately removed from the premises or
be so kept that it will not constitute a nuisance and so that the pigs will
not have access to it.
H.
If uneaten garbage, manure and refuse are collected in compost piles,
they shall be treated or covered with earth, loam or other suitable
material in sufficient amounts to eliminate any odor or nuisance. All
such piles shall be at least 500 feet from any highway or dwelling. No
garbage, manure or putrescible matter whatsoever shall, except in the
cultivation and use of the soil in ordinary methods of agriculture, be put
upon the ground within 250 feet of the high-water mark of any source
of water supply or within 250 feet of high-water mark of any open
waters flowing directly or ultimately into said source of water supply.
In addition, during the fly-breeding season, they shall be sprayed daily
with some suitable coal-tar compound or other satisfactory insecticide.
I.
Manure shall be spread upon land only when such land is in condition to
plough, and any manure so spread shall be ploughed under clean sand.
J.
Wet mulch in outdoor pens shall be removed and replaced with clean
sand.
K.
L. A water supply adequate for cleaning purposes shall be provided.
No pigs shall be kept within 50 feet of any room where milk is handled.
No person who handles milk shall assist in the maintenance of pigs or
the cleansing of pens.
M.
Adequate personnel shall be employed at all times for the proper
maintenance and operation of the piggery.
N.
No piggery shall be located, constructed or maintained any part of
which is within 250 feet of the high-water mark of any source of
drinking water supply or any tributary thereof or within 250 feet of the
high-water mark of any open waters flowing directly or ultimately into
any source of water supply.
O.
§ 201-19 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-19
200:372
ARTICLE V
Dumpsters
[Added 1-12-1981; amended 2-9-1988; 12-10-1990; 12-9-1991]
§ 201-20. Location and maintenance.
§ 201-21. Property owner to obtain permit.
§ 201-22. Contractors supplying dumpster service.
Dumpsters must be located and placed in a manner approved by the
Board of Health. A plot plan prepared by the applicant shall be on
file with the Board of Health showing the approved location of the
dumpster in relation to the business serviced.
A.
All dumpsters must be enclosed or screened as required by the Board
of Health. Dumpsters must all be placed on an impervious pad (asphalt
or cement).
B.
A dumpster is not to be filled between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., at
which times the lids are to be locked. The lids must be closed when
the dumpster is not in use during all times. Extenuating circumstances
will be determined by this Board on an individual basis, and exceptions
will be made in the best interest for the public health of the community.
The business filing for an exemption must do so in writing and state
reasons.
C.
A dumpster must be of sufficient size and capacity to eliminate
overflow, and the property owner or authorized agent of the premises
utilizing the service must immediately empty the contents when full.
D.
A dumpster must be situated so as not to obstruct the view of flowing
traffic.
E.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or agent being
serviced to maintain the dumpster area free of odors, rodents, flies,
insects, scattered debris, overflow and all other nuisances.
F.
The property owner or authorized agent responsible for maintaining
a dumpster service is required to obtain a permit from the Board of
Health by making application at the Board of Health office. This must be
preceded with the approval of the Building Department and any other
appropriate Town board or commission. The application shall include
the owner's address and telephone number. The fee for a permit, not
transferable, will be $10 on an annual basis, renewable July 1 of each
year.
A.
Municipal authorized agents must comply with § 201-20 and Subsection
A of this section. When application is submitted, a permit will be
granted with no charge.
B.
§ 201-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-22
200:373
§ 201-23. Violations and penalties; applicability.
The contractor supplying the dumpster service will make application
for a license to remove, transport or dispose of garbage, offal or other
offensive substances, as well as rubbish, trash, debris and other
materials, including scrap. Such license shall expire July 1 of each year
but may be renewable on application as herein provided.
A.
The contractor supplying the dumpster service must have evidence that
a Board of Health permit has been issued for the dumpster before
placing a dumpster on the property. If said contractor is notified by the
Board of Health of a revoked permit, the dumpster must be removed
within five days of notice.
B.
The contractor shall state on the application his or her home address,
business address and the telephone number under which the business
is operated, as well as the telephone number and name of the owner/
agent of the property being serviced. He or she shall sign the
application.
C.
The contractor shall have the name and telephone number
conspicuously displayed on the dumpster.
D.
The emptying of the dumpster contents by the contractor shall not
commence before 7:00 a.m.
E.
The fee for the license for the contractor to transport shall be $50
annually and renewable July 1 each year.
F.
The dumpster contractor shall have the dumpster deodorized when
emptied or if necessary washed and sanitized as directed by order of
the Board of Health.
G.
The contractor shall remove the contents so as not to cause spillage
during removal and transportation.
H.
The Board of Health may revoke a contractor's license for
unsatisfactory service of a property at any time and order services to
be suspended.
I.
Whenever a dumpster remains overflowing or an overflowing condition
is continuously being repeated, the Board of Health may order the
contractor, in writing, to immediately remove the dumpster and
contents from the premises being serviced.
J.
Violations of § 201-20, after notification by an inspector of the Board of
Health and notification by certified mail, may result in a penalty of not
less than $10 nor more than $25. Each day's violation, not corrected,
shall constitute a separate violation.
A.
Violation of those provisions relating to the contents of dumpsters shall
be punishable by Subsection A.
B.
§ 201-22 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-23
200:374
These regulations apply to all dumpsters in the Town of Chelmsford
or similar units, whether for residential, commercial, industrial or
municipal use.
C.
§ 201-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-23
200:375

ARTICLE VI
Subsurface Sewage and Wastewater Disposal; Groundwater
Protection
[Added 4-10-1987; amended 4-3-1995]
§ 201-24. Regulations in addition to state code.
The Chelmsford Board of Health enforces the following additional
regulations in conjunction with all applicable state regulations (Title V,
State Environmental Code):
Minimum leaching area is 800 square feet of leaching bed or its
equivalent (for one-, two- or three-bedroom dwellings).
A.
Minimum leaching area for a four-bedroom home is a one-thousandsquare-
foot bed or its equivalent but not less than 150 gallons per
bedroom. (Exception: If the percolation rate is two or less than two, the
smaller minimum is accepted.)
B.
C. Minimum size requirement for septic tank is 1,500 gallons (all uses).
Distances of leaching areas from wells shall be 100 feet. All other
watercourses shall be 75 feet (all uses). Distance to all drains shall be
a minimum to 50 feet. As used in this subsection, "watercourse" shall
mean any natural or man-made stream, pond, lake, wetland, coastal
wetland, swamp or other body of water and shall include wet meadows,
marshes, swamps, bogs and areas where groundwater, flowing or
standing surface water or ice provided a significant part of the
supporting substrate for a plant community for at least five months of
the year.
D.
E. Cutoff rate on percolation tests is 25 minutes per inch (all uses).
Deep observation holes will be performed only during the months of
March and April (all uses).
F.
G. No pump systems are allowed for residential uses (fewer than 10 units).
No building permit for a dwelling house shall be issued until the Board
of Health has approved the proposed lot as suitable from a sanitary
point of view for human habitation. No building permit shall be issued
for a dwelling house on an unsewered street until a permit for a sewage
disposal installation has been obtained from the Board of Health.
H.
A permit is required for cleaning out of sewage disposal installations.
[Note: Desired specifications may be obtained by calling at the
Board of Health office.]
I.
Percolation tests.
Percolation tests as prescribed in this subsection shall be
performed at no expense to the approving authority by a registered
professional engineer, a registered sanitarian or other person who,
(1)
J.
§ 201-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-24
200:377
in the opinion of the approving authority, is qualified to perform
such tests. All percolation tests should be performed in the
presence of the representative of the approving authority.
Our interpretation of "should be performed in the presence of a
representative of the approving authority" is "must be performed in
his or her presence." Accordingly, written requests for performance
of tests for general subdivision or individual system approval must
be submitted to this Board at least one week in advance of the
proposed date for such tests and must include, as a minimum:
(a) Name and title of individual responsible for the tests.
Time, place and number of tests to be performed. Define which
lots will have groundwater determinations and soil profile tests
performed in addition to the percolation tests.
(b)
Information defining the topography of the land and the
location of any watercourses or sources of water supply. This
information is to include a description of significant physical
features, such as ledge outcroppings, wet areas, stands of
trees and other features that have a bearing on the suitability
of the land for sanitary waste disposal purposes.
(c)
Planned or actual road layout, including plans for street
drainage and for filling land presently existing in a natural
state.
(d)
(2)
Failure to submit the data required, or performance of tests
without the Board's representative present, will result in rejection
of the plans for failure to submit adequate engineering data, unless
this requirement is waived by a majority of the Board.
(3)
In addition, it should be noted that the tests performed for approval
of subdivision plans will have to be repeated if locations or other
conditions change before sewage disposal installation permits can
be granted. Percolation tests shall not be performed until such time
as the required fee is paid to the Board of Health.
(4)
Grease trap (external). A grease trap (capacity to be determined at time
of septic system design by flow estimate) must be installed for all food
service establishments.
K.
A separate tank and dry well for washers is required in addition to the
main leaching area or an additional 120 gallons of extra capacity may
be added to the main system.
L.
All wastewater discharges within the Town of Chelmsford must be
approved by the Chelmsford Board of Health. Coolant waters are
included.
Those that must be checked for contamination before discharge is
allowed are as follows:
(1)
M.
§ 201-24 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-24
200:378
§ 201-25. Groundwater protection; discharge of wastewater from all
developments.
Within commercial and industrial areas, any discharge into the
ground, storm drains, culverts, streams, brooks, lakes, ponds,
wetlands, etc., must be analyzed for contamination before the
discharge is approved. This expense will be borne by the
owners and/or managers of the property seeking discharge
(example: sewage and chemical).
(a)
Within residential areas, any discharge into the ground
surrounding culverts, streams, brooks, ponds, lakes, wetlands,
etc., must also be analyzed for contamination before the
discharge is approved (example: sewage).
(b)
Exemptions from required testing are: the installed drainage
system approved by the Planning Board and Conservation
Commission. Any further connections must be tested (includes
catch basins, retention areas and roof leaders).
(2)
Authority. The Board of Health, in accordance with 105 CMR 400.00,
State Sanitary Code, Chapter 1, shall protect the health and well-being
of the Town of Chelmsford.
A.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the groundwater
resources of the Town of Chelmsford.
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOARD — The Chelmsford Board of Health and its duly authorized
agents or representatives.
BOD (ABBREVIATION FOR "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") —
The quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter in a specified time, at a specified temperature and under
specified conditions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any residence, company, firm or establishment that
generates wastewater.
GROUNDWATER RESOURCES — That portion of water beneath the
surface of the earth that can be collected with wells, tunnels or
drainage galleries or that flows naturally to the earth's surface via
seeps or springs.
OCCUPANT — The person, partnership or corporation that has quarters
in a development.
OWNER — Any person, partnership or corporation that is on the Town
Assessor's list for the purpose of paying property taxes on an industrial
or commercial development.
C.
§ 201-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-25
200:379
SANITARY WASTEWATER — Wastewater derived principally from
dwellings, business buildings and institutions. It may not contain
groundwater or stormwater.
SECONDARY TREATMENT — The treatment of wastewater by
biological methods after primary treatment which should remove 85%
to 90% of the BOD.
TOWN — The Town of Chelmsford, County of Middlesex,
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Required provisions. Any owner of a development must provide
secondary treatment of its wastewater prior to discharge to the
groundwater. A proposed secondary treatment system shall not receive
Board of Health approval until occupancy of the proposed development
has been determined and the quantity and quality of the occupants'
wastewaters have been submitted to the Board.
D.
Variance. The owner of a proposed development may petition the Board
to waive the secondary treatment requirement established herein, if
it can be shown that the nature of the wastewater generated shall
not have an adverse effect on the groundwater resources. Variances
shall not be granted for wastewater discharges in excess of 1,200
gallons per acre or 10,000 gallons per day. Permission by the Board to
waive secondary treatment shall enable the owner of a development to
provide a septic system for wastewater treatment prior to groundwater
discharge. The septic system shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with Board of Health regulations and Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering, State Environmental Code,
Minimum Requirements for Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage,
1977, Title 5.
E.
Effective date. This section shall apply to all developments constructed
in whole or in part after November 1, 1984.
F.
§ 201-25 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-25
200:380
ARTICLE VII
Groundwater Protection Zone
[Added 2-9-1988; amended 4-3-1995]
§ 201-26. Authority and purpose.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, for the
purpose of preserving the public health as relates to standards for
groundwater protection within the Town of Chelmsford.
§ 201-27. Establishment of zone.
§ 201-28. Modification of existing regulations.
Article VI, Subsurface Sewage and Wastewater Disposal, of this chapter is
hereby modified in the following way:
The groundwater protection zone (GPZ) is established as an overlay
district to the Town's map. This GPZ was defined by the surficial
geology of the area and groundwater flow (based on a United States
Geological Survey surficial geology map, the Chelmsford Facilities Plan
by Weston and Sampson Engineers, Inc., Chelmsford Board of Health,
Chelmsford Water Districts and Town Engineering Department). Any
area in which groundwater flow is directed toward an existing well
or future water source and the surficial geology is stratified sand and
gravel deposits (soils which yield groundwater to wells) is included in
the GPZ. Also included are areas within 150 feet of the center line of
any stream which flows into the GPZ.
A.
If a property owner questions the location of any boundary of a GPZ,
the owner may engage, at his or her own cost, a professional
hydrogeologist or soils engineer, who must be approved by the
Chelmsford Board of Health, to determine if the land in question is a
recharge area for present and future use.
B.
Increase distance from wetland to 100 feet across the board (in this
zone).
A.
Increase distance above groundwater from four feet to five feet (in this
zone).
B.
C. Increase distance above ledge from four feet to five feet (in this zone).
Establish special regulations (in this zone) at bottom end of percolation
scale. Example: If percolation rate is less than three minutes per inch,
increase height above groundwater to six feet and distance to wetlands
to 150 feet, at the Board's discretion.
D.
Construction in floodplain.
There shall be no construction of a subsurface septic system
(primary treatment) in any floodplain area, and any system must be
(1)
E.
§ 201-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-28
200:381
§ 201-29. Environmental impact report.
If a site exists within the groundwater protection zone, the applicant must
do an environmental impact report which includes but is not limited to the
following:
§ 201-30. Well regulations and setbacks from systems.
located a minimum of 50 feet from any floodplain line (if different
than wetland line).
Any system constructed within 100 feet of a floodplain must keep
the bottom of said system a minimum of two feet above the
established elevation.
(2)
A geohydro report prepared by an engineering firm having capabilities
in this area.
A.
The primary focus will be on groundwater protection, quality and
quantity, existing and future.
B.
C. Review of intended use and potential use.
A private well (in the zone) must be a minimum of 150 feet from any
system unless it is an artesian well.
A.
Any installation of a septic system in the zone must be 150 feet from
any well unless it is proven to be an artesian (then it is 100 feet).
B.
Distance between well (any type of well) and system in the zone must
be 150 feet if soils have a percolation rate of less than three minutes
per inch.
C.
There shall only be one service by a private well. If two or more
dwellings are connected to one private well it shall be treated as a
public water supply by this Board and must meet all requirements for
testing required by state statute.
D.
§ 201-28 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-30
200:382
ARTICLE VIII
Wells
[Added 2-9-1988]
§ 201-31. Authority and purpose.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31 for the purpose
of preserving the public health as relates to standards for wells within the
Town of Chelmsford.
§ 201-32. Well construction permit.
§ 201-33. Location and installation.
Well construction permits shall only be issued for work to be performed
by an individual who is licensed as a well driller by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts as required by 313 CMR 3.00 and MGL c. 21, § 16.
A.
No one shall engage in the construction, alteration, repair or
installation of a well without first obtaining a well construction permit
from the Chelmsford Board of Health. A nonrefundable fee shall be
paid to the Town of Chelmsford according to the current fee schedule
established by the Board of Health.
B.
Every well driller engaged in operations described in these regulations
shall file a copy of his or her license or certificate issued by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts with the Board of Health. On July 1
of every year all well drillers shall file a copy of their current license or
certificate with the Board.
C.
A suitable plot plan shall be filed at the time of application for a well
construction permit. The location of existing and/or proposed wells and
septic systems within 200 feet of the proposed well shall be noted.
Permits shall expire six months from the date of issuance.
D.
The well location, design, operation and water quality must be
approved by the Board of Health before its use as a potable water
supply.
E.
All wells shall be located a sufficient distance from sources of
contamination and pollution. The minimum distances required from a
well are as follows:
(1) Cesspool: 100 feet.
(2) Leaching area: 100 feet.
(3) Reserve leaching area: 100 feet.
(4) Property lines: 15 feet.
Street or public way: 35 feet. This distance shall be a minimum of
50 feet for paved roadways subject to roadway treatment.
(5)
A.
§ 201-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-33
200:383
(6) Septic tank: 50 feet.
(7) Surface water: 50 feet.
Wherever possible, wells shall be sited at an elevation offering
protection from contamination. Wells shall be on the higher elevation of
the groundwater gradient in relation to any sources of contamination
or pollution.
B.
No well shall be located in a low area with a potential for ponding of
rainfall or surface runoff.
C.
The well cap shall extend at least 12 inches above the finished grade. In
an area subject to flood it shall be elevated at least two feet above the
elevation of a one-hundred-year storm.
D.
The space outside the well casing should be sealed with a watertight
grouting with a minimum of two inches thickness and extending from
the ground surface to a minimum depth of 10 feet. The casing should be
surrounded at the ground surface with a four-inch-thick concrete slab
sloped away from the well for at least two feet in all directions.
E.
Casings should be sealed into overlying impermeable formations to
retain artesian pressure.
F.
A sanitary well seal shall be installed at the top of the casing to prevent
contamination by objectionable materials or pollutants. The seal shall
be in conformance with existing standards of sanitary practice.
G.
All wells shall have a permanent casing extending a minimum of 10 feet
into bedrock to act as a seal to keep out groundwater.
H.
The well casing shall comply with specifications of any of the following
and have a minimum thickness of 0.28 inches:
(1) American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).
(2) American Petroleum Institute (API).
(3) American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI).
(4) United States government standards.
I.
Testing.
The well must be test pumped to demonstrate its ability to furnish
sufficient water. This must be accomplished at a constant pumping
rate for a minimum of four hours at a rate approximating the
expected pumping use rate.
(1)
The pumping test shall be performed by a qualified pump or well
drilling contractor.
(2)
Maximum drawdown shall be recorded, and the well must recover
completely to the original static water level within 24 hours.
(3)
J.
§ 201-33 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-33
200:384
§ 201-34. Water quality.
§ 201-35. Records.
A record of the well shall be provided to the Board of Health after
installation. The record shall describe the following minimum data: location
of well, depth of bedrock, size of casing, depth of casing in bedrock, depth
to water, depth of well, soil strata, diameter of well, results of pump test,
property owner, property locus and name of well driller. Other information
may be required.
§ 201-36. Shallow wells.
Shallow wells that rely upon groundwater rather than an aquifer shall be
permitted only by special permission of the Board of Health. This may be
done when in the opinion of the Board enforcement of these regulations
would do manifest injustice and not serve the public health interests for
which they are intended.
Minimum yield shall be as follows:
Depth of Water
(feet) Gallons Per Minute
0 to 150 5
Over 150 to 200 4
Over 200 to 300 3
Greater than 300 2
(4)
Required water test for new wells shall cover the following:
coliform, total plate count, color, turbidity, threshold (odor), pH,
total hardness, detergent, nitrates, total iron, manganese,
chlorides, sodium and the following metals: arsenic, barium,
cadmium, chromium, selenium, mercury, lead and silver.
(5)
Water quality shall conform to standards determined by the Chelmsford
Board of Health. Water must meet accepted standards of agencies of
both the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the federal government.
The Board or its agent(s) may impose more rigid standards when
deemed necessary to protect public health interests.
A.
Permanent disinfection of a biologically polluted water supply shall
be prohibited. However, water treatment units shall require Board of
Health approval prior to any installation, and subsequent water quality
tests may be required as proof of treatment efficacy.
B.
§ 201-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-37
200:385
§ 201-37. Disclaimer.
Inspection by the Board of Health or its agent(s) and compliance with these
regulations are not a guaranty that any part of a well water system will
function satisfactorily.
§ 201-38. Severability.
Each portion of this article shall be considered as separate, and if any
portion shall be held invalid for any reason all remaining elements shall
remain in force.
§ 201-37 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-38
200:386
ARTICLE IX
Food Service and Retail Food Establishments
[Added effective 8-14-1989]
§ 201-39. Authority and purpose.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31 for the purpose
of protecting the public health and as supplemental regulations to 105 CMR
590.000 and 595.000, the State Sanitary Code.
§ 201-40. Modification of existing regulations.
Article VI, Subsurface Sewage and Wastewater Disposal, of this chapter is
hereby modified in the following way:
§ 201-41. Variances.
The owner of the property must file a request for a hearing in writing along
with all supporting data.
Food service/retail food establishment businesses. All such
establishments must install a separate subsurface sewage facility,
including an exterior grease trap.
A.
Food service/retail food establishment protection. All kitchen
preparation and storage areas must be totally separated from all
normal household use.
B.
§ 201-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-41
200:387

ARTICLE X
Health Promotion Screening Program
[Added 3-12-1990; amended 12-10-1990]
§ 201-42. Authority and purpose.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31 for the purpose
of protecting the public health as related to assurance of quality test results
and safe health procedures and as supplemental regulations to 105 CMR
180.030(D).
§ 201-43. Property owner to provide state and local regulations.
Any property owner/manager is obligated to inform the health screening
group and/or individual to contact this Department and to supply said group
or individual with a copy of Massachusetts Department of Public Health and
local regulations available at the Chelmsford Board of Health.
§ 201-44. Standards and procedures.
§ 201-45. Enforcement.
The Chelmsford Board of Health, its public health nurse or enforcement
officer shall enforce the enactment of this regulation.
§ 201-46. Violations and penalties.
§ 201-47. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as of April 1, 1990.
Appropriateness of site will be left to the discretion of the Board of
Health.
A.
Work area where finger stick and testing will occur must be covered
with a table covering of a nonabsorbent material.
B.
A suitable disinfectant must be at the site. Any blood spills should be
disinfected with household bleach (one part bleach to 10 parts water)
or another disinfectant.
C.
Any property owner/manager or health screening group and/or
individual not in compliance with the so stated regulations will be
deemed to be in violation of these regulations.
A.
Violation of this regulation shall be punishable by a fine of $25 for each
offense. The first violation will be a written warning if that individual
or group immediately abates the cholesterol screening. Each day that
such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 201-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-48
200:389
§ 201-48. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this regulation are severable,
and if any provision of this regulation shall be declared unlawful by a
valid judgment or decree of any court of the competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this regulation.
§ 201-48 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-48
200:390
ARTICLE XI
Residential Refuse Collection
[Added 6-11-1990; amended 12-10-1990; 12-9-1991]
§ 201-49. Authority.
In accordance with the authority vested in the Town of Chelmsford Board of
Health, these regulations are hereby established.
§ 201-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — All household garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and
combustible agricultural waste normally generated and disposed of by or on
behalf of the Town, but excluding:
LICENSED REFUSE COLLECTOR — Those persons or companies who have
applied for and obtained the appropriate license(s) to collect refuse within
the corporate limits of Chelmsford, Massachusetts.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials placed in a "Chelmsford
Recycles" blue or maroon recycling bin or other container designated for
recycling purposes, which shall include but not be limited to clear glass,
brown glass, green glass, tin cans, aluminum cans, HDPE plastics (milk
and water containers), PET plastics (soda bottles) and newspapers in paper
bags. Refuse haulers shall not collect recyclable materials unless they are
contracted by the Town of Chelmsford to do so.
REFUSE COLLECTION VEHICLES — All vehicles used for deliveries of
residential acceptable waste to the solid waste disposal facility, which must
be in safe, clean condition and in good repair.
Explosives and ordnance materials, oil, sludges, highly flammable
substances, cesspool or other human wastes, human and animal
remains, motor vehicles, farm or other large machinery, nonburnable
construction materials and demolition debris and hazardous refuse
of any type or kind, such as cleaning fluids, crankcase oils, cutting
oils, paints, acids, caustics, poisons, drugs, radioactive materials, fine
powdery earth used to filter cleaning fluid and refuse of similar nature;
A.
Any item of waste exceeding six feet in any one of its dimensions or
being in whole or in part of a solid mass, the solid mass portion of which
has dimensions such that a sphere with a diameter of eight inches could
be contained within such solid mass portion; and
B.
All other items of waste which would be likely to pose a threat to health
or safety or the acceptance and disposal of which may cause damage
to waste disposal facilities or be in violation of any judicial decision,
order or action of any federal, state or local government or any agency
thereof or any other regulatory or applicable law or regulations.
C.
§ 201-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-50
200:391
RESIDENTIAL ACCEPTABLE WASTE — That acceptable waste generated
within the Town of Chelmsford as is collected on behalf of the Town or
disposed of by its residents, the source of which is residential households or
municipal buildings located in the Town.
RESIDENTIAL HOUSEHOLDS — All inhabited dwellings up to and
including three-family dwellings.
THE BOARD — The Chelmsford Board of Health, the Town department
responsible for overseeing the licensing and regulation of residential refuse
collection.
TIPPING FEE — The cost per ton for disposing of quantities of residential
acceptable waste at waste disposal facilities.
TON — A short ton of 2,000 pounds.
TRASH CONTAINER — Any container used for containing trash at the curb
for pickup; for example, metal or plastic trash cans, cardboard boxes, etc.
§ 201-51. License requirements.
Collection and removal of refuse. Persons and companies engaged in
the collection of solid waste shall collect household rubbish, paper,
cardboard cartons, garbage and other waste materials from residential
households in the Town of Chelmsford and shall remove said rubbish,
paper, cardboard cartons, garbage and other waste materials to a
location or facility outside the limits of the Town of Chelmsford in
accordance with these rules and regulations as well as all other
applicable laws and regulations.
A.
License. All refuse collection companies will be required to obtain
a license from the Town of Chelmsford Board of Health prior to
commencing with the collection of solid waste. The fee for the refuse
collector shall be $50 per category annually and renewable July 1 each
year.
B.
Application and renewal. At the time of the initial application and
subsequent renewals, the refuse collection company shall submit to the
Board the following information:
A list of references, including but not limited to large commercial
customers and municipal buildings.
(1)
The names of all towns where residential trash is or has been
collected from.
(2)
A description of the collection vehicle(s) to be used and proof of
registration and insurance for each separate vehicle.
(3)
A description of the method of collecting payment from customers
and samples of any stickers used and the contract signed by
residents.
(4)
C.
§ 201-50 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-51
200:392
The name of the waste disposal site(s) to which Chelmsford's refuse
will be taken. The refuse collector will supply documentation that
all disposal sites meet all federal, state and local regulations.
(5)
Upon request, refuse collectors shall produce documentary proof
that they are entitled to dispose of trash in a licensed waste
disposal site.
(6)
Bond. Prior to the issuance of a license, the refuse collector will post
with the Town a bond for faithful performance in the amount of $10,000
issued by a company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
D.
Insurance.
The refuse collector shall furnish the Town with certificates from an
insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. The licensee shall maintain, during the period
of licensing, the following insurance with companies and in forms
acceptable to the Town and in adequate amounts. This shall protect
the licensee performing work covered under the license and the
Town and its employees, agents and officials from all claims and
liability for damages for bodily injury, including accidental death,
and for property damage which may arise from operations under
licensing.
(1)
The amounts of such insurance shall be, for each policy, not less
than:
Workmen's compensation: as required by the laws of
Massachusetts.
(a)
Bodily injury liability, including death: $1,000,000 on account
of any one person and $1,000,000 aggregate limit.
(b)
Property damage liability: $1,000,000 on account of any one
accident and $1,000,000 aggregate.
(c)
Contingent coverage for subcontractors for Subsection E(2)(b)
and (c) above.
(d)
Automobiles and trucks, including hired vehicles: bodily injury
liability, including death: $1,000,000 on account of any one
person and $1,000,000 on account of any one accident.
(e)
(2)
All policies shall be so written that the Town of Chelmsford will be
notified of cancellation or restrictive amendment at least 15 days
prior to the effective date of such cancellation or amendment.
(3)
E.
Indemnity. The licensed refuse collector will take all responsibility for
the work and take all precautions for preventing injuries to persons
or property; shall bear all losses resulting to the collector on account
of the amount or character of the work; and shall assume the defense
F.
§ 201-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-51
200:393
§ 201-52. Reports.
The following reports are to be submitted to the following Town boards as
required after collection begins:
§ 201-53. Operational procedures.
of and indemnify and hold harmless the Town, its officers, agents and
servants from all claims relating to:
(1) Labor and materials furnished to do the work;
(2) The invention and patent rights used in doing the work;
Injuries to any person or corporation received or sustained by or
from the licensed refuse collector and the collector's employees
doing the work in consequence of any improper materials,
implements or labor used therein; and
(3)
Any act, omission or neglect of the collector and the collector's
employees therein.
(4)
Federal and state licenses. The licensee shall submit copies of all
applicable federal and state licenses.
G.
License period. The license issued will be valid for a period of not
more than one year. The licensee must submit an annual application for
renewal.
H.
Tonnage. Reports on the tonnage of residential solid waste removed
from the Town of Chelmsford shall be submitted to the Board of Health
and the Board of Selectmen twice yearly on January 1 and July 1.
A.
Customer lists. Revised residential customer lists shall be submitted to
the Board of Health and the Board of Selectmen twice yearly January
1 and July 1 and shall indicate any changes in the customers served.
All new customers shall be indicated as well as those customers which
have terminated their agreements with the licensed refuse collector.
B.
Termination of service. Within seven days of termination of service by a
residential customer, the Board of Selectmen must be notified.
C.
Time of collection. Solid waste shall be collected between the hours
of 6:30 a.m. and 6:30 p.m. (prevailing time) Monday through Friday,
inclusive, with the exception of holidays observed by the Town of
Chelmsford.
A.
Holidays. Whenever a scheduled collection falls on a legal holiday, that
day's collection and the remaining collections for the week, if any,
shall be the following day. The holidays observed by the Town are:
New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, George Washington's
Birthday, Patriots Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
B.
§ 201-51 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-53
200:394
§ 201-54. Responsibilities of property owner.
Routes. Licensed refuse collectors shall have established routes which
have been approved by the Board of Health and should take appropriate
steps to operate according to the approved routes. Trash shall be
collected from each street on the same day as the Town-provided trash
collection service.
C.
Town-contracted refuse collectors. Any refuse collector who is
contracted by the Town of Chelmsford to collect residential and/or
municipal trash is not allowed to commingle trash collected under the
Town of Chelmsford's contract with any other trash from any other
source.
D.
Acceptable waste. The licensed refuse collector shall collect acceptable
wastes from its residential customers in Chelmsford, provided that the
residential acceptable waste is contained in barrels, plastic bags or tied
bundles.
E.
Unacceptable waste. The licensed refuse collector may refuse to collect
any residential waste if there is any indication that the material is not
an acceptable waste or if it is not properly containerized. The licensed
refuse collector will notify its customers of the reason(s) for refusal to
collect the waste.
F.
Spilled waste. The licensed refuse collector shall take reasonable care
in collecting refuse. Refuse shall not be scattered about the streets
or into private property. Refuse which is accidentally spilled shall be
immediately picked up by the collector and removed together with
other wastes.
G.
Stickers. Any stickers used must not appear to be similar in design,
color or general appearance to those provided by the Town.
H.
Recyclables. The licensed refuse collector shall not collect recyclable
materials in the "Chelmsford Recycles" recycling bin or other container
designated for recycling purposes unless it is contracted by the Town of
Chelmsford to do so.
I.
Inspection. The licensed refuse collector shall allow Board of Health
agents and/or other agents of the Town to inspect its vehicle and
any load if there is a due cause of suspicion of any violations of any
applicable laws, rules or regulations.
J.
A. Weekly trash pickup. Trash must be disposed of on a weekly basis.
Time at curb. Trash and recyclables must be at the curb by 6:30 a.m.
but no sooner than 6:30 p.m. the day before. All trash containers must
be removed from the curbside within 12 hours of collection.
B.
Trash container size. Trash containers must be no larger than 32
gallons and weigh no more than 80 pounds total (including trash and
C.
§ 201-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-54
200:395
§ 201-55. Violations and penalties.
§ 201-56. Severability.
Each of these regulations shall be construed as separate to the end that if
any regulation or sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held invalid for
any reason, the remainder of that regulation and all other regulations shall
continue in force.
container) and must be able to be easily picked up by one person. Bags
must be no larger than 39 gallons and weigh no more than 40 pounds.
Brush must be bundled.
Fullness of trash container. Trash containers must not be filled more
than three inches above the top edge of the container.
D.
E. Lids. All trash containers must have lids.
Suspension of licenses. Any refuse collection license may be suspended
or revised by the Board of Health upon receipt of evidence satisfactory
to the Board that the licensee has not conformed to the requirements of
these regulations or such further regulations as may be adopted for the
collection and disposal of refuse or upon recommendation of the Board
of Health.
A.
Residential violations. Violations of § 201-54 of these regulations shall
be punishable by a fine of $25 per violation.
B.
§ 201-54 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-56
200:396
ARTICLE XII
Waste Automobile Oil
[Added effective 3-1-1992]
§ 201-57. Authority and purpose.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31 to protect
the public health of the community. This regulation will be following and
expanding on the concepts enacted in MGL c. 21, § 52A.
§ 201-58. Retention facilities.
§ 201-59. Return policy.
§ 201-60. Proper disposal.
§ 201-61. Enforcement.
The Chelmsford Board of Health or its agent shall enforce the enactment of
this regulation.
Every automobile service station, marina serving powered watercraft
and retail outlet selling automobile lubricating oil shall install on the
premises and maintain waste automobile lubricating oil retention
facilities, properly sheltered and protected to prevent spillage, seepage
or discharge of said waste oil into storm or sanitary sewers or into the
waters of the commonwealth.
A.
These facilities must be in complete compliance with the Chelmsford
Fire Department rules, regulations and policies before automobile
lubricating oil may be sold.
B.
Every such station, marina and other such outlet shall be required
to accept at no additional charge waste automobile lubricating oil in
quantities not exceeding two gallons per day from any individual with
sales receipts or other proof or purchase from the place to which the
individual returns the waste oil.
A.
Every establishment selling automobile lubricating oil shall post a sign
of a minimum size 18 inches by 36 inches above or next to the products
in question. This sign must clearly state the return policy and use
lettering of sufficient size to be easily read at a distance of 10 feet.
B.
Every such station, marina and other such outlet shall periodically
remove or have removed the accumulated waste automobile lubricating
oil so as not to violate any water pollution control or other statute or
regulations.
A.
Documentation of proper disposal shall be submitted to the Board of
Health semiannually in January and July or upon request.
B.
§ 201-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-62
200:397
§ 201-62. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this regulation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$25 but not more than $100 for each offense. Each twenty-four-hour period
of violation that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 201-63. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective on March 1, 1992.
§ 201-64. Severability.
It is hereby declared that the provisions of this regulation are severable,
and if any provision of this regulation shall be declared unlawful by a valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this regulation.
§ 201-62 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-64
200:398
ARTICLE XIII
Massage/Muscular Therapy
[Added 4-13-1992; amended 3-8-1993]
§ 201-65. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Approved by the Board of Health in accordance with
accepted standards in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
MASSAGE OR MUSCULAR THERAPIST — Any person, male or female, who
has been trained in and practices the art of massage or muscular therapy.
MASSAGE OR MUSCULAR THERAPY — A method of applying pressure on
or friction against, rubbing, kneading, tapping, pounding or stroking the
external parts of the body with the hands or arms, with or without the aid
of mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances and with or without
supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, oils, creams,
lotions, powders or similar preparations, for the purpose of reducing
tension, stimulating circulation and generally providing for an increase in a
person's health and well-being.
§ 201-66. Permit required.
No person may practice massage or muscular therapy within the Town
of Chelmsford without a permit of registration from the Board of
Health.
A.
An applicant for a permit must:
(1) Be 21 years of age or older.
(2) Be of good moral and ethical character.
(3) Complete an application form available at the Health Department.
Submit a certified copy of proof of graduation from a school of
massage or muscular therapy which requires at least 1,000 hours
and at least six months of instruction and practicum training and
is approved by the American Massage Therapy Association and
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Education or
proof of graduation from a school of massage or muscular therapy
certified by the Board of Education in the state in which the school
is located or have completed at least 1,000 hours and be within
three months of graduation from a course working for a degree.
(4)
Receive a passing grade in a written examination to be taken at the
Board of Health office prior to employment (if required).
(5)
B.
§ 201-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-66
200:399
§ 201-67. Exceptions and exclusions.
§ 201-68. Licensing of massage therapy establishments.
Have had a physical examination, including a serological
examination (i.e., syphilis), within 45 days prior to application for
licensing or relicensing.
(6)
Show certification that the applicant is free of tuberculosis in
communicable form as set forth by the Department of Public Health
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(7)
The fee for an individual permit will be determined annually by the
Board of Health.
C.
D. All massage therapist permits will expire on June 30 of each year.
The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to the following
classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of
their respective professions:
Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists,
physical therapists or occupational therapists who are duly
licensed to practice their respective professions in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(1)
Nurses registered under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
(2)
Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts while engaging in practices
within the scope of their licenses, except that this provision shall
apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the
customer or client.
(3)
Personnel in hospitals, nursing homes or other health care facilities
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(4)
Coaches and athletic trainers acting within the scope of their
employment at accredited high schools, junior colleges or other
educational institutions.
(5)
A.
A person registered or licensed to practice massage in any other city
or town of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts may, at the request of
a physician or other health care professional, attend patients, specified
by said person, in Chelmsford. If requested, he/she shall submit to the
Board of Health a copy of his/her registration or license from another
community and written confirmation of the request.
B.
The Board of Health will license establishments for the sole purpose of
providing massage therapy if the following requirements are met:
A.
§ 201-66 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-68
200:400
§ 201-69. Massage therapy establishment operating requirements.
All zoning bylaws and requirements of the Town of Chelmsford are
met.
(1)
All massage therapists practicing on the premises hold current
massage therapy permits from the Town of Chelmsford.
(2)
An application supplied by the Health Department has been
completed.
(3)
A fee, to be determined by the Board of Health on an annual basis,
is paid to the Town of Chelmsford at the time the application is
submitted.
(4)
B. The license is nontransferable.
C. Licenses shall automatically expire on June 30 of each year.
Applications for renewal must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the
expiration date.
D.
Massage therapy establishments shall at all times be equipped with
an adequate supply of clean, sanitary towels, coverings and linens.
Clean towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets.
Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one patron, unless
they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and
coverings shall not be used on more than one patron. Soiled linens and
disposable items shall be deposited in separate, approved receptacles.
A.
Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more
than one patron unless they have been sterilized, using approved
sterilizing methods.
B.
Pads used on massage tables shall be covered with a durable, washable,
plastic or other waterproof material and disinfected between patrons.
C.
Therapists practicing in the establishment must be aware of disease
transmission and practice good handwashing between patrons.
D.
E. The establishment shall be connected to the public sewerage system.
The establishment shall be well-lighted, well-ventilated and properly
heated when seasonally indicated.
F.
No room used by the licensee in the conduct of his or her business shall
be used as a bedroom.
G.
There shall be an adequate supply of hot and cold running water at all
times.
H.
There shall be approved toilet and washing facilities within the
premises, readily available to the patrons and affording sufficient
privacy.
I.
§ 201-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-69
200:401
§ 201-70. Direct application of instruments to skin.
No instrument or device designed or used for direct application to the skin
shall be applied directly to the skin unless sterilized. The part of the body
being treated shall be covered with a clean towel, or else the instrument
shall be covered in a similar manner.
Where patrons of both sexes are accommodated, adequate
arrangements shall be made for separation of rooms, toilets and
washing facilities used by each sex.
J.
Walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities of the establishment
must be maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition
at all times.
K.
A list of services and fees shall be clearly posted for the benefit of
patrons.
L.
No establishment shall be kept open or operating except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. unless authorized in writing by the
Board of Health.
M.
Every person licensed to practice massage/muscular therapy or to
operate an establishment for giving massage/muscular therapy shall
have in his/her possession that license whenever he/she may be
engaged in the practice of massage/muscular therapy and when
requested will show such license to any legally authorized public officer.
N.
The door of each room or enclosure used for massage purposes shall
have a window large enough to permit visual observation of the entire
room or enclosure from outside such room or enclosure.
O.
Each room or enclosure used for the giving of massage services shall
have at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts.
P.
There shall be installed a heat and smoke detecting system approved
by the Chelmsford Fire Chief.
Q.
There shall be adequate facilities for the cleaning and sterilization of all
equipment.
R.
All rooms used for reception and treatment of patrons shall be so
arranged as to afford adequate fire protection and shall have
satisfactory means of egress in case of fire as approved by the
Chelmsford Building Inspector and Chelmsford Fire Chief.
S.
T. No food or alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the premises.
Whirlpool and bath water should be constantly changing and also have
separate drains.
U.
§ 201-69 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-71
200:402
§ 201-71. Treatment of wounds.
No sponge, stick, alum or other article liable to convey infection shall be
used to make application directly to the skin or any cut or wound.
§ 201-72. Massage of persons with skin disease.
No licensee shall massage any person afflicted with any skin eruption or
other disease unless such person shall have furnished a written certificate
from a physician to the effect that the eruption or disease is not of a
contagious or transmissible character.
§ 201-73. Cleaning of hands.
Every person licensed to practice massage shall thoroughly cleanse his or
her hands by washing with soap and hot water immediately before serving
a patron.
§ 201-74. Display of license.
Every licensed establishment must display in a conspicuous location the
licenses of all the licensees operating in the establishment.
§ 201-75. Designation of name.
No licensee shall operate under any name or conduct his or her business
under any designation not specified in his or her license.
§ 201-76. Change of address or name.
Every licensee shall notify the Board of Health prior to any change of
address, home or business, or name. Any new license or amendment to an
existing license required because of the foregoing may be issued without
charge at the discretion of the Board of Health.
§ 201-77. Inspections.
Every licensee shall permit the Board of Health or its agents or other
Town authorities acting in an official capacity to inspect his/her place of
business and his/her work at any reasonable time. Refusal to allow entry to
authorized persons shall be sufficient reason to revoke the license issued.
§ 201-78. Hearing in case of suspension or revocation of license.
A person whose license has been suspended or revoked may, within 10 days
of the suspension or revocation of his or her license, request, in writing,
a hearing upon the cause or causes of such suspension or revocation. The
Board of Health may set a time and place for said hearing.
§ 201-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-79
200:403
§ 201-79. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of these rules or regulations shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 or imprisonment for not more than
six months, or both, in accordance with MGL c. 149, § 53.
§ 201-80. Variances.
§ 201-81. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and
regulations shall be decided invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of these regulations, which
shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of these
regulations are hereby declared severable.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case when the Board of
Health finds that the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice.
A.
Every request for a variance shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the Board of Health and shall state the specific variance
sought and the reasons therefor. The fee for a variance request shall be
determined by the Board of Health.
B.
Any variance granted must be in writing with a copy available to the
public at all reasonable hours in the office of the Board of Health.
Any variance granted must be posted on the premises in a prominent
location for the duration that the variance is in effect.
C.
§ 201-79 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-81
200:404
ARTICLE XIV
Tobacco
[Added 7-10-1995; amended 5-5-1997]
§ 201-82. Authority and purpose.
The Board of Health of the Town of Chelmsford, pursuant to the authority
granted under MGL c. 111, § 31, hereby adopts the following regulations to
protect the public health of the community.
§ 201-83. Findings.
There exists substantial evidence that tobacco smoke causes cancer, heart
disease and various lung disorders. Increasing evidence further
demonstrates that the harmful effects of tobacco smoke are not confined to
smokers but also cause severe discomfort and in some cases grave illnesses
to nonsmokers. Therefore, these regulations are adopted pursuant to MGL
c. 111, §§ 31 and 31C, as health regulations in the interest of and for the
preservation of the public health.
§ 201-84. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DESIGNATED SMOKING AREA — An area designated and posted by the
proprietor, manager or other person(s) of authority in which smoking is
permitted. Said area shall not be an area where nonsmokers must have
access.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer in
return for wages or profit.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust
or other organized group of individuals, including the Town of Chelmsford
or any agency thereof, which regularly uses the services of one or more
employees.
ENCLOSED — All space between the floor and ceiling which is enclosed on
all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways or passageways).
MINOR — Any person less than 18 years of age.
NONSMOKING AREA — Any area that is designated and posted by the
proprietor or person in charge as a place where smoking by patrons,
employees or others is prohibited.
PROPER VENTILATION — An area enclosed by walls which is separately
ventilated directly to the outside and shall not allow any air to recirculate
through the building ventilation system. The area shall be under negative
pressure so as to reduce air from escaping into other areas which may be
accessed by nonsmokers. The ventilation rate in this area shall conform to
the current ASHRAE (American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
§ 201-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-84
200:405
Conditioning Engineers) or other generally accepted standard for venting a
smoking lounge approved by the Chelmsford Board of Health.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any enclosed, indoor area that is located in a building
owned or occupied by any department or agency of the Town of Chelmsford
or any political subdivision thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed, indoor area when open to and used by
the general public, including but not limited to the following facilities:
auditoriums, licensed child-care locations, schools, clinics, hospitals,
nursing homes, long-term care facilities, public libraries, municipal
buildings, museums, theaters, retail stores, retail food establishments,
indoor sports arenas, public transit facilities, enclosed shopping malls,
hotel and motel lobbies, stairwells, hallways, entrances, public rest rooms,
elevators accessible to the public, common areas in privately owned
buildings and any clubs, rooms or halls when used for public meetings.
A room or hall used for a private social function in which the sponsor of
the private function and not the owner or proprietor has control over the
seating arrangements shall not be construed as a public place.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment serving food for consumption on the
premises which maintains tables for the use of its customers. This category
includes cafeterias in the workplace.
RETAIL STORE — Any establishment selling goods, articles or personal
services to the public.
SEATING CAPACITY — That capacity designated on the occupancy permit
of a restaurant.
SMOKING — The lighting of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco
product or having the possession of any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other tobacco product.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any machine or device designated for or
used for the vending of cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products upon
the insertion of coins, trade checks or slugs.
WORKPLACE — Any area within a structure or portion thereof at which
one or more employees perform services for their employer. It also includes
private offices, individual work stations and all common areas, including
but not limited to the following areas: employee lounges, rest rooms,
conference rooms, hallways, stairways and entranceways.
§ 201-85. Prohibition of smoking in public places.
Public buildings. This Board bans the smoking of cigarettes and all
other tobacco products from all public buildings within the Town of
Chelmsford.
A.
Restaurants. In any restaurant, smoking shall be prohibited except
in specifically designated smoking areas. Where smoking areas are
designated, existing physical barriers shall be used to minimize the
toxic effect of smoke on persons in nonsmoking areas. The designated
B.
§ 201-84 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-85
200:406
smoking area shall not be an area where smoking is prohibited by
the Fire Marshal, law or regulation. Nonsmoking areas shall comprise
no less than 75% of the seating capacity of the restaurant. Areas
designated as smoking and nonsmoking areas must be conspicuously
marked. One year from the implementation date of these regulations,
all designated smoking areas shall have proper ventilation, as defined
in § 201-84. In case of restaurants consisting of a single room, the
ventilation rate for the room shall conform to the current ASHRAE
(American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning
Engineers) or other generally accepted standard for venting a smoking
lounge approved by the Chelmsford Board of Health.
Auditoriums, clinics, hospitals, nursing homes, long-term care facilities,
museums, theaters, indoor sports arenas, enclosed shopping malls,
hotels, motels and inns. A designated smoking area with proper
ventilation, as defined in § 201-84, may be designated in auditoriums,
clinics, hospitals, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, museums,
theaters, indoor sports arenas, enclosed shopping malls, hotels, motels,
inns and all other public places. Areas designated as smoking and
nonsmoking areas must be conspicuously marked.
C.
Hotel/motel/inn rooms rented to guests. Smoking rooms may be
designated by the proprietor(s) or other person(s) in charge of a hotel/
motel/inn and may not exceed 25% of the total rooms licensed for
guests. Nonsmoking room locations may not be located between
smoking rooms. Nonsmoking rooms shall be situated so as to utilize
physical barriers and ventilation systems to minimize the toxic effect
of tobacco smoke on nonsmokers. Customers seeking accommodations
shall be routinely advised of the availability of nonsmoking rooms by
check-in personnel. Rooms shall be posted as smoking prohibited or
smoking permitted.
D.
Retail stores. The prohibition of smoking in public places shall apply
to retail stores doing business with the general public. A designated
smoking area with proper ventilation, as defined in § 201-84, may be
established in areas not open to the public.
E.
Schools. It shall be unlawful for any person, including all teaching and
nonteaching personnel, to use cigarettes or any tobacco products in any
private or public school, on school grounds or in school vehicles.
F.
Implementation in public places. The proprietor(s) or other person(s)
in charge of a public place covered by this regulation shall make
reasonable efforts to prevent smoking in nonsmoking areas by:
Conspicuously posting a notice or sign at each entrance to the
public place indicating smoking is prohibited therein except in
specifically designated smoking areas and, in addition,
conspicuously posting "Smoking" and "No Smoking" signs, or the
international "No Smoking" symbol, in every area where smoking
is permitted or prohibited by this regulation. The employer shall
(1)
G.
§ 201-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-85
200:407
§ 201-86. Workplace.
provide proof that a designated smoking area has proper
ventilation from a certified heating, ventilation and air-conditioning
(HVAC) engineer or equally qualified professional to the Director of
the Board of Health or his or her agent.
Arranging seating so that existing physical barriers and available
space are utilized to minimize the presence of tobacco smoke in
nonsmoking areas. Nonsmoking areas are to be situated near the
fresh air intake vent of the facility. These nonsmoking areas must
be established for nonsmoking personnel.
(2)
Requiring patrons, visitors or employees who may be smoking in
a nonsmoking area either to refrain from smoking or to move to a
designated smoking area.
(3)
Using any other means which may be appropriate and reasonable
to enforce these regulations.
(4)
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any workplace except
in a specifically designated area with proper ventilation, as defined in
§ 201-84.
A.
Each employer operating a workplace in the Town of Chelmsford may
specifically designate an enclosed area with proper ventilation as
defined in § 201-84, except that nonsmoking areas must also be
available for nonsmoking employees. Areas designated as smoking and
nonsmoking areas must be conspicuously marked.
B.
Each employer operating a workplace in the Town of Chelmsford shall
establish and implement a written policy governing smoking in such
workplace. Employees must be notified of the policy, and a copy of said
policy must be posted in a location easily visible and accessible to all
employees. Upon request, the employer shall provide a written policy
to the Director of the Board of Health or his or her agent.
C.
Any employee exposed to smoke or smoking by-products because of
poor ventilation or inadequate nonsmoking areas may object, in writing,
to the employer. The employer should respond, in writing, within 20
working days. If after 20 working days the employer has not begun to
resolve the objecting employee's complaint, a written complaint may be
filed with the Board of Health.
D.
Each employer having control of premises upon which smoking is
prohibited by this regulation, or his or her agent or designee, shall
conspicuously display upon the premises an appropriate number of
signs reading "Smoking Prohibited by Law."
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person having control of any workplace
upon which smoking is prohibited by this regulation to knowingly
F.
§ 201-85 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-86
200:408
§ 201-87. Retail sale of tobacco products.
§ 201-88. Tobacco sales to minors.
permit, or for his or her agent to knowingly permit, a violation of this
regulation.
No person, firm, corporation, establishment or agency shall sell
cigarettes, chewing tobacco or other tobacco products in the Town of
Chelmsford unless he, she or it has a valid permit from the Chelmsford
Board of Health.
A.
No person or entity selling tobacco products shall allow anyone to
sell tobacco products until such employee reads the Board of Health
regulations and signs a sworn statement, a copy of which will be placed
on file in the office of the Board of Health, that he or she understands
and will uphold the regulation.
B.
All displays of tobacco products shall be located behind the sales
counter, and the purchase of tobacco products must be controlled by
the employee.
C.
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a person or entity may
only sell tobacco products in a direct, face-to-face exchange between
the retailer and the consumer. Examples of methods of sale which
are not permitted include, but are not limited to, vending machines
and self-service displays, except for vending machines and self-service
displays that are located in facilities where the retail tobacco products
dealer's permit ensures that no person younger than 18 years of age is
present or permitted to enter at any time.
D.
No person or entity may sell or cause to be sold, or distribute or cause
to be distributed, any cigarette package that contains fewer than 20
cigarettes.
E.
In conformance with MGL c. 270, §§ 6 and 7, no person shall give/sell
cigarettes, chewing tobacco, snuff or other tobacco in any of its forms
to any person who is a minor (under the age of 18).
A.
In conformance with state law prohibiting sales to minors (under 18
years of age), a copy of MGL c. 270, § 6 shall be posted conspicuously
by the owner or other person in charge. The notice shall be posted
at all cash registers where tobacco is sold and shall be posted in
such a manner so it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the counter.
B.
Store owners, managers or other persons in charge where cigarettes,
chewing tobacco or other tobacco products are sold shall conspicuously
post and maintain signs that proof of age is required to determine that
a customer is not a minor (under 18 years of age) to purchase tobacco
products.
C.
§ 201-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-88
200:409
§ 201-89. Variances.
§ 201-90. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
No retailer may sell cigarettes, smokeless tobacco or other tobacco
products to any person younger than 18 years of age. Each retailer shall
verify by means of photographic identification containing the bearer's
date of birth that no person purchasing the product is younger than 18
years of age. No such verification is required for any person over the
age of 26.
D.
No free samples of tobacco or tobacco products shall be distributed
or sold and no person shall distribute any coupons or vouchers
redeemable for free tobacco products within the Town of Chelmsford to
minors (less than 18 years of age).
E.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case when the Board of
Health finds that the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice.
A.
Every request for a variance shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the Board of Health and shall state the specific variance
sought and the reasons therefor. The fee for a variance request shall be
determined by the Board of Health.
B.
Any variance granted must be in writing with a copy available to the
public at all reasonable hours in the office of the Board of Health.
Any variance granted must be posted on the premises in a prominent
location for the duration that the variance is in effect.
C.
Any person found to be smoking within any public building is deemed
to be in violation of this regulation. Any person who smokes in a
nonsmoking area shall be subject to a fine of up to $25 for the first
violation, $50 for the second violation and $100 for any third or
subsequent violation.
A.
Any proprietor(s) or other person(s) in charge of a place who fails
to comply with these regulations or employee who sells any tobacco
product to a minor shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first
violation, $200 for the second violation and suspension of the Board of
Health permit to sell tobacco for 30 days, $300 for the third violation
and suspension of the Board of Health permit to sell tobacco for 90
days, $300 for the fourth violation and suspension of the Board of
Health permit to sell tobacco for six months and possible permanent
revocation of the Board of Health tobacco permit. Any proprietor(s)
or other person(s) who fails to comply with this regulation for a fifth
time shall be subject to a fine of $300 and permanent revocation of any
license issued by the Board of Health.
B.
In addition to the remedies provided by Subsections A and B, the Board
of Health or any person aggrieved by the failure of the proprietor
C.
§ 201-88 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-90
200:410
§ 201-91. Other applicable laws.
These regulations shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable health, safety or fire
codes, regulations or statutes.
§ 201-92. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 201-93. When effective.
This regulation shall take effect 90 days after publication of a summary
of this regulation in a newspaper in the Town of Chelmsford. As required
by MGL c. 111, § 31, an attested copy has been filed with the Department
of Environmental Protection on July 20, 1995. Public meetings regarding
this regulation were conducted on April 3, 1995, and June 12, 1995. This
regulation was voted by a majority of this Board on July 10, 1995. This
regulation was further amended to conform to the Food and Drug
Administration regulations and unanimously approved by this Board on May
5, 1997.
or other person in charge of a place covered by these regulations to
comply with any provision of this section may apply for injunctive relief
to enforce the provisions of this section in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Any person aggrieved by the willful failure or refusal to comply with
restrictions in any municipal building may complain, in writing, to the
Board of Health. The Board of Health shall respond, in writing, within
20 working days to the complainant that it has inspected the area
described in the complaint and has enforced the provisions of this
section as provided herein.
D.
A statute of limitation of three years shall apply to all fines and
penalties issued for sale of tobacco to minors. Determination of fines
and penalties will be based upon the record of sales within the prior
three-year period. Violations will be treated as in Subsection B,
beginning with a fine of $100.
E.
§ 201-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-93
200:411

ARTICLE XV
Body Piercing
[Added 9-8-1997; amended 9-14-1998]
§ 201-94. Purpose.
§ 201-95. Definitions.
The following words, as used in these rules and regulations, unless the
context otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
ANTIBACTERIAL SOLUTION — Any solution used to retard the growth of
bacteria for application to human skin and which is so labeled.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Director of the Chelmsford Board of Health and
his or her clerk, officers, agents, assistants and/or inspectors.
BODY PIERCER — Any person who performs piercing of any part of the
body other than the earlobe which is pierced by use of an appropriate
piercing gun.
BODY PIERCER PERMIT — A written instrument, issued by the Board of
Health, authorizing the person named therein to engage in the work of body
piercing.
BODY PIERCING — Any method of inserting a needle into the body to place
jewelry in the perforation produced by the needle. Establishments and/or
individuals involved in the piercing of earlobes only and using approved ear
piercing guns are subject only to the general rules and regulations.
GERMICIDAL SOLUTION — Any solution which destroys germs and is so
labeled.
The Town of Chelmsford is promulgating rules and regulations which
provide minimum requirements to be met by any person performing
body piercing upon any individual and for any establishment where
body piercing is performed. These requirements shall include, but are
not limited to, general sanitation of premises wherein body piercing is
to be performed along with sterilization of instruments. These rules and
regulations are necessary to protect the public's health by preventing
diseases, including but not limited to transmission of Hepatitis B and/or
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV/AIDS).
A.
In addition, these rules and regulations shall establish procedures for
registration with the Board of Health of all persons performing body
piercing, for the requirement of minimal training standards for the
prevention of disease transmission and for knowledge of anatomy and
physiology, for regular inspection of premises wherein body piercing
is performed and for revocation of the registration of any person or
establishment deemed in violation of the rules and regulations
promulgated under this article. An annual, nontransferable registration
fee, set by the Chelmsford Board of Health, shall be paid by any person
or establishment registered under this article.
B.
§ 201-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-95
200:413
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18.
OPERATOR — Any person who owns, controls, operates, conducts or
manages any piercing establishment, whether actually performing the work
of piercing or not.
PIERCING STUDIO — Any room or space where piercing is practiced or
where the business of piercing is conducted or any part thereof.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZED — Effective bacterial treatment by a process that provides
sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria
count, including pathogens, to a safe level on equipment.
STERILIZATION — Holding in an autoclave for 30 minutes, at 20 pounds'
pressure, at a temperature of 275° F.
§ 201-96. General rules and regulations.
No minor shall receive body piercing unless accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian who has signed a consent form. No piercing of the
genitalia of minors shall be allowed.
A.
B. No piercing of animals shall be allowed in piercing studios.
Preprocedural consultation to discuss body piercing, its risks and
potential complications shall be required with each client not less than
72 hours prior to the procedure. An informed consent form shall be
signed by all clients. Clients shall be supplied a copy of the consent
form and the consent form shall be kept on file by the body piercer.
Clients should be told to consult with their physician regarding any
medical condition which could be exacerbated by the piercing
procedure (i.e., hemophilia, open sores, etc.).
C.
Patrons who admit to or are obviously under the influence of alcohol or
other judgment-altering drugs shall not receive a body piercing.
D.
Body piercers shall not be under the influence of any substance, legal
or illegal, which might impair their judgment or ability to properly
perform body piercing.
E.
Patrons should receive verbal and written instructions on the cleaning,
use of antiseptics and other specific instructions for each piercing after
the piercing, including the signs and symptoms of complications.
F.
Appropriate disinfectants must be used to disinfect the surface of the
skin in the area to be pierced prior to piercing.
G.
Infections and adverse reactions of any kind suspected from the
application of piercing which become known to the body piercer shall
be reported to the Board of Health within 24 hours and the patron
referred to a physician for examination.
H.
§ 201-95 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-96
200:414
§ 201-97. Registration required; fees; violations and penalties.
Body piercers who receive needle stick injuries and/or any potential
exposure to blood-borne pathogens on the job shall follow the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) guidelines on
the reporting and follow-up on needle stick injuries. OSHA guidelines
for needle stick follow-up shall be posted in the employee area [Code of
Federal Regulations 29 CFR 1910.1030(f)].
I.
It is mandated that body piercers receive the series of Hepatitis B
vaccinations and tetanus doses or booster shot.
J.
The gun used for the piercing of ear lobes only must be disinfected with
an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approved disinfectant, such
as madicide or a similar product.
K.
Failure to comply with any of the above regulations may result in
immediate revocation of registration.
L.
No person or body piercer shall perform body piercing, display a sign or
in any other way advertise or purport to be a body piercer unless that
person holds a valid certificate of registration from the Board of Health.
A.
An applicant for registration shall pay a fee of $100 with an annual
renewal fee of $100 and shall show to the satisfaction of the Board of
Health that the applicant:
Has complied with the applicable rules and regulations of the
Board of Health.
(1)
Upon application, has provided evidence in the form of a driver's
license/state identification card or federal identification card that
the applicant is not less than 18 years of age.
(2)
Upon application, has signed a form consenting to abide by the
rules and regulations and recommended procedures on the
prevention of disease transmission in body piercing, sanitation,
sterilization, handling of infections, universal body fluid
precautions, sharp and biologic waste disposal and wound care as
stated in the federal register of EPA rules and regulations on bloodborne
pathogens.
(3)
Upon application, shall notify the Board of Health, in writing, of the
regular address of the place where the person performs or intends
to perform body piercing and shall keep the registration certificate
conspicuously posted in the place of business at all times. Body
piercers shall operate only out of facilities approved by the Board of
Health to perform body piercing. Body piercers shall be required to
demonstrate proper sanitary procedures and to develop and submit
their policy on infection control to the Board of Health.
(4)
B.
§ 201-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-97
200:415
§ 201-98. Facilities and equipment.
Minimal requirements. Whoever, not being registered as a qualified
nurse under MGL c. 112, § 74 or as a qualified physician under MGL
c. 112, § 2, or corresponding earlier laws, punctures a body part
(excluding the ear) of any person by means of body piercing shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.
C.
Facilities.
(1) Facilities must be located in an area zoned for business.
Studio design, furniture, lighting, plumbing, water and sewage
must be in accordance with local bylaws.
(2)
With the exception of service animals (e.g., guide dogs), no animals
should be allowed on the premises.
(3)
The floor and all other surfaces shall be maintained in a clean
condition at all times. The walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and
in good repair at all times. Light fixtures, decorative materials and
similar equipment attached to the walls or ceilings shall be kept
clean.
(4)
Adequate ventilation (such as air conditioning, etc.) to keep the
area dry and air circulating should be used. ("Adequate ventilation"
shall mean a free and unrestricted circulation of fresh air
throughout the body piercing studio and the expulsion of foul or
stagnant air.) The use of a HEPA ventilation system is required.
(5)
Convenient, clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facilities
shall be made accessible to customers. A sign shall be posted in the
bathroom which forbids insertion or handling of piercing/jewelry.
The plumbing fixtures and toilet room shall be maintained in a
sanitary manner and in good repair. Single-service hand towels or
mechanical means for hand drying shall be provided.
(6)
Proper biologic waste and sharps disposal of single-use items and
needles exposed to body fluids shall be required in accordance with
state and local regulations. Only medical-grade sharps containers
that are puncture-resistant with tight-fitting lids are acceptable.
(7)
Body piercers shall be equipped with appropriate sterilizing
equipment (i.e., a working steam autoclave). Autoclaves must be
spore tested monthly by independent laboratories to ensure that
they are working adequately, and a record shall be kept available
for review by the Board of Health.
(8)
Body piercers shall be equipped with appropriate cleansing
equipment (i.e., a working ultrasonic cleaner).
(9)
A.
B. Work area.
§ 201-97 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-98
200:416
§ 201-99. Operation procedures.
Each body piercing studio shall have a separate work area not used
for any other purpose.
(1)
No one shall be pierced at any other location in the studio other
than the work area.
(2)
No customer should be allowed to perform their own piercing/
insertions anywhere on the premises.
(3)
Work areas shall not be used as a corridor for access to other
rooms.
(4)
Body piercing must be performed in a room approved by the Board
of Health.
(5)
The floors, chairs and table tops where body piercing equipment
and body piercing work is done should be nonporous. Carpet is
not permitted as a floor covering in the work area where the body
piercing is applied.
(6)
The work area should be well lighted. The work area shall have at
least 50 footcandles of light measured at the height of the work
table.
(7)
Facilities shall be equipped with sinks and basins with hot and cold
running water for the exclusive use of the piercers for washing
their hands and preparing their clients for body piercing.
(8)
A covered waste receptacle with disposable liner bags shall be
located in the work area.
(9)
No person shall smoke, consume any food or drink in the work
area.
(10)
No other activities (such as hair styling, etc.) shall be performed in
any room designated for body piercing.
(11)
Business procedure and jewelry.
Body piercers shall, prior to body piercing, complete all business
transactions and complete the client consent form and provide a
copy to the client.
(1)
Client and piercer must have appropriate size and quality jewelry
chosen before the procedure begins.
(2)
Only appropriate jewelry should be used in piercing. Appropriate
jewelry is made of implant-grade, high-quality surgical steel (316E
Series), solid 14K or 18K gold, niobium, titanium or platinum.
Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches or irregular surfaces
which might endanger the tissues.
(3)
A.
§ 201-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-99
200:417
Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing is not
appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by
piercers.
(4)
Hand washing and general health of body piercer. Before working on
each patron, the body piercer shall:
(1) Inspect hands for small cuts and abrasions.
Refrain from body piercing or handling equipment if he or she has
open sores, weeping dermatitis or lesions on hands or arms until
the condition has cleared.
(2)
Refrain from body piercing until the condition has cleared if he or
she has a cold, flu or other communicable disease.
(3)
(4) Wash hands, wrists and up to elbows with antibacterial solution.
Dry hands thoroughly with single-use disposable towel, such as a
paper towel, or air dry under a heat dryer.
(5)
B.
Body piercing procedures.
(1) Body piercers shall set up equipment in front of client.
Sealed autoclave bags containing any equipment required to be
sterile shall be opened in front of the client and the autoclave bag
discarded.
(2)
All jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not
previously worn or contaminated) should be disinfected with a
nonhazardous hard surface disinfectant and must comply with
OSHA regulations. All jewelry contaminated or potentially
contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by
another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator
bags, sealed and dated.
(3)
All needles used in piercing must be presterilized, used on one
person, in one sitting, for single piercing and immediately disposed
of in a medical sharps container.
(4)
All forceps, tubes, etc., must be presterilized, stored in sterile
indicator bags, sealed and dated and used on one person and in one
sitting. After one such use, they must be autoclaved and stored in
sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated.
(5)
C.
Disinfection routine.
Body piercers shall:
(a) Put on fresh gloves for disinfection routine.
(b) Move in such a manner to avoid recontamination of surfaces.
(c) Discard disposable items and remove from areas.
(1)
D.
§ 201-99 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-99
200:418
§ 201-100. Disposal of waste.
Remove plastic barrier film (if used) and disinfect surface
areas, drawer pulls, cabinetry, telephones, lamps, chairs, sinks,
ultrasonic tanks, tables, chairs, floor area and any other
surfaces that might have become contaminated.
(d)
(e) Dispose of single-use (disposable) lap cloths.
(f) Remove gloves, discard gloves and wash hands.
Double bag or use biohazard bags and discard materials after
each client.
(g)
(h) Discard materials in a medically appropriate manner.
All reusable, nonsterilizable implements, such as marking pen,
should be nonporous and disinfected after each use with EPA
approved hard surface disinfection liquid. Nonspray wipes for
surfaces and liquids for soaking jewelry are preferred over spray
disinfectants which may disperse pathogens into the air.
(2)
Cleansing with ultrasonic cleaners should be the rule for removal
of bacitracin or other triple antibiotic solutions, blood and other
particles from a used contaminated implement (i.e., jewelry,
forceps, insertion tapers and pliers), followed by steam autoclave.
(3)
Steam autoclave must be used on all equipment that may come
in contact with the client or the jewelry (i.e., receiving tubes,
rubber bands, insertion tapers, forceps, files, gauge wheels, pliers,
etc.). Equipment shall be bagged, dated and sealed and stored in
a nonporous dark, dry cool place, such as a medical credenza,
etc. Spore indicators shall be used with each load to ensure spore
eradication. Instruments shall be autoclaved at a temperature of
275° F. under pressure of 20 pounds per square inch for 30 minutes
from start. Autoclaves shall be spore tested by independent
laboratories at least once each month to induce efficacy. Immersion
in cold germicidal solutions provides incomplete sterilization and is
inappropriate.
(4)
Appropriate ear piercing guns should only be used for piercing ear
lobes and shall not be used for piercing any other body part.
(5)
Iodine, antiseptics and other ointments used shall be applied with
single-use applicators. Applicators that have touched a client once
may not be used to retrieve antiseptics, iodine, etc., from
containers and shall be disposed of after single use.
(6)
Bar setups, piercing needles, razor blades or other sharp instruments
which are not to be sterilized shall be disposed of in medically approved
sharps containers that are puncture-resistant and have tight-fitting lids.
A.
§ 201-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 201-100
200:419
§ 201-101. Mobile establishments.
Mobile piercing studios shall not be allowed to operate in Chelmsford.
§ 201-102. Suspension of registration.
§ 201-103. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 201-104. Effective date.
These regulations were adopted by the Board of Health, Chelmsford,
Massachusetts, in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 31, September 8, 1997,
and revised September 14, 1998.
{END OF CHAPTER}
Containers of sharps wastes shall be sent to a facility where they are
either incinerated or otherwise rendered nonhazardous.
B.
Disposable waste shall be placed in easily cleanable, closed containers
with tight-fitting lids to prevent leakage or spoilage.
C.
D. Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use.
Disposable waste shall be handled, stored and disposed of to minimize
direct exposure of personnel to waste material.
E.
The Board of Health medical/waste generator form must be completed
and returned to the Board of Health prior to issuance of a certificate of
registration.
F.
The piercer's registration shall be suspended immediately upon notice
to the holder (without a hearing) when the Board of Health has reason
to believe that an imminent health hazard exists. In all other instances
of violation of the provisions of this regulation the Board of Health shall
serve the registrant a written notice specifying the violations and afford
the registrant or certificate holder a reasonable opportunity to correct
the same.
A.
Whenever a registrant has failed to comply with any written notice
issued under the provisions of this section, the Board of Health may
suspend the body piercer's registration on the 10th day following
receipt of written notice of such suspension.
B.
§ 201-100 CHELMSFORD CODE § 201-104
200:420
Chapter 202
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 20.
Historic district — See Ch. 68.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 142.
Trailers and trailer camps — See Ch. 158.
Trees — See Ch. 161.
Wetlands — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 195.
§ 201-104 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 201-104
202:421

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 202-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the establishment of subdivision control in Chelmsford is
to secure for the town all of the benefits and protection authorized by the
Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, inclusive. The
purpose of these rules and regulations is to specify and make clear the
requirements and procedures to be followed and the responsibilities to be
discharged in operations under the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 202-2. Approval of definitive plan required.
No person shall make a subdivision (as defined in the Subdivision Control
Law) of any land within the town or proceed with the improvement or
sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction of ways or the installation
of municipal services therein unless and until a definitive plan of such
subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Board as
hereinafter provided.
§ 202-3. Number of dwellings per lot.
Not more than one dwelling designed or suitable for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as a dwelling on
any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the town, without the consent of the
Board. Such consent may be conditioned upon the providing of adequate
ways furnishing access to each site for such building, in the same manner
as otherwise required for lots in a subdivision.
§ 202-4. Definitions.
Unless the content clearly requires some other meaning, the following
words and phrases shall have these meanings:
BOARD — The Chelmsford Planning Board.
BUSINESS STREET — A street serving abutting property which is chiefly
used or zoned for industry or commerce.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street with anticipated traffic equivalent to that
generated by 50 homes or more.
LANE — A street which, by its location and design, may not reasonably be
expected to service nonresidential property or serve as a means of access
to more than 10 homes.
MINOR STREET — A street which cannot qualify as a lane but which
serves residential property and can be expected to handle less traffic than
a collector street.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES — Public utilities furnished by the town.
§ 202-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-4
202:423
OFF-STREET PATH — A way for pedestrians, equestrians or bicycles not
within a street right-of-way.
PRIVATE WAY — A way which has not been accepted by the town as a public
way or one which has not been dedicated to public use or one in which the
public has not acquired rights of usage by prescription.
SUBDIVISION — A division of land into two or more lots in such a manner
as to constitute a subdivision as defined in MGL c. 41.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW — Sections 81K to 81GG of Chapter 41 of
the Massachusetts General Laws, as amended from time to time.
§ 202-4 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-4
202:424
ARTICLE II
Plan Procedures
§ 202-5. Submission of plans.
Plans intended for review at a regular meeting of the Planning Board shall
be forwarded to the Planning Board Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. two
working days prior to the Planning Board meeting. The day of the next
regular Board meeting shall be considered to be the date of submission for
all plans, except that the date of mailing shall be the date of submission
for definitive plans sent by registered mail to the Planning Board in care
of the Town Clerk. For plans transmitted to the Planning Board other
than at a regular Board meeting or other than through the Town Clerk,
the date of submission shall be considered to be the day of the next
regular Planning Board meeting after such transmittal. Plans shall not be
considered submitted until all required documentation has been received.
§ 202-6. Plans not requiring approval.
Submission. Any person applying for endorsement of a plan that he or
she believes does not require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law shall submit the original and six prints of the plan and Application
Form A to the Planning Board.57 The applicant shall also file with the
Town Clerk, by delivery or by registered or certified mail, postage
prepaid, a notice stating the date of submission for such determination
along with a copy of Application Form A.
A.
Fees. All plans not requiring approval under the Subdivision Control
Law submitted to the Planning Board for review must be accompanied
by a check for the fee in the amount of $25 for each lot on the plan that
will have any change, however slight. [Added 8-23-1995]
B.
Required information. Such plans shall show all of the following:
Any existing structures on the land shown on the plan and
dimensions of yards.
(1)
Any existing structures on any remaining adjoining land owned by
the applicant and dimensions of yards.
(2)
Remaining frontage and area of any adjoining land in the same
ownership. [Amended 9-28-1994]
(3)
Present owner of the land shown on the plan and all abutting
owners.
(4)
Location of any easement or way, public or private, across the land,
with a designation as to the use of the same.
(5)
C.
57.Editor's Note: Application Form A is available from the office of the Planning Board.
§ 202-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-6
202:425
Criteria. If all lots meet one of the following criteria, the plan is not
a subdivision and approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not
required. The Planning Board will so endorse the plan, provided that
a registered land surveyor certifies that Subsection D(1), (2) or (3) is
true. [Amended 9-28-1994]
Each lot on the plan or altered by it meets one of these criteria:
It has all the frontage required under zoning on:
[1] A public way;
A way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and
used as a public way;
[2]
A way shown on a plan approved and endorsed earlier by
the Planning Board under this chapter;
[3]
A way in existence on March 8, 1937, having in the opinion
of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades
and adequate construction to provide for the needs of
vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land
abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation
of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings
erected or to be erected thereon; or
[4]
A way shown on a plan of a subdivision registered in the
Land Court prior to February 1, 1952.
[5]
(a)
(1)
Each lot on the plan contains a building which existed prior to
March 8, 1937.
(2)
The plan simply describes already existing parcels with no new lot
divisions.
(3)
D.
Ways in existence. In determining whether an existing way provides
adequate access to qualify a plan as not constituting a subdivision, the
Board shall consider the following conditions, among others:
Is the right-of-way at least 30 feet wide and of reasonable
horizontal alignment?
(1)
Does the existing horizontal and vertical alignment of the roadway
provide safe visibility?
(2)
Is the roadway constructed at least 18 feet wide, with at least eight
inches of gravel and with adequate provisions for drainage?
(3)
If the road could ever service more than six dwelling units, is
it bituminous surfaced or have provisions been made for such
surfacing without cost to the town?
(4)
Have provisions been made for public utilities without cost to the
town?
(5)
E.
§ 202-6 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-7
202:426
§ 202-7. Preliminary plan.
Presubmission review. Prior to investing in extensive professional
design efforts for subdivision plans, it will often prove useful to review
the proposed development of a parcel of land with the Planning Board,
in order that general approaches and potential problems can be freely
explored. Pencil sketches, which need not be professionally prepared,
will assist the discussion and might show some but not all of the
information shown on a preliminary plan. In some cases, this
presubmission review may eliminate the need for such a preliminary
plan.
A.
Preliminary plan conferences. Ordinarily three preliminary conferences
with the Board and the preparation of one or more preliminary
subdivision plans are involved before notice is given by the Board of
a public hearing on a subdivision plan. This enables the applicant,
the Board, other town officers and owners of property abutting the
subdivision to discuss and clarify any problems before a definitive plan
is prepared.
B.
Submittals.
Preliminary subdivision plans. A preliminary subdivision plan may
be a drawing in pencil or a print thereof. Six copies thereof shall
be presented to the Board. Such plan shall contain, in addition to
other specific information deemed necessary by the Board in any
particular instance, the following information. Existing features are
to be shown at the level of detail shown on Town of Chelmsford
topographic maps; proposals are to be located and dimensioned to
the nearest foot.
The subdivision name (if any), boundaries, North point, latest
revision date, scale, legend, the title "Preliminary Plan" and a
Planning Board file number (to be assigned by the Planning
Board engineer and to appear in the lower right-hand corner
of each sheet submitted).
(a)
The names of the record owner and the applicant and the
name, seal and signature of the designer, engineer or surveyor.
(b)
The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent
local tax list.
(c)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements
and any public areas within the subdivision in a general
manner.
(d)
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, in a general manner.
(e)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with
approximate areas and dimensions.
(f)
(1)
C.
§ 202-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-7
202:427
The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent
streets.
(g)
The topography of the land in a general manner, including:
Contour lines at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to
the town benchmark datum.
[1]
[2] Existing buildings, if any.
Major site features, such as rock ridges, ledge
outcroppings, swamps and bodies of water.
[3]
[4] Location of existing facilities for municipal services.
The edge of tree cover and the approximate location of
isolated trees over six inches in trunk diameter or other
critical trees identified by the Board.
[5]
(h)
Locus plans. Preliminary plans shall include or be accompanied by
a locus plan at one inch equals 800 feet indicating the relationship
of the proposed subdivision and its streets to nearby development.
In the case of a preliminary plan covering less than all of the
land owned by the subdivider in the area of the subdivision, the
preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a plan showing in a
general manner the overall proposed development of all the land
owned by the subdivider in the area of the subdivision and
indicating the section for which approval is desired.
(2)
Filing of preliminary plans and first preliminary conference. Initial
preliminary plans shall be filed with the Board for the purpose of a
first preliminary conference. Said conference shall be held to acquaint
the Board with the general character of the development proposed
and the intention of the developer and to acquaint the developer with
the overall requirements of the Board and the town's subdivision
regulations.
D.
Staking and second preliminary conference. After the first preliminary
conference with the Board, the approximate center line of proposed
streets shall be staked out to permit inspection by the Board and
other town officers. The applicant will be informed by the Board when
such inspection has been completed, and arrangements will be made
for a second preliminary conference with the Board. At such second
conference or thereafter, the Board usually grants its approval of the
preliminary subdivision plan with or without modifications suggested
by it or agreed upon by the applicant. However, no such approval
constitutes a waiver of the Board's right to require further changes in
the plan.
E.
Third preliminary conference. At the third conference the applicant
submits the proposed definitive subdivision plan and plans and profiles
of ways, together with other materials required under § 202-8A.
F.
§ 202-7 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-8
202:428
§ 202-8. Definitive plan.
Application procedure. Any person who desires approval of a definitive
plan of a subdivision shall:
Submit to the Planning Board the following, with the drawings
consolidated onto a single sheet or on separate sheets:
Ten contact prints of the definitive plan, dark line on white
background. (See Subsection B for contents.) The original
drawing of the definitive plan will only be needed if and when
signing of the plan takes place.
(a)
Ten copies of a locus plan of the subdivision at one inch equals
800 feet, showing proposed roads and their relation to the
surrounding area and the location of the zoning district or
districts applicable to the site.
(b)
Ten prints of street plans and profiles of every proposed street.
(See Subsection C for contents.)
(c)
Ten prints of street cross sections for each class of street
within the subdivision, drawn at one inch equals four feet,
showing the location of all utilities and other elements within
the street right-of-way and typical cross sections of any altered
drainage courses or off-street paths.
(d)
(e) A properly executed Application Form C.58
A submittal fee of $50 per lot (minimum of $250) created
within the subdivision.
(f)
Drainage calculations, certified by the engineer who prepared
them.
(g)
Evidence of ownership and, if requested by the Board, traverse
notes, language of any easements, covenants or deed
restrictions applying or proposed to apply to the area being
subdivided, rights and easements obtained for utilities or
drainage outside of the subdivision, description of erosion
control methods to be employed and cross sections of proposed
streets at critical locations showing existing and proposed
grade for the width of the right-of-way plus 25 feet on each
side.
(h)
If necessary in order to determine compliance with the
requirements or intent of this regulation, the Board may
require specialized engineering or environmental analyses to
be prepared at the expense of the applicant.
(i)
(1)
A.
58.Editor's Note: Application Form C is available from the office of the Planning Board.
§ 202-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-8
202:429
One copy of the environmental information report, if required.
(See Subsection D.)
(j)
A list of names and mailing addresses for all abutters as they
appear on the most recent local tax list, including property
owners on the opposite side of any streets abutting the
subdivision.
(k)
(l) A construction plan. (See Subsection E for contents.)
Submit to the Town Clerk by delivery or registered or certified
mail:
A notice stating the date of definitive plan submission to the
Planning Board.
(a)
(b) A copy of the completed Application Form C.
(2)
Submit to the Board of Health:
(a) Two copies of the definitive plan.
(b) Two copies of the street plans and profiles.
(c) A copy of the completed Application Form C.
Two copies of the separate sheet showing topography
[Subsection A(1)(l) above].
(d)
(3)
Definitive plan contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor in a form acceptable to the Middlesex County
Registry of Deeds. It shall contain the following: [Amended
9-28-1994]
Subdivision name, North point, legend, date, annotation of revision
dates and contents, scale and Planning Board file number (to be
assigned by the Planning Board engineer and to appear in the
lower right-hand corner of each sheet submitted).
(1)
Name and address of the record owner and of the subdivider and
stamp and signature of the registered land surveyor and any other
professionals engaged in the design, in each case certifying that
elements of the plan for which they are responsible have been
prepared in accordance with these regulations.
(2)
Location and names of all abutters as they appear on the most
recent tax list, including property owners on the opposite side of
any streets abutting the subdivision.
(3)
Sufficient data to readily determine the location, direction and
length of every existing and proposed street, way, easement, lot
and boundary line and to establish those lines on the ground.
(4)
B.
§ 202-8 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-8
202:430
The area of each lot and the zoning lot area calculated as defined
in the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw,59 if different.
(5)
Lot numbers shown enclosed in a circle and street numbers
enclosed in a square.
(6)
Location of all permanent monuments, properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed.
(7)
Location, names and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision and
designation as to whether public or private.
(8)
(9) Existing and proposed watercourses and ponds.
Reference identifying applicable street plans and profiles,
covenants or other relevant documents, whether recorded or not.
(10)
Suitable space for endorsement by the Town Clerk and by the
Planning Board, with spaces for annotating date of approval and
date of endorsement.
(11)
Street plans and profiles. For each street there shall be a separate
plan at one inch equals 40 feet and profile at one inch equals 40
feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical, with elevations
referenced to the town datum, drawn in India ink on tracing cloth or in
pencil on polyester film, showing the following data:
Subdivision name, owner's name and address, boundary lines of
ways, North point, scale, date, annotation of revision dates and
content and Planning Board file number, as on the definitive plan.
(1)
Stamp and signature of the professional engineer preparing the
plan. [Amended 9-28-1994]
(2)
The plan shall show bearings and distances, radii and arcs, central
angle and tangent distances on all curves with stationing on the
center line.
(3)
The profile shall show the existing ground on the center line in a
solid black line, the existing right side in a short dash line and the
existing left side in a long dash line. The proposed grade shall be
shown in a heavy black line with the elevation shown at each fiftyfoot
station, with the rate of grade indicated.
(4)
The grade of all streets intersecting the proposed streets shall be
shown for at least 100 feet each side of the intersection of street
center line.
(5)
The proposed drainage, catch basins, manholes, pipes and any
other drainage facilities shall be shown on both plan and profile.
(6)
C.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 202-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-8
202:431
All plans and profiles shall include a notation on each drawing that
the same is one of an indicated total number of sheets.
(7)
Such additional information as the Board may deem necessary,
including the plan of the fire alarm installation.
(8)
Environmental information. An environmental information report shall
be submitted for any subdivision creating frontage potentially allowing
20 or more dwelling units. For subdivisions potentially allowing fewer
than 20 dwelling units, the Board may require that certain of the
following be submitted where necessary to evaluate the plan because
of special circumstances of the location or proposal. An environmental
information report for a subdivision shall include the following
documentation. Drawings shall be at uniform scale on sheets not larger
than 42 inches by 60 inches.
Drawings showing all information not otherwise submitted which
is listed under Section 4.2 of the regulations of the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering adopted under
MGL c. 131, § 40, unless certain items are waived by the Board as
not being relevant or feasible. (See Appendix A for detailed list.60)
(1)
A narrative statement shall also be submitted, documenting the
following with reference to the environmental information maps,
where relevant:
(a) Impact upon surface water quality and level.
(b) Impact upon groundwater quality and level.
Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features and scenic or historic environs.
(c)
Capability of soils, vegetative cover and proposed erosion
control efforts to support proposed development without
danger of erosion silting or other instability.
(d)
Relationship to the requirements of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A
(the Wetlands Protection Act).
(e)
(2)
D.
Construction plan contents. The construction plan shall be drawn at
a scale of one inch equals 40 feet and shall contain the following:
[Amended 9-28-1994]
Subdivision name, North point, legend, date, annotation of revision
dates and contents, scale and Planning Board file number in the
lower right-hand corner.
(1)
At two-foot contour intervals, existing topography and topography
resulting from development of streets, drainage and other required
improvements, referenced to the town datum.
(2)
E.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 202-8 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-8
202:432
§ 202-9. Review procedures.
Location of tree cover and selected individual trees {see
§ 202-7C(1)(h)[5]}, existing structures, including fences and walls,
existing water supplies and on-site disposal systems, wetlands and,
if encountered, the boundary of the Floodplain District established
in the Zoning Bylaws.61
(3)
(4) Existing and proposed streets, ways and easements.
Road center line stationing, referenced to the street plans and
profiles.
(5)
Drainage system schematic layout, with elevations and sizes for
any facilities not shown on the plans and profiles of streets.
(6)
Board of Health. The Board of Health shall report to the Planning
Board, in writing, with signatures of a majority of its members, its
approval or disapproval of the plan, as required by MGL c. 41, § 81U.
If the Board of Health disapproves said plan, it shall make specific
findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such plan cannot be
used for building sites without injury to the public health and include
such specific findings and the reason therefor in such report and, where
possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof.
Approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall then only be given
provided that the developer documents having reviewed the plan with
the Board of Health and only on condition that the lots or land as to
which specific findings were made shall not be built upon without prior
consent of the Board of Health. The Board shall endorse on the plan the
lots or land to which said conditions apply.
A.
Conservation Commission review. The developer shall document prior
to Planning Board approval of the definitive plan either that the
Conservation Commission has determined that the Wetlands Protection
Act is not applicable to the proposed development or that the developer
has filed a notice of intent with the Commission. Concurrent review by
the Conservation Commission and Planning Board is recommended, to
be exercised at the developer's option.
B.
Review by other town officials. Previous to approval of any definitive
plan and profile, the Planning Board will require a letter of
recommendation from the Director of Public Works, the Chief of the
Fire Department and the appropriate Water District.62
C.
Public hearing. The Board will not approve a definitive subdivision plan
submitted to it until it shall have held a public hearing with respect
to such plan. Notice of each such public hearing shall be given by the
Board in accordance with the laws of the commonwealth.
D.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning, Art. XI, Floodplain District.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 200, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 202-8 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-10
202:433
§ 202-10. Action by Planning Board.
Decision. After the public hearing the Board in due course will approve,
modify and approve or disapprove the definitive subdivision plan
submitted. Criteria for action by the Board shall be the following:
(1) Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions.
Determination that development at this location does not entail
unwarranted hazard to safety, health and convenience of future
residents of the development or of others because of possible
natural disasters, traffic hazard or other environmental
degradation.
(2)
(3) Conformity with the requirements of Article III.
Determination, based upon the environmental information report
(where submitted), that the subdivision as designed will not cause
substantial and irreversible damage to the environment, which
damage could be avoided or ameliorated through an alternative
development plan.
(4)
(5) Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements.
(6) Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control Law.
A.
Following such action, the Board will file a certificate of its action with
the Town Clerk (Forms D-1 and D-2)63 and will send notice of its action
by registered or certified mail to the applicant at his or her address
stated in the application. The Board will send a brief summary of its
action to any person interested upon written request therefor stating
the name and address of the person to whom the summary shall be
sent. A copy of the covenant shall be transmitted by the Board to the
Inspector of Buildings.
B.
The Board's approval of a subdivision plan, if granted, shall be endorsed
on the definitive plan only after the expiration of any applicable
statutory appeal period.
C.
Performance guaranty.
Before the Board endorses its approval on the plan, the owner shall
execute an appropriate covenant (a sample of which is attached to
these rules and regulations as Form E64) which shall be recorded
with the subdivision plan stipulating that no lot of the land shown
on the plan shall be sold or buildings or other structures erected
or placed thereon or application for a building permit made with
respect to any such lot until:
(1)
D.
63.Editor's Note: Forms D-1 and D-2 are available from the office of the Planning Board.
64.Editor's Note: Form E is available from the office of the Planning Board.
§ 202-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-10
202:434
The streets shown on the subdivision plan and the streets
and any footpaths required by the Board shown on the plans
and profiles have been brought to subgrade throughout in
accordance with the requirements of these rules and
regulations, including the installation of required catch basins,
drains, culverts and other drainage facilities.
(a)
Facilities for water in accordance with § 202-15 and in
accordance with the requirements of the appropriate Board
of Water Commissioners have been installed throughout the
streets shown on the plan.
(b)
The subdivision plan, bearing the Board's signed endorsement
thereon, and a signed copy of such agreement have been
recorded in the Registry of Deeds or with the Recorder of the
Land Court.
(c)
The owner has executed a contract with the Board on behalf
of the town (samples of which are attached to these rules
and regulations as Forms F-1 and F-265), accompanied by
appropriate security to secure performance of the terms and
conditions thereof, to complete construction of all required
improvements not later than a specified date.
(d)
The owner has recorded in the Registry of Deeds or with the
Recorder of the Land Court a certificate of release from the
Board indicating that the conditions set forth in Subsection
D(1)(a) to (d) of this section have been met. In addition, the
owner shall covenant that no building certificates of use and
occupancy shall be applied for until streets serving such
building have been surfaced with at least a two-inch binder
course of bituminous concrete. [Amended 9-28-1994]
(e)
However, nothing in this Subsection D shall be construed as a
limitation on the authority of the Board to condition its approval
of any plan upon the satisfaction of conditions in addition to those
referred to in this subsection.
(2)
Copies of documents. Following plan approval, endorsement and
recording, the applicant shall provide the Board with one polyester
film reproducible and five prints of the definitive plan and one copy of
final covenants and restrictions, noting book, page number and date of
recording for each, and one polyester film reproducible and five prints
of the street plan and profiles. One copy of the definitive plan shall be
transmitted to the Inspector of Buildings by the Planning Board.
E.
Release of performance guaranty.
General. Upon completion of improvements required by this
regulation, the subdivider may request either partial or full release
(1)
F.
65.Editor's Note: Forms F-1 and F-2 are available from the office of the Planning Board.
§ 202-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-10
202:435
of the performance guaranty by sending a statement of completion
and request for release by registered mail to the Planning Board
and to the Town Clerk. Release will be granted only following
written approval by the Planning Board engineer and any other
town officials concerned with the work performed. Copies of
release from covenants or agreements regarding building or use
and occupancy permits shall be sent by the Planning Board to the
Inspector of Buildings.
Partial release. The Board may grant partial release from such
security for partial completion of improvements, provided that the
completed portion provides a reasonable system for circulation
and utilities pending completion of the rest, and provided that
appropriate arrangements have been made for later disposition of
such interim facilities as temporary turnarounds.
(2)
Security.
The Board may release the applicant from the covenant upon
receipt of an agreement executed by the applicant and by
the holder of a first mortgage on the premises providing for
retention of funds and their availability to the town upon
default. (See MGL c. 41, § 81U, paragraph 11.)
(a)
The Board shall retain security in an amount equal to at least
15% of the total cost of improvements until the integrity of
road pavement and drainage has been verified following a full
winter in place and an amount equal to at least 5% of the total
cost until trees and other vegetation have been established and
the fee has been conveyed to the town or three years have
elapsed since completion of the improvements.
(b)
(3)
Refusal of release. If the Planning Board determines that said
construction or installation has not been completed, it shall specify
in a notice sent by registered mail to the applicant and to the Town
Clerk the details wherein said construction and installation fails to
comply with the requirements of this regulation.
(4)
Rescission. Failure of the developer to record the definitive plan within
six months of its endorsement; or to comply with the construction
schedule incorporated into the performance agreement; or to initiate
construction of improvements or sell lots in a subdivision or portion
thereof within seven years of the approval of the definitive plan; or
to comply with all applicable Zoning Bylaws and requirements of the
Conservation Commission under the Wetlands Protection Act; or the
unauthorized departure from any agreements made or plans submitted,
whether or not at the direction of other public agencies, shall constitute
reason for the Planning Board to consider rescission of such approval,
in accordance with the requirements and procedures of MGL c. 41,
§ 81W.
G.
§ 202-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-11
202:436
§ 202-11. Street status.
Approval not to constitute acceptance of streets or footpaths. Approval
by the Board of a definitive subdivision plan shall not constitute the
laying out or acceptance by the town of any streets or footpaths within
a subdivision.
A.
Ownership of ways and easements.
The subdivider shall retain title to the fee of each street, path or
easement in or appurtenant to the subdivision until conveyed to the
town or for at least three years after completion of improvements,
whichever is the lesser, and shall maintain and repair the roads
and drainage facilities in a manner satisfactory to the Board during
that period. Notation that fee is to be retained shall be placed on
the definitive plan. However, this provision may be waived by the
Planning Board for subdivisions where the public interest is served
by retention of private ways and means of securing such retention
and their maintenance have been agreed upon.
(1)
Prior to final release of security, the developer shall submit all
necessary documentation for street acceptance, including plans
in form acceptable to the Registry of Deeds, legal description,
easements, list of owners and mortgagees of lots having rights in
the street and any grants of rights necessary.
(2)
B.
Completion within three years. The Board may decline to approve any
plan unless the applicant agrees to complete the ways shown thereon
and install the public utilities aforesaid within three years of the date
of approval. If the ways in any subdivision are not complete and the
utilities aforesaid are not installed within the time so agreed to by
the applicant or so required by the Board, the Board's approval of the
definitive plan shall lapse, and no such way shall thereafter be laid
out, constructed, completed or opened for public use unless and until
a new application and definitive plan in accordance with the rules and
regulations then in effect is filed with and approved by the Board.
C.
As-built plans.
Upon completion of construction and before release of the
performance guaranty, the subdivider shall have prepared and
submitted as-built plans at the same scale as the street plans,
which shall indicate the actual location of all of the following:
(a) Street lines.
(b) Traveled way edges and driveways. [Amended 9-28-1994]
(c) Path locations.
(d) Permanent monuments.
(e) Location and inverts of the required utilities and drainage.
(1)
D.
§ 202-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-11
202:437
Locations of any other underground utilities, such as
electricity, telephone lines and streetlighting and aboveground
boxes. [Amended 9-28-1994]
(f)
The accuracy of such as-built plans shall be certified by a
registered land surveyor or registered professional engineer
retained by the subdivider and approved by the Planning Board
engineer.
(2)
§ 202-11 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-11
202:438
ARTICLE III
Design Standards and Improvements
§ 202-12. General requirements.
Design guides. All subdivisions shall be designed and improvements
made by the developer consistent with the requirements of this article.
Design and construction shall:
Reduce, to the extent reasonably possible, the following:
(a) Volume of cut and fill.
Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed,
especially if within 200 feet of a river, pond or stream or having
a slope of more than 15%.
(b)
(c) Number of mature trees removed.
(d) Extent of waterways altered or relocated.
Visual prominence of man-made elements not necessary for
safety or orientation.
(e)
(1)
Increase, to the extent reasonably possible, the following:
Use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets providing
house frontages.
(a)
(b) Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape.
(c) Vistas from public ways.
(2)
A.
Required cross section. Street construction shall conform to the
required street cross section included as Exhibit A with these rules and
regulations.66 Grass strips and driveway entrances shall be so graded as
to prevent surface water on the street from running onto private land.
B.
Extension. Reasonable provisions shall be made for extension of
pavements and utilities to adjoining properties, including installation
of water gates and manholes, if necessary. The developer shall not
deny others connection to the water system, drainage or cable utilities,
provided that they pay all costs of such connection and comply with
all applicable requirements of the Town of Chelmsford or any relevant
water districts.
C.
Construction standards. In the event of any question as to construction
details, specifications for the composition of material, workmanship
and the method of applying materials or in the absence of established
town standards, or if town standards are less demanding, standards
of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works shall apply in each
instance.
D.
66.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 202-12 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-12
202:439
§ 202-13. Streets.
Compliance with Zoning Bylaw.67 The location of buildings and other
structures on land involved in subdivision or other plans submitted to
the Board and the division of such land into lots shall comply with the
Town Zoning Bylaw then in effect or with a variance granted by the
Town Board of Appeals.
E.
No expense to town. All streets, footpaths, water mains and pipes,
hydrants, fire alarm systems, drains, catch basins, culverts and other
related facilities and municipal services shall be installed in
subdivisions and completed in accordance with these rules and
regulations and without expense to the town. Water mains and pipes
(other than service pipes), hydrants and fire alarm systems will be
installed by the appropriate water district or the town at the expense
of the subdivider or will be installed by the developer and/or subdivider
at his or her expense in accordance with specifications established
by the water district and subject to its inspection, as directed by the
Planning Board. In installing the fire alarm system within a subdivision,
the developer shall connect the same to the town's existing fire alarm
system at a location designated by the Fire Chief.
F.
Horizontal design.
Width of streets. All streets shall be designed so as to provide safe
travel for vehicles and pedestrians. Streets shown on subdivision
plans shall be classified as business streets, collector streets, minor
streets or lanes, and minimum widths shall be the following:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement
(feet)
Business street 60 34
Collector street 60 30
Minor street 50 26
Lane 40 22
Off-street path 8 Varies
(1)
Planned projections of streets into adjoining property. Streets
within the subdivision shall be projected to connect with existing
or proposed streets on adjoining property which come up to the
boundary line.
If adjoining property is not subdivided but is, in the opinion of
the Board, suitable for eventual development, provision shall
be made for proper projection of streets into such property
by continuing appropriate streets within the subdivision to the
exterior boundary thereof.
(a)
(2)
A.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 202-12 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-13
202:440
Streets with temporary dead ends, laid out to permit future
projection, shall conform to the provisions of alignment, width
and grade that would be applicable to such streets if extended.
(b)
Curvilinearity. Curvilinear street systems shall be used wherever
feasible.
(3)
Radii. The minimum center-line radii shall be 300 feet for business
or collector streets, 150 feet for minor streets and 100 feet for
lanes.
(4)
Intersections. Street lines shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible at right angles. No street shall intersect any
other street at less than 60°. Wherever possible, street
intersections shall be at least 150 feet apart. Intersections
involving collector streets shall be spaced at least 400 feet apart.
Curblines at intersections shall be cut back so as to provide for
corner radii of not less than 30 feet at any intersection with a
business or collector street and of not less than 20 feet at any other
intersection. Intersections shall be located in locations that provide
safe corner sight distances. Wherever possible, the sight distance
shall conform to the following: [Amended 9-28-1994]
Proposed
Street Intersecting Street
Sight Distance
(feet)
Lane Lane 200
Any street Minor, collector or
business
300
(5)
Dead ends. Permanent dead-end streets (a street, extension of
a street or system of streets connected to other streets only at
a single point) shall not serve more than 10 lots unless, in the
opinion of the Board, they are necessitated by topography or other
local conditions. If dead-end streets are approved, a turnaround
with a radius of at least 62.5 feet to the outside of the layout
will be required. Temporary dead-ends shall similarly provide for a
turnaround, which may be located in part on easements over lots
so long as contractual assurance is provided that upon extension of
the street the terminated turnaround will be removed and replaced
with loam and planting.
(6)
Reserve strips. Reserve strips or barriers prohibiting access to
streets or adjoining property will not be permitted.
(7)
Vertical alignment.
Grades of streets. Grades of streets along the gutter line shall
be not less than 1%. Vertical curves are required wherever the
algebraic difference in grade between center-line tangents exceeds
(1)
B.
§ 202-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-13
202:441
1%. Maximum street grade and vertical curve length shall conform
to the following: [Amended 9-28-1994]
Type of Street
Maximum
Grade
Forward Sight
Distance
(feet)
Business or collector
street
6% 200
Minor street 10% 150
Lane 12% 125
Leveling areas. On any street where the grade exceeds 6% on
the approach to an intersection, a leveling area with a slope of
not more than 4% shall be provided for a distance of at least
50 feet from the nearest edge of the intersecting traveled way.
The maximum center-line grade through a cul-de-sac shall be 5%.
[Amended 9-28-1994]
(2)
Roadway construction.
Street grading. Stumps, brush, roots, boulders and like material
shall be removed as necessary for the roadway and utilities.
Wherever feasible, existing vegetation shall be retained and
protected. [Amended 7-8-1981]
The full length and width of the proposed roadway pavement
area shall be excavated or filled, as necessary, to a depth of
at least 151/2 inches below the finished surface as shown on
the profile. However, if the soil is soft and spongy or contains
undesirable material, such as clay, sand pockets, peat, stones
over six inches in diameter or any other material detrimental
to the subgrade, such material shall be removed and replaced
with suitable well-compacted material.
(a)
No topsoil suitable for reuse shall be removed from the
subdivision unless adequate topsoil will remain on site or is
otherwise assured to provide all disturbed areas within the
subdivision with a topsoil depth of at least four inches and
there is also assurance that all streets from which topsoil is
being removed will be brought to subgrade with approved
materials within six months.
(b)
(1)
Finished subbase. [Amended 7-8-1981]
Roadways shall be constructed with a foundation of at least
eight inches compacted thickness of gravel borrow conforming
to Massachusetts Department of Public Works Specification for
Highways and Bridges M1.03.0, Type b. The source of this
material (with a five-pound sample) shall be made available
to the Planning Board engineer. Over this subbase material
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 202-13 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-13
202:442
§ 202-14. Stormwater management.
a four-inch layer of processed gravel conforming to the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standard
Specification for Highways and Bridges M1.03.1 shall be
placed.
The gravel shall be spread in two layers, each of which shall
be thoroughly watered and rolled true to line and grade with
a roller of not less than 12 tons. Any depressions that appear
during and after rolling shall be filled with additional gravel
and rerolled until the surface is true and even. This surface
shall be 31/2 inches below the proposed finished grade as
shown on the profiles and have transverse grade conforming to
that shown on the required cross sections.
(b)
Finished pavement.
After the treated roadway base has been subjected to the
action of traffic for a time period specified by the Planning
Board engineer, but not in excess of 30 days, a binder course of
Class I-1 bituminous concrete shall be applied and compacted
and rolled to a thickness of two inches with a true surface
conforming to the cross section of the road. A second course
of Class I-1 bituminous concrete top shall then be applied and
compacted and rolled to a thickness of 11/2 inches (two inches
for business streets) with a true surface conforming to the
cross section of the road. Specifications for the composition of
material, workmanship and the method of applying pavement
material shall conform to the specifications of the town.
(a)
Pavements shall be constructed for the full length of all streets
within the subdivision shown on the plan. The center line of
such pavements shall coincide with the center line of the street
rights-of-way unless a minor variance is specifically approved
by the Board.
(b)
Minimum width of roadway pavements shall coincide with the
requirements of Subsection A(1) of this section as determined
by the Board.
(c)
Minimum outside diameter of roadway pavement area within
turnarounds on dead-end streets, if allowed, shall be 108 feet.
(d)
(3)
General approach. Storm drains, culverts and related facilities shall be
designed to permit the unimpeded flow of all natural watercourses, to
ensure adequate drainage at all low points along streets, to control
erosion and to intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area being drained.
To the maximum extent feasible, stormwater shall be recharged rather
than piped to surface water. Peak stream flows and runoff at the
A.
§ 202-13 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-14
202:443
boundaries of the development in a twenty-five-year frequency storm
shall be no more than 10% higher following development than prior to
development. [Amended 9-28-1994]
Design basis. Storm sewers shall be based on a ten-year frequency
storm, and detention basins and culverts shall be based on a twentyfive-
year frequency storm, with consideration given to damage
avoidance for a one-hundred-year storm. [Amended 9-28-1994]
B.
Design method. Design shall be based upon the rational method, the
Manning Formula, United States Weather Bureau Technical Paper No.
40, Rainfall Frequency Atlas, Soil Conservation Service Technical Paper
No. 149, A Method for Estimating Runoff, and ULI Residential
Stormwater Management, 1975, and United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service Guidelines for Soil and Water
Conservation in Urbanizing Areas of Massachusetts, unless alternative
methods or sources are approved by the Planning Board engineer.
Water velocities in pipes and gutters shall be between two feet and
10 feet per second and not more than five feet per second on ground
surfaces. All undeveloped tributary areas shall be assumed to be fully
developed in accordance with the Zoning Bylaw. The coefficient of
runoff used shall not be less than 0.45 for subdivided areas.
C.
Storm sewers. A catch basin to manhole drain configuration shall be
used. All drain pipes shall be at least 12 inches inside diameter and
made of reinforced concrete conforming to Massachusetts Department
of Public Works specifications for Class III pipe or such higher class
as may be required by depth of cover, which shall be not less than 24
inches. PVC pipe (SDR 35 or equivalent) may be approved for use by
the Planning Board engineer. [Amended 9-28-1994]
D.
Structures. Generally, catch basins will be required on both sides of the
roadway on continuous grade at intervals of not more than 400 feet.
Catch basins shall be at least six feet deep and four feet in diameter
(inside measurements), with a thirty-inch or greater sump below pipe
invert, and shall be constructed of concrete blocks or precast concrete
units. Manhole covers and grates shall be in conformance with
Massachusetts Department of Public Works specifications, designed
and placed so as to cause no hazard to bicycles.
E.
Waterways. Open brooks or tributary ditches which are to be altered
shall be shaped to a cross section and gradient and provided with
stream bottom hardening, all acceptable to the Planning Board.
F.
Connections. Proper connections shall be made with any existing drains
in adjacent streets or easements which prove adequate to
accommodate the drainage flow from the subdivision. In the absence
of such facilities, or the inadequacy of the same, it shall be the
responsibility of the developer to extend drains from the subdivision as
required to properly dispose of all drainage from said subdivision in a
manner determined to be proper by the Board.
G.
§ 202-14 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-15
202:444
§ 202-15. Water supply.
The Board will not approve a subdivision plan unless water, suitable
in the opinion of the Board for domestic use and fire protection, is
certified by the developer's engineer to be available throughout the
subdivision at a minimum standard of 500 gallons per minute open
hydrant flow, with at least 20 pounds per square inch residual pressure.
In addition, the Board may require the installation of booster pumps
in dwellings to assure at least 20 pounds per square inch pressure
throughout such dwellings.
A.
In the event that a plan for a proposed subdivision is located in an area
of town which, in the opinion of the Board, precludes the practicality
of the obtainment of water supply from any water district, the Board
will not approve such subdivision unless, in its opinion, upon advice
of the Health Department, adequate groundwater is available at the
site to supply suitable water for domestic use and, upon advice of the
Fire Department, adequate provisions have been made for firesafety.
Excavations made for water connections subsequent to paving shall be
backfilled, compacted and surfaced under supervision of the Planning
Board engineer so as to completely avoid differential settlement or
displacement.
B.
Sanitary sewers. [Added 9-28-1994; amended 4-9-1997]
Connection. The Planning Board will not approve a subdivision plan
unless all plans submitted provide for construction of a municipal
sewer system within the subdivision to be connected to the existing
municipal sewer system, if available. In the event that the
municipal sewer system is not available for reasonable connection
of the subdivision, the Sewer Commission shall provide the
proponent with a location and depth of the future connection to
enable the proponent to design and construct a dry sewer line for
future use by the town.
(1)
Requirements.
All engineering plans, designs and profiles for construction of
the municipal sewer system within the subdivision shall be
prepared by the proponent and shall meet all requirements and
specifications of the Sewer Commission and shall be in general
conformity with the existing municipal sewer system.
(a)
All engineering plans, profiles and designs shall be reviewed
by the Sewer Commission and its engineer at the proponent's
expense, and a certification of approval shall be delivered by
the applicant to the Planning Board prior to approval of the
definitive subdivision plan. Failure to provide said certification
shall be grounds to disapprove the definitive plan.
(b)
The Planning Board shall not waive the provisions of this
section without the written recommendation of the Sewer
(c)
(2)
C.
§ 202-15 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-15
202:445
§ 202-16. Cable utilities.
Commission that the construction of a sewer system within the
subdivision is not feasible.
Bonding.
In determining the bonding for the project pursuant to MGL
c. 41, § 81U, all costs of the sewer system, including off-site
construction, shall be included and bonded.
(a)
In the event that the location and depth of the sewer that will
be servicing the subdivision are not available, the Planning
Board may require the proponent to sufficiently bond the cost
of the sewer line installation. The proponent will bear the cost
of legal, consulting and testing fees required to arrive at an
estimate for the bond.
(b)
(3)
Sewer extension. The design and approval of the municipal sewer
within the subdivision shall fall within the sole jurisdiction of the
Sewer Commission. In the event that off-site construction is
proposed to extend the existing sewer system to service the
subdivision, the approval of the extension shall fall within the sole
discretion of the Sewer Commission. Approval of the extension
shall be evidenced by a fully executed sewer extension agreement
between the proponent and the Sewer Commission, together with
all state approvals and permits.
(4)
Easements. The proponent shall provide all necessary sewer
easements required by the Sewer Commission, and these shall be
shown on the definitive plan. The final location of the sewer lines
within the subdivision and the location of the connection to the
municipal sewer shall remain in the sole jurisdiction of the Sewer
Commission.
(5)
Expenses. The proponent shall be responsible for reimbursement
to the Sewer Commission of all costs and expenses incurred for
legal and engineer consultants, inspection and testing.
(6)
Requirement. [Amended 7-8-1981]
All wiring, cables and other appurtenances of electric power,
telephone and fire alarm systems shall be placed underground
within the limits of the street right-of-way, except where such
underground installations would cause undue hardship by reason
of topography, subsoil conditions or other site peculiarities. The
Planning Board may allow all or any part of the wiring, cables and
other appurtenances to be placed above ground within appropriate
easements.
(1)
A plan shall be submitted for streetlighting of the proposed
subdivision from an underground electrical distribution net. After
(2)
A.
§ 202-15 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-16
202:446
§ 202-17. Sidewalks.
approval by the Planning Board (fire, police and highway), the
developer shall install the lighting prior to issuance of any
occupancy permit.
B. Timing. All cable utilities shall be installed at the time of development.
Depth. Electric power cables shall be not less than 30 inches below
finished grade.
C.
Locations. Underground utilities shall be located as indicated on the
required cross section. All underground utility systems, including
power, communications and gas, shall have their aboveground
appurtenances designed to avoid system interruption or damage in the
event of flooding to base flood elevation.
D.
Where required. Footpaths shall be installed on both sides of collector
streets, on both sides of minor streets and lanes in the RC District,
based on the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw,68 and on one side of minor
streets and lanes in other residential districts, unless the Planning
Board determines that no sidewalk is appropriate because a continuous
system is infeasible or such walk would serve neither pedestrian
convenience nor safety. Sidewalks will be required on one side of
business streets. [Amended 9-28-1994]
In addition, the Planning Board shall, under conditions other than
the above, require that the grading of the right-of-way be so
executed as to make possible later additions of sidewalks without
major regrading.
(1)
Footpaths shall be not less than five feet in width, except four feet
on lanes, and shall be located as close as is feasible to the street
side line.
(2)
A.
Construction. All materials shall be removed for the full width of the
footpath to a subgrade 101/2 inches below the finished grade as shown
on the cross section, and all soft spots and other undesirable material
below such subgrade shall be replaced with gravel (Massachusetts
Department of Public Works Specification M1.03.0, Type b) and rolled.
The excavated area shall then be filled with gravel (Specification
M1.03.0, Type b) and rolled with a cross slope of not less than 1/4 inch
nor greater than 3/8 inch to the foot. The footpath shall be constructed
of bituminous concrete in two courses consisting of 11/2 inches of
binder and one inch of finish. All bituminous concrete shall conform to
Massachusetts Department of Public Works specifications, as amended.
[Amended 9-28-1994]
B.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Zoning.
§ 202-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-18
202:447
§ 202-18. Easements. [Amended 9-28-1994]
Easements for water mains, storm drains, utilities and other purposes and
their appurtenances shall be provided where such are located outside the
street line and shall be at least 30 feet wide. Where a subdivision is
traversed by a natural watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, the
Board may require that there be provided an easement or drainage rightof-
way of adequate width to conform substantially to a line 15 feet distant
from either side of the watercourse or stream. The Board may require the
enclosure of any such watercourse or stream and, in the event of enclosure,
may require an adequate easement to service the same. All utility (sewer,
water, drain, etc.) pipes, structures and appurtenances shall be designed
and constructed so as to be accessible by equipment necessary for the
future operation and maintenance of the facilities.
§ 202-19. Open space and planting.
Reservation of open space. Where it believes proper and subject to
governing statutes, the Board may require the plan to provide open
areas suitably located for parks, for playground or recreational
purposes or for other required public facilities. Such areas shall not
be unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided and
to the prospective public use of such land. The Board, by appropriate
endorsement on the plan, may restrict the erection of a building or
buildings upon such reserved areas for a period of three years without
its written approval.
A.
Preservation of trees. No trees over four inches in diameter shall be
removed from a subdivision or a lot within a subdivision and no grading
of a subdivision or a lot within a subdivision shall be undertaken until
the Department of Public Works of the town has marked those trees
of such size that may or shall be removed and those trees of such size
that must be welled in order to ensure their preservation following
grading.69
B.
Shade trees. Such trees as are suitable, in the opinion of the Board,
for preservation shall be preserved. Where, in the opinion of the Board,
existing trees are inadequate, shade trees having a diameter of at least
two inches and of a variety suitable, in the opinion of the Board, shall
be planted. Such planted trees shall usually be spaced not more than
40 feet apart, in 1/2 cubic yard of topsoil satisfactory to the Board.
C.
Planting space. There shall be a planting space between the curbline
of the roadway and the footpath or street sidewalk. Said area shall be
surfaced with not less than six inches of topsoil, which shall be seeded
and rolled to the satisfaction of the Board.
D.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 200, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 202-18 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-19
202:448
§ 202-20. Monuments.
Bounds shall be placed at all angle points, at the beginning and end of all
curves, at all intersections of streets and at such other places as may be
required by the Board. Such bounds shall be of sound granite, not less than
three feet long and not less then five inches square. The top of each bound
shall be dressed and have a one-half-inch drill hole.
§ 202-21. Curbing and berms. [Amended 7-8-1981; 9-28-1994]
In some subdivisions, the Board may require infiltration trenches (see the
required cross section detail70) along the edge of asphalt pavement for
lanes, minor streets, collector streets and business streets. In all cases
sloped granite curbing shall be required. All granite curbing, where
required, shall be sloped granite curbing comparable to Massachusetts
Department of Public Works Specification M9.04.2, Type SB. When used on
a radius of 20 feet or less, curb shall be cut with radial joints. Workmanship
and method of setting shall conform to the specifications of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works. Where curbing is not required,
Class I bituminous concrete berms shall be placed in accordance with
Massachusetts Department of Public Works Specification 470.
§ 202-22. Guardrails. [Amended 9-28-1994]
Guardrails or similar devices for keeping vehicles on the road shall be
installed where deemed necessary by the Board and shall be capable of
withstanding without displacement the impact of an automobile traveling
five miles per hour and of being readily seen by drivers. Guardrails shall
conform to Massachusetts Department of Public Works specifications.
Grading of slopes of streets. All slopes resulting from grading of streets
are to be graded to a slope not steeper than 2:1 in cut and 3:1 in fill
nor more than 3/4:1 in ledge. Slopes and other areas where topsoil has
been removed shall be loamed with a topsoil satisfactory to the Board
to a depth of at least six inches, seeded with a permanent grass mixture
and rolled. In the event that such slopes cannot be contained within the
street side lines, the subdivider shall reserve slope easements wherever
feasible. If retaining walls are necessary in the opinion of the Board,
they shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, stone, brick or other
materials deemed suitable by the Board.
E.
At front lot corners where a road bound is not required by the above,
a granite bound not less than three feet long and not less than three
inches square, with a one-half-inch drill hole, shall be set.
A.
No permanent bounds shall be installed until all construction which
would disturb or destroy bounds is completed.
B.
70.Editor's Note: See Exhibit A at the end of this chapter.
§ 202-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-23
202:449
§ 202-23. Street signs.
The developer shall furnish and erect street signs at the intersection of all
new streets within a subdivision to designate the name of each street in
the development, said signs to conform with those used by the town. From
the time the construction of said street or streets is commenced until the
time final approval is requested, a temporary sign of wood or masonite with
appropriate letters may be used.
§ 202-24. Removal of debris; restoration of property.
Before sale of a lot, the subdivider shall clean up any debris thereon
caused by street construction and installation of utilities. All areas within a
street destroyed or altered in construction operations shall be restored to
vegetation or other finish satisfactory to the Board.
§ 202-25. Construction process.
Safety.
All precautions should be taken by the developer and the
developer's subcontractors to observe common sense safety
requirements. The Board designates the Planning Board engineer
to report to the Board all unsafe activities in preparation of the
subdivision.
(1)
Holes greater than five feet in depth and soil piles higher than 10
feet or materials stacked in an unsafe manner shall not be allowed
unless the area is adequately protected.
(2)
A.
Inspections.
Inspections shall be arranged for as outlined on Form H, Inspection
Form.71 The Planning Board engineer may authorize minor on-site
departures from the street plan and profile and may issue a stopwork
order effective for two weeks or until the next Planning Board
meeting, whichever is sooner. No drainage or utility elements shall
be backfilled or otherwise covered until authorized by the Planning
Board engineer.
(1)
No asphalt pavement shall be placed until a certified (by a
registered professional engineer or registered land surveyor) asbuilt
plan has been reviewed by the Planning Board engineer.
(2)
B.
Compliance.
It is the responsibility of the developer to ensure that the approved
construction plans and these regulations are implemented. Use
of qualified persons to furnish adequate and timely engineering
supervision during construction is required. Surveillance and site
(1)
C.
71.Editor's Note: Form H is available from the office of the Planning Board.
§ 202-23 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-25
202:450
visits by town officials shall not be construed as relieving this
responsibility.
Prior to release of security, a certificate by a registered
professional engineer (civil) and a registered land surveyor
acceptable to the Board must be obtained by the developer and
filed, indicating that all improvements for which security is being
released have been completed consistent with the approved plans
and with these regulations.
(2)
§ 202-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-25
202:451

ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 202-26. Variation of requirements.
§ 202-27. Board of Appeals.
As designated by § 195-102 of the Chelmsford Zoning Bylaw, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall also be the Subdivision Regulations Board of
Appeals, exercising the power granted by MGL c. 41, § 81Z.
§ 202-28. Court appeals.
Appeals may be taken to the Superior Court, in accordance with MGL c. 41,
§ 81BB.
§ 202-29. Severability.
In case, for any reason, any part or parts of these rules and regulations
should be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder.
§ 202-30. When effective.
These rules and regulations or any revisions to them shall become effective
following their adoption by the Planning Board and upon transmittal of
certified copies of them to the Register of Deeds and to the Recorder of the
Land Court.
{END OF CHAPTER}
The Board may, in any particular case, where such action is in the
public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the
Subdivision Control Law:
Require information and impose requirements and conditions in
addition to, and vary the procedures set forth in, these rules and
regulations.
(1)
Waive strict compliance with these rules and regulations, provided
that such waiver is requested in writing, granted in writing and
referenced on the definitive plan or street plans and profiles.
(2)
A.
In particular, variation may be allowed for subdivisions of four or fewer
lots which are not contiguous with property subdivided within the past
five years and now or previously in the same ownership, provided that
the developer covenants that no additional lots will be created on that
or contiguous lands in the same ownership for five years from the date
of approval and the plan is annotated to indicate that the street does not
meet usual standards for town acceptance and that betterments may be
involved in the event of such acceptance.
B.
§ 202-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 202-30
202:453
Chapter 203
TRAFFIC RULES AND ORDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 174. Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 180.
§ 202-30 CHELMSFORD CODE § 202-30
202:454
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 203-1. Purpose; definitions.
These are traffic rules and orders regulating traffic upon streets open to
the public in the Town of Chelmsford and repealing all other bylaws in
conflict herewith, ordained by the Selectmen of the Town of Chelmsford
as follows.
A.
Wherever in these rules and orders the following terms are used, they
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Vehicles of the Fire
Department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and
emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service
corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle being used in the
transportation of goods, wares or merchandise for commercial
purposes.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, HEAVY — Any commercial vehicle of 21/2
tons in capacity or over.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within
the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections or any other
portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral curblines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or
more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether
or not one such street or highway crosses the other.
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — Any scooter with two or more wheels that
is gasoline or alcohol fueled or electrically powered. (This definition
does not apply to wheel chair or mobility scooters equipped with a
seat.)[Added 7-19-2004]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is selfpropelled.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS — All signals, not inconsistent with these
rules and orders, placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction for the purpose of directing, warning or
regulating traffic.[Amended 10-4-1999]
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices, other
than signals, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction
for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating
traffic.[Amended 10-4-1999]
B.
§ 203-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-1
202:455
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon
a roadway otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading or in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so
marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all
times.[Amended 10-4-1999]
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines and the
adjacent property lines.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for
purposes of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights or
words, or any combination thereof, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
§ 203-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-1
202:456
ARTICLE II
Enforcement; Applicability
§ 203-2. Authority of police.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of this town to enforce the
provisions of these rules and orders. Officers of the Police Department
are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of
visible or audible signal in conformance with the provisions of these rules
and orders, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or
to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire
Department may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding
the provisions of these rules and orders.
§ 203-3. Authority of Selectmen; emergencies and special
conditions.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby empowered to make and enforce
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of these rules and
orders and to make and enforce regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions.
§ 203-4. Public employees.
The provisions of these rules and orders shall apply to the operator of any
vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government or
this state, county or town, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to
violate any of the provisions of these rules and orders, except as otherwise
permitted in these rules and orders.
§ 203-5. Emergency vehicles.
The provisions of these rules and orders regulating the movement, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles
as defined in these rules and orders while the driver of such vehicle is
operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public
duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such
vehicle from the consequence of reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 203-6. Persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or
motorized scooters or animals. [Amended 7-19-2004]
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or motorized
scooter or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving an animal,
shall be subject to the provisions of these rules and orders applicable to the
operator of any vehicle, except those provisions of these rules and orders
with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except those provisions
which by their very nature can have no application.
§ 203-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-6
202:457

ARTICLE III
Traffic Signs and Signals
§ 203-7. Selectmen to place and maintain traffic signals. [Amended
10-4-1999]
The Selectmen are hereby authorized and, as to those signs and signals
required hereunder, it shall be their duty to place and maintain or cause
to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs and signals. All signs
required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be
uniform as to type and location throughout the town.
§ 203-8. Effect of signs on enforcement.
No provision of these rules and orders for which signs are required shall
be enforceable against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation the sign herein required is not in the proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall
be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof.
§ 203-9. Obedience required.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to disobey the instructions of any
official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the provisions of
these rules and orders, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 203-10. School zones.
A flashing yellow light with a sign attached to read "School Buses Entering
Ahead" shall be installed in the vicinity of the following school locations:
A. Graniteville Road (near) High School entrance (200 Richardson Road).
B. North Road near the McCarthy School (250 North Road).
C. Boston Road near the South Row School (250 Boston Road).
D. Graniteville Road near the Parker School (75 Graniteville Road).
Richardson Road near the Harrington School and entrance to High
School (120 Richardson Road).
E.
F. Billerica Road near the Center School (84 Billerica Road).
G. Dalton Road near the Westlands School (170 Dalton Road).
Brick Kiln Road, the location of the Murdoch Charter School. [Added
12-2-2002]
H.
§ 203-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-10
202:459
§ 203-11. Signal colors.
[NOTE:
See
Article
47,
ATM
1973]
Colors in traffic control signals shall have the commands ascribed to
them in this section and no other meanings, and no driver of a vehicle
or operator of a railway car shall fail to comply with said commands,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer or lawful traffic
regulating sign, signal device.
Red. While the red lens is illuminated, no driver of a vehicle facing
the signal shall enter the intersection; provided, however, that if a
right, left or vertical green arrow is illuminated at the same time, a
driver may enter the intersection to make the movement permitted
by the green arrow or arrows.
(1)
Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated no waiting driver of any
vehicle shall proceed until the green lens is illuminated, and any
driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection who can stop said
vehicle with safety before reaching the intersection or a marked
stop line shall stop at such point; provided, however, that if a right,
left or vertical green arrow is illuminated at the same time a driver
may enter the intersection to make the movement permitted by the
green arrow or arrows.
(2)
Green.
While the green lens is illuminated, the driver of a vehicle
facing the signal may proceed in any direction,
notwithstanding the use or not of any special right, left or
vertical green arrow lens which may be incorporated in such
signal.
(a)
Special green arrow. When a special right, left or vertical
(meaning straight ahead) green arrow lens is incorporated in a
signal, drivers facing said signal may, regardless of either red
or yellow indications, turn right or left or go straight ahead,
respectively, in accordance with the movement permitted by
the green arrow or arrows illuminated at the time. In no case
shall a driver proceed without due regard for the safety of
those persons already within the intersection.
(b)
(3)
Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated
together no driver of a vehicle shall enter the intersection, and
during such time the intersection shall be reserved for the
exclusive use of pedestrians.
(4)
A.
§ 203-10 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-11
202:460
§ 203-12. Unauthorized signs and signals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon
or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signals
or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from
view any official traffic sign or signals. Every such prohibited sign, signal or
device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Selectmen are
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without
notice.
§ 203-13. Interference with signs and signals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move or
obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.
§ 203-14. Crosswalks.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized to establish and to designate and shall
thereafter maintain or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where,
in their opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the
roadway and at such other places as they may deem necessary.
§ 203-15. Safety zones and lanes for traffic.
Flashing red. The red lens, when illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, shall indicate those intersections at which a
driver is required by law to stop before entering.
(5)
Flashing yellow. The yellow lens, when illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, shall indicate the presence of a hazard and
shall permit drivers to proceed only with caution.
(6)
The word "intersection" as used in this section shall mean any
intersection of one or more ways with another and any intersection of
ways with a railroad.
B.
The Selectmen are hereby empowered to establish safety zones of such
kind and character at such places as they may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
A.
The Selectmen are authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as they may deem advisable consistent with
the provisions of these rules and orders.
B.
§ 203-11 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-15
202:461

ARTICLE IV
Pedestrians
§ 203-16. Vehicle operators to yield right-of-way.
§ 203-17. Controlled intersections.
At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, the
following movements shall prevail: pedestrians cross on amber light only;
traffic moves on green only; and traffic stops on red.
§ 203-18. Soliciting rides.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in a highway for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the operator of any private vehicle.
The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any
unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections
where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or
traffic control signals.
A.
Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the
rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
B.
§ 203-16 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-18
202:463

ARTICLE V
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 203-19. Places where illegal.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park
such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic sign or signal:
§ 203-20. Passenger zones and loading zones.
A. Within an intersection.
B. On a crosswalk.
C. In front of a private driveway.
D. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop signs or
traffic control signal located at the side of the roadway, the same to be
designated by official signs.
E.
Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, the same to
be designated by official signs.
F.
G. Within 20 feet of any street corner.72
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
H.
The Selectmen shall have the authority to determine the location of
necessary zones and loading zones and shall erect and maintain or
cause to be maintained appropriate signs indicating the same.
A.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as
a passenger zone.
B.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or
park said vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or for the unloading and
delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a
loading zone.
C.
In no case shall the stop for loading and for unloading of materials
exceed 30 minutes.
D.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 200, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 203-19 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-21
202:465
§ 203-21. Designation of bus stops and taxicab stands.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized to establish bus stops and taxicab
stands on such public streets in such places and in such number as they
shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public,
and every bus stop and taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate
signs.
§ 203-22. Parking in bus stops and taxicab stands.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than a bus to
stand or park in any official designated bus stop or any vehicle other than a
taxicab to stand or park in an official designated taxicab stand, except that
the operator of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop in any such stop
or stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of passengers.
§ 203-23. Parking of buses and taxicabs.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to park upon
any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop
or taxicab stand, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator
of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
§ 203-24. Obstructing free movement of traffic.
§ 203-25. Parking time limited in designated places.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle
upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 18 feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that an operator
may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of
passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or
traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to park a vehicle within an alley in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than
10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular
traffic.
B.
One-hour parking. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not park such
vehicles for longer than one hour at any time in the following
designated districts:
A.
§ 203-21 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-25
202:466
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Avenue Easterly From a point 100 feet south of the
entrance to the Adams Library
southerly for a distance of 100 feet
Central Square Easterly 40 feet southerly from the line of
Billerica Street to the Boston Road
Central Square Westerly 50 feet from the Acton Road to the
railroad location of the New York, New
Haven and Hartford Railroad, except
that distance from Cushing Place to a
point in front of property at Numbers
15-16 Central Square, for an
approximate distance of 129 feet
Central Square
Park
Northerly —
Groton Road Westerly Commencing at the intersection of
Newfield Street and Groton Road and
ending at the intersection of Groton
Road and Adams Street, from Monday
through Saturday, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
North Road Easterly In front of the Old Town Hall, 1A North
Road, from a point commencing at the
driveway adjacent to the New York,
New Haven and Hartford Railroad to a
point of 300 feet, from Monday through
Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
Thirty-minute parking. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not park
such vehicle for longer than 30 minutes at any time in the following
designated districts:
Name of Street Side Location
Central Square Easterly From a point commencing at the exit of
the Stop & Shop Parking Lot, 16-20
Boston Road, 430 feet to a point
northerly 100 feet from the intersection
of Billerica Road and Boston Road
Central Square Northerly At a point at the intersection of
Chelmsford Street and the Penn Central
Railroad property, a total distance of
152 feet
B.
§ 203-25 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-25
202:467
§ 203-26. Parking prohibited in designated places.
The operator of a motor vehicle shall not park such vehicle at the following
designated areas:
Name of
Street Side Location
Acton Road Both From the intersection of Bartlett Street to
a point beyond the 9-13 Acton Road, a
total distance of 600 feet
Acton Road South Beginning at Proctor Road and running in
a westerly direction on Acton Road for a
distance of 400 feet
Adams Avenue East From a point 200 feet south of the
driveway of the Adams Library to the
intersection of Adams Avenue and Boston
Road
Adams Avenue West From the intersection of Adams Avenue
and Bartlett Street to the intersection of
Adams Avenue and Boston Road, a total
distance of 500 feet
Adams Street North Westerly 100 feet from the westerly line of
Groton Road
Adams Street South From a point at the intersection of Adams
Street and Grant Street to a point at the
intersection of Adams Street and Sherman
Street, a total distance of 250 feet
Bartlett Street Both From the intersection of Bartlett Street
and Acton Road a total distance of 450
feet, commencing at a point adjacent to
Bartlett Park
Boston Road East Commencing in front of 6 Boston Road
(a.k.a. 34 Central Square) northerly to
intersection of Billerica Road (Rte. 129)
Name of Street Side Location
Central Square Westerly From Cushing Place to a point in front
of property at Numbers 15-16 Central
Square, for an approximate distance of
129 feet, such area to be used for
parallel parking
Dunstable Road Easterly From a point 60 feet northerly of its
intersection with Tyngsboro Road to a
point 140 feet northerly of the point of
beginning
§ 203-25 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-26
202:468
Name of
Street Side Location
Boston Road East Commencing at the northerly side of
Summer Street, in a northerly direction
for a distance of 675 feet to the boundary
of the property of Stop & Shop, 16-20
Boston Road and 6 Boston Road
Boston Road West From the intersection of Adams Avenue
and Boston Road northerly for a distance
of 676 feet to the property of the Mobil
Gas Station (30 Central)
Boston Road West
(between
signs)
In front of the Adams Library, from the
intersection of Boston Road and Adams
Avenue northerly for a distance of 50 feet
Byam Road East and
west
From a point beginning at the intersection
of Byam Road and Acton Road northerly to
the intersection of Byam Road and Barton
Hill Road, a total distance of 1,700 feet
Carlisle Street Right-hand
side
In a northwesterly direction, from a point
in front of Number 74 Carlisle Street to
the corner of the intersection of Albina
Street and Carlisle Street
Carlisle Street West Commencing at a point at the intersection
of Carlisle Street and Marshall Street, 540
feet southerly
Central Square North Northerly 50 feet from the northerly line
of Chelmsford Street
Central Square North Southerly 50 feet from the railroad
location of the New York, New Haven and
Hartford Railroad
Central Square
Park
East and
west
One-hour parking
Chelmsford
Street
North From a point at the driveway of Number 8
Chelmsford Street to Central Square, a
total distance of 50 feet
Chelmsford
Street
North Opposite Number 89 Chelmsford Street
for a distance of 1,035 feet to a point
opposite the intersection of Wilson Street
and Chelmsford Street
Chelmsford
Street
South Commencing at the intersection of
Billerica Road for a distance of 1,056 feet
ending at the intersection of Wilson Street
and Chelmsford Street
§ 203-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-26
202:469
Name of
Street Side Location
Chelmsford
Street
South Commencing at the intersection of Wilson
Street and Chelmsford Street for a
distance of 1,035 feet to a point beyond a
little league field at entrance to property
of Number 89 Chelmsford Street
Church Street North From Middlesex Street to Quigley Avenue
Crooked Spring
Road
East From a point at the intersection of
Richardson Road northerly to the rear
entrance of the Parker School, a total
distance of 330 feet
Crooked Spring
Road
West From a point at the intersection of
Richardson Road northerly to the rear
entrance of the Parker School, a total
distance of 330 feet
Crosby Lane North On the easterly side of North Road 55 feet
northerly
Davis Road East From a point at the intersection of Davis
Road and Old Westford Road to a point at
the intersection of Davis Road and
Graniteville Road, a total distance of 392
feet
Drum Hill Road Both From a point at the blinking yellow traffic
light at the entrance to the Route 3 rotary
to the town line at Parkhurst Road, a total
distance of 1,590 feet
Fletcher Street North From a point at the entrance of St. Mary's
parking lot westerly to the intersection of
North Road and Fletcher Street, a
distance of 185 feet
Fletcher Street North On the easterly side of North Road 611
feet northerly to the southern point of
Crosby Lane
Fletcher Street South Commencing at the intersection of North
Road and Fletcher Street, easterly for a
distance of 980 feet
Gay Street South Between Middlesex Street and Princeton
Street
Glen Avenue
[Added
8-15-2005]
--- Within 50 feet on either side of Pole #12
on Glen Avenue
§ 203-26 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-26
202:470
Name of
Street Side Location
Graniteville
Road
Both From a point at the intersection of
Richardson Road to the second entrance
to the Parker School property, a total
distance of 1,500 feet
Graniteville
Road
North From a point at the intersection of Old
Westford Road and Graniteville Road in a
northerly direction a total distance of 192
feet
Graniteville
Road
South From a point at the intersection of Davis
Road and Graniteville Road to a point at
the intersection of Graniteville Road and
Old Westford Road, a total distance of 900
feet
Grant Street East From a point at the intersection of Grant
Street and Washington Street to a point at
the intersection of Grant Street and
Adams Street, a total distance of 795 feet
Larcom Square All At the intersection of Boston Road and
Adams Avenue
Littleton Road South From State Highway Survey Station 100 x
50 in 103 x 40
North Road East Southerly 500 feet from the southerly line
of Fletcher Street
North Road — At main entrance to the Old Town Hall, 1A
North Road, as amended by § 203-26A
North Road West 635 feet northerly from the entrance to
Westford Street to the northern point of
Fletcher Street
North Road West Northerly 500 feet from the intersection of
Fletcher Street with North Road
Old Westford
Road
North From a point at the intersection of Old
Westford Road and Graniteville Road to a
point at the intersection of Old Westford
Road and Davis Road, a total distance of
821 feet
Parkerville Road East Commencing at the intersection of
Parkerville Road and Pond Street,
northerly for a distance of 750 feet to the
intersection of Parkerville Road and Maple
Road
§ 203-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-26
202:471
Name of
Street Side Location
Parkerville Road West Commencing at the intersection of Maple
Road and Parkerville Road southerly for a
distance of 750 feet to the intersection of
Pond Street and Parkerville Road
Pond Street North From the intersection of Pond Street and
Parkerville Road to the intersection of
Pond Street and Acton Road, a total
distance of 1,156 feet, effective June 15 to
September 15 inclusive, yearly
Pond Street South From the intersection of Pond Street and
Parkerville Road easterly for a distance of
385 feet, effective June 15 to September
15 inclusive, yearly
Princeton Street — The main entrance to the North Town
Hall, 31 Princeton Street
Princeton Street East From Mt. Pleasant Street to Gay Street
Princeton Street West From its intersection with Mt. Pleasant
Street northerly to the entrance of 73-77
Princeton Street
Princeton Street West From the southerly line of Shaw Street to
the southerly end of the driveway at No. 1
Princeton Street, a total distance of 90
feet
Proctor Road East and
west
Beginning at a point 510 feet in from the
intersection of Proctor and Acton Road
southerly for a distance of 310 feet
Quigley Avenue East From the intersection of Quigley Avenue
and Mt. Pleasant Street to the intersection
of Quigley Avenue and Middlesex Street, a
total distance of 700 feet
Richardson
Road
East From a point at the intersection of
Graniteville Road southerly to the
entrance of the high school (opposite
Crooked Spring Road), a total distance of
345 feet
Richardson
Road
West From a point at the intersection of
Graniteville Road to the intersection of
Crooked Spring Road, a total distance of
545 feet
Sherman Street East From a point at the intersection of
Sherman Street and Adams Street to the
intersection of Sherman Street and Varney
Avenue, a distance of 1,120 feet
§ 203-26 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-26
202:472
Name of
Street Side Location
Street
extending from
Worthern Street
along Fletcher
Park
South For a distance of 114 feet to the westerly
side of North Road
Washington
Street
North From here to corner from the intersection
of Princeton Street and Washington
Street, a total distance of 20 feet
Washington
Street
South From the intersection of Washington
Street and Princeton Street to the end of
the Fire Department property, a total
distance of 250 feet
Wellman Avenue — Within the cul-de-sac area
Wellman Avenue North and
south
From a point at the intersection of
Wellman Avenue and Tyngsboro Road
westerly 210 feet to the Boston and Maine
Railroad tracks
Westford Street West From a point commencing at the parking
lot of the Unitarian Church southerly for a
distance of 295 feet, except for church
services
Wilson Street East From the intersection of Wilson Street and
Billerica Road to the intersection of Wilson
Street and Chelmsford Street, a total
distance of 550 feet
Worthern Street East 1,000 feet from the northern point of the
intersection of North Road and Worthern
Street southerly to Westford Street
§ 203-27. Snow emergencies. [Added 5-11-1987 STM by Art. 973]
§ 203-28. Standing or parking close to curb.
The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to declare a snow
emergency.
A.
Upon the declaration of a snow emergency, it shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle upon any street, and all such vehicles shall forthwith be
removed.
B.
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals, the operator of a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park
such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel to the edge of the roadway
A.
73.Editor's Note: This article also deleted former Section 27, All-night parking prohibited.
§ 203-26 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-28
202:473
§ 203-29. Parking vehicle for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street any vehicle
displayed for sale.
§ 203-30. Parking fines.74
Penalty charges are established as follows:
Violation Penalty
Overtime parking $10.00
Parking in wrong direction $10.00
Parking more than one foot from curb $10.00
Parking in taxi stand $10.00
Violation of snow emergency $10.00
Parking in restricted area $20.00
and with the right curbside wheels of the vehicle within six inches of
the edge of the roadway, except as provided in the following Subsection
A(1) and (2):
Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle
parking, a vehicle shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated
by such marks or sign.
(1)
In places where, and at hours when, stopping for the loading or
unloading of merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used
for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into
the curb or take on or discharge loads when the owner of such
vehicle holds a permit granting the owner such special privilege,
and provided further that such permit shall be either in the
possession of the operator or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle
is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load, and it
shall be unlawful for any such owner or operator to violate any of
the special terms or conditions of any such special permit.
(2)
The Selectmen shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall
be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or cause the same to
be marked or signed.
B.
The Selectmen are hereby authorized to issue to any owner of a vehicle
used to transport merchandise or materials a special permit, renewable
annually, and to state therein the terms and conditions thereof, allowing
the operator of such vehicle the privilege of loading and unloading
while the vehicle is backed against the curb, if in the opinion of the
Selectmen such privilege is reasonably necessary in the conduct of the
owner's business and will not seriously interfere with traffic.
C.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 200, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 203-28 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-30
202:474
Violation Penalty
Parking within 10 feet of hydrant $20.00
Parking to block driveway of private way $20.00
Parking within 20 feet of intersection $20.00
Parking in bus stop $20.00
Double parking $25.00
Parking on crosswalk $25.00
Parking on sidewalk $25.00
Parking in a street, other than an alley, so as not
to leave 18 feet of unobstructed travel
$25.00
Parking in an alley so as not to leave 10 feet of
unobstructed travel
$25.00
Parking to block snow removal $25.00
Parking in front of fire station $25.00
Parking across from fire station when posted $25.00
Parking in fire lane $25.00
Parking in handicapped space $100.00
Illegal use of handicapped placard $100.00
§ 203-30 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-30
202:475

ARTICLE VI
Operation of Vehicles
§ 203-31. Driving on right side of street.
§ 203-32. Turning at intersections.
§ 203-33. Limitations on turning around.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as
to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in
safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic.
§ 203-34. Emerging from alley or driveway.
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
Upon all streets, except upon one-way streets, the operator of a vehicle
shall drive the same upon the right half of the street, and the operator
of a slow-moving vehicle shall drive the same as close as possible to the
right-hand edge or curb of the street, unless it is impracticable to travel
on such side of the street and except when overtaking and passing.
A.
The foregoing provision of this section shall not be deemed to prevent
marking of lanes for traffic upon any street and the allocation of
designated lanes to traffic moving in a particular direction.
B.
Right turns. The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at
an intersection or into an alley or driveway shall approach the point of
turning in the traffic lane nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the
street and, in turning, shall keep as close as practicable to the righthand
curb or edge of the street.
A.
Turning left. The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left at
an intersection or into a driveway shall approach the point of turning in
the lane for traffic to the right of and next to the center of the roadway,
and, unless otherwise directed by turning markers, the operator of a
vehicle in turning left at an intersection shall pass to the right of the
center of the intersection before turning. Upon streets laned for traffic
and upon one-way streets, a left turn shall be made from the left lane of
traffic.
B.
Turning markers. The Selectmen are hereby authorized to place
turning markers within or at the entrance to intersections directing that
traffic turning left shall follow a line of travel other than as directed
in Subsection B of this section. Whenever turning markers have been
placed as herein provided, traffic turning left shall follow the line as
directed by such markers.
C.
§ 203-31 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-35
202:477
§ 203-35. Driving within sidewalk area.
The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at
a permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 203-36. Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while
such vehicle is in motion.
§ 203-37. Riding on portion of vehicle not designed for passengers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a vehicle upon any portion thereof
not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is
in motion. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of duty or within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
§ 203-38. Railway trains not to block street.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any steam or
street railway train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the same
in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for
a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall
not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
It shall be unlawful for any street railway train or car to stop within an
intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging
passengers.
§ 203-39. Obedience to isolated stop signs.
Every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance approaching
an intersection of ways where there exists facing such driver an official
sign bearing the word "Stop" or a flashing red signal indication, said
sign or signal having the written approval of the Department of Public
Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and/or the Chelmsford Board
of Selectmen, such approval being in effect, shall, before proceeding
through the intersection, bring such vehicle, railway car or other
conveyance to a complete stop at such point as may be clearly marked
by a sign or line or, if a point is not so marked, than at the nearer line
or crosswalk of said intersection.
A.
In accordance with the foregoing, the erection and maintenance of an
isolated stop sign or signs or flashing red signals, as the case may be,
are authorized as follows:75
B.
75.Editor's Note: A former entry for northbound drivers on Acton Road at Bartlett Street was
deleted 8-16-1999.
§ 203-35 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-39
202:478
Stop Sign on Direction of Traffic
Adams Avenue at Boston Road Eastbound
Adams Street at Groton Road Northbound
Adams Street at Sherman Street East and westbound
Alpha Road at Billerica Road (Route 129) Northbound
Alpine Lane at Route 110 —
Barton Hill Road at Acton Road North and southbound
Berkeley Drive at Graniteville Road Northbound
Billerica Road (Rte. 129), Chelmsford
Street (Rte. 110) and Central Square
All drivers entering
intersection
Bradford Road and Aberdeen Street East and westbound
Brick Kiln Road at Carlisle Street Northbound
Brook Street at Summer Street Westbound
Burning Tree Lane at Acton Road (Route
27)
Northwestbound
Byam Road at Acton Road Eastbound
Byam Road at Robin Hill Road [Added
11-9-1998]
—
Canter Road at Thomas Drive Eastbound
Castlewood Drive at Graniteville Road Southbound
Cathy Road at Thomas Drive Westbound
Chatham Road at Warren Avenue Southbound
Clear Street at Linwood Street North and southbound
Clover Hill Drive at Pine Hill Road Northbound
Coolidge Street at Groton Road Southbound
Courtland Drive at Westford Street Northbound
Cross Street at Mission Road Westerly
Dalton Road at Westford Street Westbound
Davis Road at Graniteville Road Northbound
Davis Road at Old Westford Road East and westbound
Dayton Street at Bradford Road [Added
3-15-1999]
Northbound
Dunstable Road at Groton Road (Route
40)
Southerly
Elizabeth Drive at Mill Road Eastbound
Elm Street at Acton Road Westbound
Field Street at Erlin Road Northbound
Field Street at Linwood Street East and westbound
§ 203-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-39
202:479
Stop Sign on Direction of Traffic
First Street at Warren Avenue Northbound
Galloway Road at Pine Hill Road Southbound
Golden Cove Road at Billerica Road
(Route 129)
Southbound
Graniteville Road at Old Westford Road Northbound
Groton Road at Vinal Square Eastbound
Grove Street at Perham Street [Added
5-15-1995]
Eastbound
Hall Road at Parker Road East and westbound
Harold Street at Warren Avenue Northbound
Hazen Road at Concord Road Southerly
Highland Avenue at Middlesex Street
[Added 3-17-1997]
Northbound
High Street at Acton Road East and westbound
High Street at Robin Hill Road Eastbound
Hitchinpost Road at Old Westford Road Westbound
Hornbeam Hill Road at Fairbanks Road Northbound
Housatonic Avenue at Bowl Road [Added
11-6-2000]
North and southbound
Ideal Avenue at Linwood Street North and southbound
Industrial Avenue at Billerica Road
(Route 129)
Northbound
Janet Road at Wildes Road Northbound
Jordan Street at Crooked Spring Road Eastbound
Joyce Street at Pleasant Street —
Locke Road at Westford Street Westbound
Locust Road at Robin Hill Road North and southbound
Main Street at Groton Road Northbound
Manning Road at Carlisle Street Eastbound
Mansur Street at Sherman Street —
Maple Road at Acton Road [Added
4-26-2004]
Eastbound
Maple Road at Parkerville Road Eastbound
Marshall Street at Carlisle Street Eastbound
Maynard Circle at Meadowbrook Road Westbound
Meadowbrook Road at Crooked Spring
Road
Southerly
§ 203-39 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-39
202:480
Stop Sign on Direction of Traffic
Meadowbrook Road at Main Street Southbound
Middlesex Street at Vinal Square Westbound
Miland Avenue at Linwood Street East and westbound
Moore Street at Brick Kiln Road [Added
11-9-1998]
Eastbound
Mt. Pleasant Street at Church Street Northeastbound
Newfield Street at Adams Street East and westbound
Newfield Street at Washington Street North and southbound
Pennock Road at Abbott Lane [Added
8-11-2014]
—
Pine Hill Road at Westford Street Northbound
Purcell Drive at Acton Road Westbound
Quigley Avenue at Church Street Southbound
Rack Road at Old Westford Road Northbound
Richardson Road at Graniteville Road Southbound
River Meadow Drive at Warren Avenue Southbound
Riverneck Road at Billerica Road Westbound
Riverneck Road at Carlisle Street East and westbound
St. Nicholas Avenue at Bowl Road
[Added 11-6-2000]
North and southbound
San Mateo Road at Proctor Road Westbound
School Street at Graniteville Road All drivers entering
intersection
School Street at Old Westford Road Southbound
Scientia Drive at Billerica Road (Route
129)
Northbound
Shaw Street at Newfield Street —
Sleeper Street at Tyngsboro Road Southbound
Smith Street at Parkhurst Road Westbound
Smith Street at Steadman Street Eastbound
Spaulding Road at Gristone Road Westbound
Spaulding Road at Monument Hill Road Eastbound
Steadman Street at Dalton Road All drivers entering the
intersection, including
Subway Avenue as it enters
this intersection
Subway Avenue at Dalton Road Northwestbound
§ 203-39 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-39
202:481
§ 203-40. Operation at ways connected by ramps and at
intersections with islands.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been
separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at the
intersections of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers of vehicles
shall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals or markings.
§ 203-41. One-way streets.
Upon the following streets or parts of streets vehicular traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated below, provided that a sufficient number of
official signs are erected and maintained at each of the exits for each oneway
street so that at least one sign will be clearly visible for a distance of at
least 75 feet to drivers approaching such an exit:
Stop Sign on Direction of Traffic
Summer Street (a.k.a. Grove Street) at
Billerica Road
Westbound
Summer Street at Boston Road Westbound
Sunset Avenue at Dalton Road North and southbound
Swain Road at Dunstable Road Northbound
Sycamore Street at Westford Street Southbound
Turnpike Road at Mill Road Eastbound
Westford Street at Littleton Road Southbound
Westford Street at Old Westford Road Westbound
Westford Street at Route 110 (Littleton
Road)
Southbound
Wildwood Road at Dalton Road [Added
5-19-2014]
—
Winslow Road at Rack Road East/westbound
Woodlawn Avenue at Linwood Street East and westbound
Wood Street at Tyngsboro Road Eastbound
Wotton Street at Middlesex Street Eastbound
§ 203-39 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-41
202:482
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Acton Road Southerly From the intersection of Acton Road
and Boston Road to the intersection of
Acton Road and Bartlett Street, for a
total distance of 360 feet
Adams Avenue Southerly From the intersection of Adams Avenue
and Bartlett Street to the intersection
of Adams Avenue and Boston Road, for
a total distance of 390 feet
Adams Street
[Added 11-8-1993]
Southerly From Groton Road to Newfield Street
Bartlett Street Southerly From the intersection of Bartlett Street
and Acton Road to the intersection of
Bartlett Street and Adams Avenue, for
a total distance of 514 feet
Boston Road Northerly From the intersection of Boston Road
and Adams Avenue to a point at the
traffic island in Central Square, for a
total distance of 1,030 feet
Gay Street
[Added
3-16-1998]76
— Entering from Princeton Street and
exiting onto Middlesex Street.
§ 203-42. Heavy commercial vehicles.
Restricted. The use and operation of heavy commercial vehicles having
a carrying capacity of more than 21/2 tons are hereby restricted on the
following named streets or parts thereof and in the manner outlined
and during the period of time set forth:
North Road, between Littleton Road and Route 3. The alternate
route shall be via Chelmsford Street (Route 110) and Route 3.
(1)
Golden Cove Road, entire length, 24 hours a day. The alternate
route shall be via Billerica Road (Rte. 129) to Wilson Street to
Chelmsford Street (Rte. 110).
(2)
Scientia Drive, entire length, 24 hours a day. The alternate route
shall be via Billerica Road and Industrial Avenue.
(3)
(4) Lynn Avenue, 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. [Added 12-2-2002]
A.
Exemptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to heavy
commercial vehicles going to or coming from places upon said streets
B.
76.Editor's Note: Rivermeadow Road (formerly known as "Third Street"), formerly a one-way
street, became two-way per Board of Selectmen 9-16-1991.
§ 203-41 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-42
202:483
§ 203-43. Clinging to moving vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to, or attach himself/
herself or his/her vehicle to, any other moving vehicle or streetcar upon any
roadway.
§ 203-44. Limitations on backing.
The operator of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made in safety.
§ 203-45. Parades and processions.
No parade or procession or group of individuals or vehicles shall occupy
or march on any street, except funeral processions and Police and Fire
Departments, unless written permit therefor is given by the Chief of Police,
and said Chief of Police may designate the period during which said street
or streets may be thus occupied.
§ 203-46. Areas of restricted access.
for the purpose of making deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise
to or similar collections from abutting land or buildings or adjoining
streets or ways to which access cannot otherwise be gained or to
vehicles used in connection with the construction, maintenance and
repair of said streets or public utilities therein or to vehicles owned by
a federal, state, municipal or public service corporation.
Subsection A of this section shall be effective only during such times as
official signs are erected and maintained setting forth its provisions.
C.
Do not enter signs shall be posted as follows:
High Street in the easterly direction from Acton Road, in effect
from 6:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.
(1)
Worthen Street in the southerly direction from North Road, in
effect from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.
(2)
Bartlett Street in a northerly direction from Action Road, in effect
at all times.
(3)
Quigley Avenue in a northerly direction from Middlesex Street, in
effect at all times. [Added 1-12-2004]
(4)
Access onto Sycamore Street from Westford Street, with a time
restriction of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.
[Added 9-12-2005]
(5)
A.
B. Turn restrictions shall be posted as follows:
§ 203-42 CHELMSFORD CODE § 203-46
202:484
No left enter from Worthen Street in easterly direction at Fletcher
Square Park, in effect from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(1)
No right turn from Groton Road onto Sherman Street, 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.
(2)
No right turn from Groton Road onto Newfield Street, 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.
(3)
No left turn from Chelmsford Street (Rte. 110) easterly onto
Billerica Road (Rte. 129), in effect at all times.
(4)
No left turn from Golden Cove Road onto New Fletcher Street, 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. [Added 12-17-2012]
(5)
No left turn from Golden Cove Road onto New Spaulding Street,
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. [Added
12-17-2012]
(6)
No left turn from Golden Cove Road onto Dawn Drive, 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. [Added 12-17-2012]
(7)
No parking signs shall be posted as follows: [Added 4-11-2016]
Along the 200 feet on both sides of the entrance and exit of
Wellman Avenue.
(1)
C.
§ 203-46 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-46
202:485

ARTICLE VII
Penalties; Disposition of Fines
§ 203-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-4-1999]
Except as otherwise provided in these rules and orders, any person violating
any of the provisions of these rules and orders or any rule or regulation
made by the Board of Selectmen pursuant thereto shall be guilty of a
violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be liable to a fine not to exceed
$20.
§ 203-48. Disposition of fines and forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of
bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of these
rules and orders shall be paid into the town treasury.
§ 203-47 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-48
202:487

ARTICLE VIII
Severability; Repealer
§ 203-49. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and
orders is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of these rules and orders.
The Board of Selectmen hereby declares that it would have passed these
rules and orders and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or phrases is declared unconstitutional.
§ 203-50. Repealer.
The former traffic rules and orders of this town are hereby repealed, and
all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with
the provisions of these rules and orders are hereby repealed, except that
this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of these rules and orders.
{END OF CHAPTER}
§ 203-49 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 203-50
202:489
Appendix
Chapter A300
ACCEPTED STATUTES AND ACTS
§ A300-1. Accepted statutes and acts.
Accounting System, State
Ch. 598, Acts of 1910
(1921 ATM Art. 7)
Authorizes the installation of the State
Accounting System
Ch. 44, § 53E
(5-5-1986 ATM Art. 16)
Revolving accounts
Ch. 40, § 4G
(5-4-1987 ATM Art. 23)
Advertising municipal contract, etc.
Ch. 44, § 53E
(6-4-1990 ATM)
Appropriate certain anticipated receipts
Ch. 44, § 53F 1/2
(10-20-1997 ATM Art. 15;
4-25-2016 ATM Art. 10)
Enterprise fund
Accountant, Town
Ch. 264, Acts of 1910 Authorizes the Selectmen to appoint a Town
Accountant
Ch. 252, Acts of 1916
(12-17-1920 STM Art. 2)
Appeals, Board of
Ch. 40, § 30A
(now Ch. 40A, § 20)
(3-12-1956 ATM Art 71)
Restricts reconsideration of previously
rejected matters by the Board of Appeals
Assessors
Ch. 889, Acts of 1971
(5-6-1974 ATM Art. 28)
$1,000 per year additional compensation
Ch. 60A, § 1
(5-21-1984 ATM Art. 49)
Tax exemption for veterans
§ 203-50 CHELMSFORD CODE § A300-1
202:490
Ch. 59, § 5
(17C)
(5-11-1987 STM)
Exemption of certain real estate from taxes
Ch. 59, § 5
(41B)
(5-11-1987 STM Art. 13)
Exemption of certain real estate
Ch. 59, § 5
(41C and 17D)
(5-1-1989 ATM Art. 13)
Exemption for low-income residents
Ch. 653, § 40, Acts of 1989
(4-23-1990 STM)
Change in assessment dates
Ch. 59, § 5
(37A)
(5-4-1992 ATM Art. 7)
Blind exemption ($500)
Ch 59, § 5J
(4-30-1998 ATM)
Phased-in assessment for owner who
improves occupied historic property
Ch. 39, § 23D Allowing members of boards, commissions
and committees who have missed a single
adjudicatory hearing to participate in a
decision on the matter under certain
circumstances
Ch. 59, § 5K
(4-27-2000 ATM Art. 13)
Senior citizens property tax work-off
abatement program, effective beginning in
Fiscal Year 2001
Bridges
Ch. 134, Acts of 2015
(11-23-2015)
Designating Lance Corporal Andrew J.
Zabierek Memorial Bridge
Building Line
Ch. 82, § 37
(General Laws of 1921)
(4-2-1923 STM Art. 2)
Authorizes the establishment of a building
line (setback) from existing streets or ways
and prohibits the erection of buildings within
said line when established
Cemetery
Ch. 264, Acts of 1890 Authorizes the election of Cemetery
Commissioners
Chelmsford Country Club
§ A300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A300-1
202:491
Golf course
Ch. 44, § 53F 1/2
(10-17-2011 ATM Art. 8)
Allows Town to establish an "enterprise
fund"
Civil Service
Police
Ch. 31, § 48
(1944 ATM Art. 10)
Civil service status for police officers
Police Chief
Ch. 31, § 49
(1944 ATM Art. 11)
Civil service status for Chief of Police
Ch. 366, Acts of 1993
(10-21-1993 ATM Art. 12)
Exempt Police Chief from civil service
Fire
Ch. 31, § 48
(3-7-1966 ATM by ballot)
Civil service status for member of Fire
Department
Conservation Commission
Ch. 40, § 8c
(1961 ATM Art. 27)
Establishing Conservation Commission
Ch. 45, § 21
(5-19-1977 ATM Art. 59)
Care and management of Town Forest
Ch. 287, Acts of 1988
(5-1-1989 ATM Art. 30)
Special legislation to establish Chelmsford-
Carlisle Regional Conservation District
Ch. 120, Acts of 2000 Granting of sewer easement to town
Community Preservation
Act
Ch. 44B
(2-26-2001 STM Art. 1)
Acceptance of Act
Council on Aging
Ch. 44, § 53E 1/2
(5-1-1997 ATM)
Authorizing a revolving fund for Senior Trip
Program
Dogs
Ch. 140, § 147A
(5-5-1986 ATM Art. 18)
(10-17-2005 ATM Art. 14)
Regulation of dogs
§ A300-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § A300-1
202:492
Elections
Nomination Papers
Ch. 53, § 9A
(4-25-2011 ATM Art. 14)
Obtaining of blank nomination papers;
statement by candidate
Official Ballots
Ch. 11, § 364 (Rev. Laws)
(1-29-1903 STM Art. 3)
Authorizing the use of official ballots at Town
Election
Employees
8-Hour Day
Ch. 54, Acts of 1909
(now Ch. 148, § 31)
(1914 ATM)
8-hour day for town employees
Retirement System
Ch. 32, §§ 1 to 28
(11-5-1946 state election)
Accept provisions of retirement system
Vacation
Ch. 44, § 65
(6-13-1949 STM Art. 5)
Authorizes the payment in advance of
vacation pay
Ch. 41, § 111
(6-13-1949 STM Art. 6)
Authorized two weeks' vacation annually
without loss of pay to municipal employees
Pension
Ch. 647, Acts of 1960
(3-13-1961 ATM Art. 53)
Pension increase for retired employees
Ch. 820, Acts of 1950
(12-11-1950 STM Art. 13)
Authorizes increase in pension benefits to
retired employees
Group Insurance
Ch. 32B
(1961 ATM, by ballot)
Authorizes group insurance benefits for town
employees and their families
Ch. 32B, § 9A
(1970 ATM by ballot)
Town to pay 1/2 the cost of group insurance
Ch. 32B, § 9D
(4-25-1983 ATM)
Surviving spouse insurance
§ A300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A300-1
202:493
Ch. 41, § 111
(12-11-1950 STM Art. 13)
Retired police officers and fire fighters,
hospital, etc., expenses
Ch. 32B, § 9D
(4-25-1983 ATM Art. 24)
1/2 premium costs payable by surviving
spouse
Ch. 32B, § 7A
(4-25-1983 ATM Art. 24)
Addition rate
Indemnification
Ch. 41, § 100A
(1970 ATM Art. 14)
Indemnification of town employees for
damage sustained in the operation of town
vehicles
Vacation
Ch. 41, § 111D
(1969 ATM by ballot)
Extension of vacation benefits for members
of Police and Fire Departments
Reserve Fund for
Compensated Absences
Ch. 40, § 13D
(10-15-2012 ATM Art. 4)
Establish reserve fund for future payment of
accrued liabilities for compensated absences
due upon termination
Early Retirement
Ch. 133, § 48, Acts of 1992
(10-19-1992 ATM Art. 4)
Early retirement incentive
Ch. 399, § 48, Acts of 1992
(4-26-1993 ATM Art. 13)
Early retirement incentive
Retirement
Ch. 32B, § 20
(10-17-2011 ATM Art. 4)
Allows Town to establish an Other Post-
Employment Benefits Liability Trust Fund
Health Benefits
Ch. 32B, § 18
(10-16-2006 ATM Art. 6)
Requires all retirees, their spouses and
dependents who are enrolled in Medicare
Part A at no cost to the retiree, spouse or
dependents, or eligible for coverage
thereunder at no cost to the retiree, spouse
or dependents, to enroll in a Medicare health
benefits supplemental plan offered by the
Town
Ch. 69, Acts of 2011
(Board of Selectmen,
7-25-2011)
Authorizes Town to modify employee health
plans without going through the full
collective bargaining process
§ A300-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § A300-1
202:494
Expedited permitting
Ch. 43D
(10-20-2008 ATM Art. 13)
Allows Town to designate priority
development sites and confers eligibility for
technical assistance funding
Fees
Ch. 40, § 22F
(4-25-2005 STM Art. 3)
Allows Town boards and officers to fix
reasonable fees for licenses, permits and
certificates, and reasonable fees for services
provided by such board or officer
Fire Department
Ch. 148, § 6
(General Laws of 1921)
(1923 ATM Art. 21)
Authorizes Fire Department officials to enter
buildings to make inspections of fire hazards
Ch. 48, §§ 42 to 44
(1954 ATM Art. 103)
Establishment of Fire Department to be
under the control of a Chief
Ch. 48, § 59A
(Board of Selectmen,
5-2-1966)
Mutual aid and participation in parades
Ch. 148, § 26C
(5-21-1979 ATM Art. 4)
Smoke and heat detectors
Ch. 148, § 26G
(5-23-1983 ATM Art. 45)
Automatic sprinklers
Ch. 45, Acts of 2013 Authorizes the Town to continue the
employment of Fire Chief Michael Curran
until June 30, 2015, until the date of his
retirement or until the date he is relieved of
his duties by the Town Manager, whichever
occurs first
Work Week
Ch. 48, § 58D
(1969 ATM by ballot)
Authorizes 42-hour week for firefighters
Handicapped
Commission
Ch. 40, § 8J
(1-27-1986 STM Art. 2)
Establish Handicapped Commission
(Commission on Disabilities)
Health (Board of)
§ A300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A300-1
202:495
Ch. 29C, § 1
(5-1-1997 ATM Art. 30)
Massachusetts Water Pollution Abatement
Trust
Highway Surveyor
Ch. 11, § 336
(Rev. Laws)
(1903 ATM Art. 16)
Authorizes town to elect, annually, a
Highway Surveyor
Historical Commission
Ch. 40, § 8D
(3-14-1966 ATM Art. 13)
Authorizes the creation of an Historical
Commission
Historical District
Boundaries of district
(5-8-1975 ATM Art. 35)
Establish Historic District
Housing Authority
Ch. 121B
(1970 ATM Art. 53)
Establishing of a Housing Authority
Ch. 571, Acts of 1989 Designate as the Ruth K. Delaney Housing
for the Elderly
Ice Skating Rink - Tully
Forum (Brick Kiln Road -
Chelmsford-Billerica Line)
Ch. 141 H.B. No. 5340
Sec. 10, 1998
2nd Annual Session
Approved 5-28-1998
Authorizes the Division of Capital Planning
and Operations to enter into a lease of
certain property within the Town of
Chelmsford
Industrial Development
Commission
Ch. 297, Acts of 1954
(1954 ATM Art. 43)
Authorizes the creation of an Industrial
Development Commission
Ch. 40, § 8A
(1956 ATM Art. 73)
Establishment of an Industrial Development
Commission
Industrial Development
Finance Authority
Ch. 40D
(1974 ATM Art. 31)
Establishment of an Industrial Development
Finance Authority
Insurance Fund
§ A300-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § A300-1
202:496
Ch. 191, Acts of 1905
(1907 ATM)
Establishment of municipal building
insurance
Ch. 718, Acts of 1977
(5-19-1977 ATM Art. 61)
Abolish Sinking Fund Commission
Library
Ch. 347, Acts of 1890
(1893 ATM Art. 12)
Authorizing the State Board of Library
Commissioners to assist any town which
accepts this Act in the establishment and
maintenance of a free public library
Licenses
Alcoholic Beverages
Ch. 168, Acts of 2015
(1-6-2016)
Authorizing the Town to hold licenses for the
sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on
the premises
Bowling
Ch. 136, § 4B
(3-18-1960 STM Art. 1)
Permits the licensing of bowling on the
Lord's Day
Ice Cream
Ch. 423, Acts of 1909
(now Ch. 136, § 7)
(1917 ATM Art. 30)
Sale of ice cream, confectionery on the
Lord's Day may be licensed
Nudity
Ch. 138, § 12B
(10-23-1995 ATM Art. 14)
Prohibition of nudity in any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
Picnic Groves
Ch. 309, Acts of 1885
(1900 ATM Art. 13)
Authorizes the granting of licenses to
establish, let, keep open and maintain a
grove to be used for picnics and other
gatherings
Sports and Games
Ch. 136, §§ 21 to 28
(7-2-1923 STM Art. 8)
Licenses may be issued for sports and games
on the Lord's Day
Moderator - Election
Ch. 835, § 397, Acts of 1913
(1913 STM Art. 12)
Authorizes the election of a moderator on
official ballots for a 1-year term
Motor Vehicles
Parking Violations
§ A300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A300-1
202:497
Ch. 90, § 20A
(10-4-1965 STM Art. 7;
4-26-2010 ATM Art. 1577)
Requires the visible tagging of motor
vehicles for violations of law
Ch. 90, § 20C
(5-21-1979 ATM Art. 38;
12-4-1981 STM Art. 2)
Violation of parking regulations, etc.
Ch. 90, §§ 20D and 20E
(12-4-1981 STM Art. 2)
Disposition, penalties, violations on motor
vehicles, etc. (Parking Clerk)
Towing
Ch. 40, § 22D
(3-12-1962 ATM Art. 38)
Authority to tow illegally parked cars
Park Commission
Ch. 28, §§ 1 to 14
(Rev. Laws)
(1909 ATM Art. 2)
Authorizes the establishment of a Park
Commission with certain powers
Planning Board
Ch. 41, §§ 81A to 81J
(1973 ATM Art. 3)
Establishment of a Planning Board with
improved powers
Ch. 808
(1978 ATM Art. 31)
Ch. 41, § 81U, p. 13
(5-1-1989 ATM Art. 20)
Subdivision construction bond
Poles and wires
Ch. 415, Acts of 2010 Authorizes the Town to regulate the removal
of aboveground utility poles, overhead wires
and other associated structures and to
regulate the installation of underground
wires and associated structures
Police Department
Established
Ch. 41, § 97 (General Laws
of 1921)
(1928 ATM Art. 31)
Authorizes the establishment of a Police
Department to be under the control of a
Chief of Police ("weak chief form")
Uniforms (Police/Fire)
77.Editor's Note: This article also repealed the former acceptance of Ch. 90, § 20A 1/2, by Art.
2 of the 12-4-1981 STM.
§ A300-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § A300-1
202:498
Ch. 40, § 6B
(1953 ATM Art. 18)
Authorizes town to expand funds for police/
fire uniforms
Work Week
Ch. 147, § 16C
(3-10-1958 ATM Art. 66)
5-day week for police officers
Mutual Aid
Ch. 40, § 8G
(1974 ATM Art. 44)
Authorization of police mutual aid
agreements
Ch. 291, Acts of 1990
(Art. 20)
Enhanced 911 Service
Ch. 360, Acts of 1987
(5-11-1987 STM Art. 5)
Appointment dates of certain officers
Ch. 41, § 108L
(10-20-1997 ATM Art. 6)
Quinn Bill
Precincts
Ch. 264, Acts of 1886
(11-2-1886 STM Art. 2)
Divide into convenient voting precincts
Precincts Voting
Ch. 835, Acts of 1913, § 421 Authorizes use of precinct voting for town
elections
Ch. 291, Acts of 1918, § 29
(12-17-1920 STM Art. 7)
Private Ways
Ch. 40, § 6F
(1954 ATM Art. 23)
Authorizes the town to expend public funds
on private ways
Ch. 40, §§ 6C and 6G
(6-8-1976 ATM Art. 45)
Removal of ice and snow and temporary
resurfacing
Recreation Commission
Ch. 45, § 14
(3-13-1961 ATM Art. 34)
Authority for Selectmen to appoint a
Recreation Commission
Ch. 44, § 531/2
(5-4-1992 ATM Art. 10)
Supporting service revolving fund
§ A300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A300-1
202:499
Ch. 44, § 53D
(4-29-1993 ATM Art. 22)
Recreation and parks revolving fund
Registration - bicycles
Ch. 85, § 11A
(7-23-1942 STM Art. 8)
Authorizes the registration of bicycles
Superintendent
Ch. 431, Acts of 1888
(1896 ATM Art. 11)
Authorizes two or more towns to unite for
the purpose of hiring a Superintendent of
Schools
Regional Vocational
Ch. 71, §§ 16 to 16I
(10-4-1965 STM Art. 10)
Authorizes the creation of a Regional
Vocational School District
Ch. 188, Acts of 1985
(1-27-1986 STM Arts. 1 and
2; 5-9-1988 ATM Art. 29;
4-24-1989 ATM Art. 5;
6-11-1990 ATM Art. 21)
Grants for Chelmsford and N.V.T.H.S.
Ch. 71, § 83, Acts of 1993 Early retirement for school personnel
Ch. 60, § 3C
(5-2-1996 ATM Art. 18)
Chelmsford Arts and Technology Education
Fund
Finances
Ch. 71, § 71E
(5-3-1979 ATM Art. 42)
Expenditure by School Committee of
receipts from certain programs
Ch. 71, § 71F
(10-16-2000 ATM Art. 21)
Establishment of revolving account for
tuition payments for nonresident students
and state reimbursements for foster-care
children
Selectmen
Ch. 11, § 343
(2-21-1903 STM)
Authorizes town to designate Selectmen to
also serve, by virtue of their office, as
Assessors and Overseers of the Poor
Sewer Commission
Ch. 41, § 63
(1969 ATM Art. 69)
Establishment of a Sewer Commission
Ch. 83, § 16, pp. A to F
(9-25-1986 STM Art. 2)
Collection of liens
§ A300-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § A300-1
202:500
Ch. 420, Acts of 1985 Ch.
138, Acts of 1987
Establishing an Industrial Sewer District
Taxation
Ch. 59, § 5, Clause 54
(10-19-2015 ATM Art. 14)
Establishing a minimum value of personal
property subject to taxation in the amount of
$5,000
Ch. 60A, § 1
(10-19-2015 ATM Art. 15)
Motor vehicle excise exemption on one
vehicle owned or leased and registered for
nonbusiness use for Massachusetts residents
who are in active military service and
deployed outside Massachusetts for at least
45 days in the excise calendar year
Ch. 64L, § 2(a)
(8-17-2009 STM Art. 1)
Local meals excise tax, effective 10-1-2009
Ch. 184, § 51, Acts of 2002
(10-17-2005 ATM Art. 13)
Adjustment to senior citizen tax factors as
set forth in MGL c. 59, § 5, to first apply in
fiscal year 2006, beginning 7-1-2005
Town Clerk
Ch. 11, § 335
(Rev. Laws)
(2-21-1903 STM Art. 3)
Establish a 3-year term of office
Town Hall
Ch. 265, Acts of 1947
(now Ch. 41, § 110A)
(9-29-1947 STM Art. 4)
Close Town Hall on Saturday
Trees
Ch. 242, Acts of 1867
(1872 ATM Art. 9)
Prohibits the cutting down of any
ornamental or shade tree without first giving
notice to the Selectmen, who may prohibit
its removal, the landowner being entitled to
receive damages for the retention of the tree
Treasurer
Ch. 40, § 57
(9-25-1986 STM Arts. 8 and
9)
Grant for renewal of licenses affected by
nonpayment of local taxes and fees
Ch. 60, § 15
(3-5-2009 STM Art. 2)
Fee for each written demand issued by
Collector
§ A300-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § A300-1
202:501
Ch. 60, § 23A
(6-29-1978 STM)
Fees charged for furnishing certificate of
lien
Ch. 64G, § 3A
(5-5-1986 ATM Art. 27;
8-17-2009 STM Art. 2)
Local room occupancy excise; rate increase
Ch. 80, § 13B
(11-30-1987 STM Art. 8)
Liens
Ch. 200A, § 9A
(10-24-2016 ATM Art. 15)
Procedure for providing notice and disposing
of abandoned funds in the custody of the
Town
Ch. 653, § 40, Acts of 1989
(4-23-1990 STM Art. 1)
Quarterly property tax billing
Ch. 653, § 41, Acts of 1989
(4-23-1990 STM Art. 2)
Change in assessment dates
Tully Forum
See Ice Skating Rink
Workmen's
Compensation
Ch. 40, § 13A (General Laws
of 1921)
(8-17-1931 STM Art. 19)
Authorizes self-insurance for workmen's
compensation benefits
Ch. 152
(1951 ATM Art. 30)
Extends workmen's compensation coverage
to all Town employees
Ch. 807, Acts of 1913
(now Ch. 152, §§ 69 to 75)
(1914 ATM, ballot vote)
Workmen's compensation for laborers,
mechanics and workmen, for injuries
received in public employment
{END OF CHAPTER}
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ A300-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § DL-1
202:502
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 4 3-27-2000 Wetlands amendment Ch. 187
ATM, Art. 13 4-27-2000 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 19 4-27-2000 Charter amendment § 3-5
ATM, Art. 13 10-16-2000 Vision obstructions Ch. 142, Art. V
ATM, Art. 17 10-16-2000 Amusement devices Ch. 10
ATM, Art. 19 10-16-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 10-16-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 21 10-16-2000 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
Board of
Selectmen
11-6-2000 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
STM, Art. 1 2-26-2001 Community Preservation Act
accepted
Ch. A300
STM, Art. 2 2-26-2001 Community Preservation
Committee
Ch. 19
ATM, Art. 17 4-30-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 15 10-15-2001 Noise Ch. 100
ATM, Art. 16 10-15-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 19 10-15-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 10-15-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 22 10-15-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Board of
Selectmen
1-28-2002 Traffic rules and orders
amendment (no right turn
onto Marinel Avenue from
Dunstable Road)
NCM
(temporary
measure)
ATM, Art. 12 4-29-2002 Dogs amendment Ch. 11, Art. I
ATM, Art. 13 4-29-2002 Street openings amendment Ch. 142, Art. II
ATM, Art. 21 4-29-2002 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 22 4-29-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 10-24-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 23 10-24-2002 Annual Report Ch. 12
Board of
Selectmen
12-2-2002 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
Board of
Selectmen
12-2-2002 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
202:503
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 1 4-28-2003 Town Meeting amendment Ch. 154
ATM, Art. 20 4-28-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Board of
Selectmen
1-12-2004 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
Board of
Selectmen
4-26-2004 Traffic rules and orders
amendment (stop sign at
intersection of Maple Road
and Acton Road)
Pending
litigation
ATM, Art. 19 4-26-2004 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 27 4-26-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Board of
Selectmen
4-26-2004 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
Board of
Selectmen
7-19-2004 Traffic rules and orders
amendment (scooters)
Ch. 203
ATM, Art. 17 10-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
STM, Art. 3 4-25-2005 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 21 4-25-2005 Demolition of buildings Ch. 16
ATM, Art. 23 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 24 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 25 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 26 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 27 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 28 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 29 4-25-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Board of
Selectmen
8-15-2005 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
Board of
Selectmen
9-12-2005 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
ATM, Art. 12 10-17-2005 Recreation vehicles Ch. 124
ATM, Art. 13 10-17-2005 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 14 10-17-2005 Dogs amendment; General
Law acceptance
Ch. 11, Art. I;
Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 15 10-17-2005 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 5
ATM, Art. 17 10-17-2005 Finance amendment Ch. 35
ATM, Art. 18 10-17-2005 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 42
ATM, Art. 19 10-17-2005 Fortune-tellers amendment Ch. 46
ATM, Art. 20 10-17-2005 Solicitors amendment Ch 116, Art. III
§ DL-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § DL-1
202:504
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 21 10-17-2005 Street openings amendment Ch 142, Art. II
ATM, Art. 22 10-17-2005 Recycling amendment Ch. 137
ATM, Art. 23 10-17-2005 Adoption of amended Zoning
Map
NCM (see
§ 195-3)
ATM, Art. 26 10-17-2005 Officers, boards and
committees amendment
Ch. 106
ATM, Art. 23 4-24-2006 Finance amendment Ch. 35
ATM, Art. 26 4-24-2006 Chelmsford Arts and
Technology Education Fund
amendment
Ch. 51, Art. I
ATM, Art. 6 10-16-2006 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 14 10-16-2006 Dogs amendment Ch. 11, Art. I
ATM, Art. 17 10-16-2006 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 19 10-16-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 24 10-16-2006 Petition to General Court for
Charter amendment
NCM
ATM, Art. 27 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 3-2
ATM, Art. 29 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 3-3
ATM, Art. 35 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 4-2
ATM, Art. 36 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 4-3
ATM, Art. 37 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 4-5
ATM, Art. 38 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 4-6
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
202:505
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 39 10-16-2006;
ratified
4-3-2007
ATE
Charter amendment § 8-5
ATM, Art. 15 5-3-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 16 5-3-2007 Officers, boards and
committees amendment
Ch. 106
ATM, Art. 17 5-3-2007 Recycling amendment Ch. 137
ATM, Art. 18 5-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 19 5-3-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 5-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 21 5-3-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 12 10-22-2007 General penalty amendment Ch. 1, Art. II
Ch. 157, Acts
of 2007
Special act Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 17 4-28-2008 Conservation Commission
amendment
Ch. 20, Arts. I
and II
ATM, Art. 18 4-28-2008 Wetlands amendment Ch. 187
ATM, Art. 19 4-28-2008 Wetlands amendment Ch. 187
ATM, Art. 20 4-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 21 4-28-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 11 10-20-2008 Poles and wires amendment Ch. 119
ATM, Art. 12 10-20-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 13 10-20-2008 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 14 10-20-2008 Demolition of buildings
amendment
Ch. 16
STM, Art. 2 3-5-2009 Fee for delinquent excise fees Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 17 4-27-2009 Wetlands amendment Ch. 187
ATM, Art. 18 4-27-2009 Officers, boards and
committees amendment
Ch. 106
ATM, Art. 19 4-27-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
STM, Art. 1 8-17-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
STM, Art. 2 8-17-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 13 4-26-2010 Streets and sidewalks: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I
ATM, Art. 14 4-26-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § DL-1
202:506
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 15 4-26-2010 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 16 4-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 25 4-26-2010 Energy conservation: Stretch
Energy Code
Ch. 25
ATM, Art. 17 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 18 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 19 10-18-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 10-18-2010 Streets and sidewalks: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I
Ch. 415, Acts
of 2010
Special act Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 14 4-25-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 16 4-25-2011 Town Meeting amendment Ch. 154
ATM, Art. 19 4-25-2011 Right to farm Ch. 127
Board of
Selectmen
6-27-2011 Acceptance of final report by
Sewer Commission;
dissolution of Sewer
Commission
Charter
(footnote only)
Board of
Selectmen
7-25-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 4 10-17-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 8 10-17-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 16 10-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 17 10-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 18 10-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 19 10-17-2011 Zoning Map amendment NCM
ATM. Art. 20 10-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 21 10-17-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 16 4-30-2012 Trees amendment Ch. 161
ATM, Art. 25 4-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 26 4-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 28 4-30-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 29 4-30-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 30 4-30-2012 Scenic roads Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 4 10-15-2012 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
202:507
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 15 10-15-2012 Dog license fees Ch. 11, Art. I
(footnote only)
ATM, Art. 17 10-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 18 10-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 19 10-15-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
Board of
Selectmen
12-17-2012 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
Ch. 62, Acts
of 2012
Special act Ch. A300
Ch. 73, Acts
of 2012
Special act Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 24 4-29-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 25 4-29-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 26 4-29-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 27 4-29-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 28 4-29-2013 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 42
ATM, Art. 29 4-29-2013 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 11, Art. I
Ch. 45, Acts
of 2013
7-24-2013 Special act Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 13 10-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 14 10-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 15 10-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 16 10-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 4-28-2014 Animals: dog amendment Ch. 11, Art. I
ATM, Art. 22 4-28-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 23 4-28-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 25 4-28-2014 Sewage disposal amendment Ch. 132
Board of
Selectmen
5-19-2014 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
Board of
Selectmen
8-11-2014 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
ATM, Art. 12 10-20-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 7 10-19-2015 Sewage disposal amendment Ch. 132
ATM, Art. 14 10-19-2015 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 15 10-19-2015 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 17 10-19-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
§ DL-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § DL-1
202:508
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ch. 134, Acts
of 2015
11-23-2015 Special act Ch. A300
Ch. 168, Acts
of 2015
1-6-2016 Special act Ch. A300
Board of
Selectmen
4-11-2016 Traffic rules and orders
amendment
Ch. 203
ATM, Art. 10 4-25-2016 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 18 4-25-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 19 4-25-2016 Streets and sidewalks: snow
and ice amendment
Ch. 142, Art. III
ATM, Art. 20 4-25-2016 Water withdrawal
(commercial)
Ch. 185
ATM, Art. 13 10-24-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 14 10-24-2016 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 11, Art. I
ATM, Art. 15 10-24-2016 General Law acceptance Ch. A300
ATM, Art. 15 4-24-2017 Finance amendment Ch. 35
ATM, Art. 22 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 25 4-24-2017 Streets and sidewalks: street
openings amendment
Ch. 142, Art. II
ATM, Art. 26 4-24-2017 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 81
ATM,. Art. 27 4-24-2017 Funds: Chelmsford Arts and
Technology Education Fund
amendment
Ch. 51, Art. I
ATM, Art. 28 4-24-2017 Town Meeting amendment Ch. 154
ATM, Art. 15 10-16-2017 Marijuana Establishments Ch. 89
ATM, Art. 16 10-16-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 18 10-16-2017 Scenic Roads Amendment Ch. 130
ATM, Art. 19 10-16-2017 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 20 10-16-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 24 10-16-2017 Charter Amendment Ch. C
ATM, Art. 25 10-16-2017 Charter Amendment Ch. C
ATM, Art. 26 10-16-2017 Charter Amendment Ch. C
ATM, Art. 27 10-16-2017 Charter Amendment Ch. C
ATM, Art. 28 10-16-2017 Charter Amendment Ch. C
ATM, Art. 29 10-16-2017 Charter Amendment Ch. C
§ DL-1 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § DL-1
202:509
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ch. 76, Acts
of 2018
4-12-2018 Charter Amendment Ch. C
ATM, Art. 16 10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 19 10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
ATM, Art. 20 10-15-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
ATM, Art. 22 10-15-2018 Sustainable Community:
Polystyrene in Food
Establishments
Ch. 144, Art. II
ATM, Art. 23 10-15-2018 Sustainable Community:
Retail Use of Plastic Beverage
Straws and Stirrers
Ch. 144, Art. III
STM, Art. 1 10-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 195
Board of
Health
12-10-2018 Health Regulations
Amendment (Domestic
Animals)
Ch. 201
Board of
Health
1-7-2019 Health Regulations
Amendment (Domestic
Animals)
Ch. 201
§ DL-1 CHELMSFORD CODE § DL-1
202:510

ZONING
195 Attachment 2
Town of Chelmsford
[Amended 4-25-2005 ATM by Art. 28; 10-17-2011 ATM by Art. 20]
Table of Dimensional Requirements

Dimensional Requirements RA (LD) RB (LD) RC RMH CA CB CC CD IA IS RMH CX P OS
Minimum Lot Area  6,000 4,000 2,000 40,000 20,000 40,000 100,000 10,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 20,000 20,000
Width (feet) 150 150 125 150 125 150 200 50 150 150 150 125 125
Depth (feet) 150 150 125 150 125 0 200 0 150 150 0 125 125
Frontage (feet) 150 150 125 150 125 150 200 50 150 150 150 125 125
Front (feet) 40 40 20 40 20 60 60 20 40 40 60 20 20
Side (feet) 25 25 12 25 10 30 30 10 40 40 30 10 10
Rear (feet) 30 30 20 30 10 20 30 10 30 30 20 10 10
Maximum Building Coverage 10% 15% 20% 15% 15% 30% 30% 40% 40% 30% 30% 15% 15%
Stories 3 3 3 3 3 4 3 4 4 4 4 3 3
Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 45 35 45 45 45 45 35 35
Floor area ratio .15 .20 .25 .30 .45 .45 .45 .45 .45 .45 .45 NA NA
NOTES:

1 For multifamily dwellings, not less than 80,000 square feet or 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit, whichever is greater.

2 For granite operations, minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.

3 Corner lots shall maintain front yard requirements for each street frontage.

4
Increase to 100 feet when such yard is abutting a residentially used or zoned property.

5
Increase by 20 feet where abutting an RA or RB District.

6
Increase by 20 feet where abutting a residentially used or zoned property.
195 Attachment 2:1 05 - 01 - 2014