Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 1, Art. 1/I of the 1976 Code]
§ 1-1. Bylaws to be termed ordinances; enacting style. [Amended
9-1-2009]
All bylaws of the City of Chicopee shall be denominated ordinances, and the
enacting style thereof shall be "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City
of Chicopee, as follows."
§ 1-2. Recording of ordinances.
All ordinances which shall be passed by the Board of Aldermen of said City
shall be recorded by the City Clerk, in the order in which they shall pass to
be ordained, in a book to be kept for that purpose. Such ordinances shall
also be printed in the municipal register for the year in which they shall
have been passed.
§ 1-3. Orders and resolves. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Whenever the City Council expresses anything by way of command, the
form of expression shall be "ordered"; and when said City Council expresses
opinions, principles, facts or purposes, the form shall be "resolved."
§ 1-4. Taking effect of ordinances.
Every ordinance passed shall take effect upon its passage, unless otherwise
expressly provided therein.
§ 1-5. General penalty.
Whoever violates a provision of any ordinance of the City, whether included
herein or hereafter enacted, shall, unless other provision is expressly made,
be liable to a penalty of not more $20 for each offense.
§ 1-6. Liability of employers for violation of ordinances.
When anything is prohibited in an ordinance, not only the persons actually
doing the prohibited thing, but also the employers and all other persons
concerned therein, shall be liable to the penalty prescribed therefor.
§ 1-7. Rules of construction; definitions.
In the construction of all ordinances of the City, the following rules shall
be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the City Council or repugnant to the context of the
same ordinance. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Word usage. Words importing the singular number shall include the
plural, words importing the plural shall include the singular and words
B.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:3
§ 1-8. Copies available to the public.
The Clerk shall make copies of this Code available to the public at a
reasonable cost. However, the cost shall at least cover the cost of printing
and binding.
§ 1-8.1. License and permit issuance; definitions. [Added 4-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-23]
importing the masculine gender shall include females and boards of
the City. The words "street," "streets," "highway" and "highways" shall
be synonymous and shall include all public ways, all avenues, courts,
lanes, alleys, squares and sidewalks and those parts of public places
which form traveled parts of highways. Words purporting to give joint
authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
Definitions. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
OWNER — When applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, either
alone or with others.
PERSONS — Includes corporations.
SIDEWALK — Includes all walks which have been graded and
constructed for the use of persons traveling on foot, whether made
of concrete, brick, cement, stone, plank, cinders or dirt and also such
portions of bridges as are designed for the use of foot passengers.
TENANT and OCCUPANT — When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building
or land, either alone or with others.
C.
All amendments and additions to the Code of the City will conform to
the general format of this Code and be sent to the Law Department
for approval of construction and legality before the second and final
reading. Each will be assigned to a chapter and properly numbered
according to Articles and sections by the Ordinance Committee of the
City Council. Whenever necessary, the Ordinance Committee shall ask
the Clerk to recommend the format and location of ordinances. Within
90 days of the amendment of any section or chapter of this Code,
the Clerk shall make available to the public and to persons kept on a
special mailing list for that purpose new pages or chapters for insertion
in their copies of the Code as is appropriate. [Amended 2-21-1984;
9-1-2009]
D.
Before any Board, Committee or Commission issues any license or
permit in the City of Chicopee, all ordinances, zoning or regular, must
be satisfied first.
A.
§ 1-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 1-8.1
1:4
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
REGULAR ORDINANCE — Any ordinance as set forth and passed by
the City Council to include all present ordinances and past ordinances
as adopted by the Charter of the City of Chicopee as Article I,
Miscellaneous Provisions, and Article II, Adoption of Code and all of
their revisions.[Amended 9-1-2009]
ZONING ORDINANCE — All of zoning ordinances as defined in Chapter
275 to include all revisions to this chapter.
B.
§ 1-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8.1
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
§ 1-9. Adoption of Code. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The ordinances of the City of Chicopee of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the City Council, as previously consolidated in the 1976 Code of
the City of Chicopee, adopted May 4, 1976, and the ordinances of a general
and permanent nature adopted by the City Council subsequent to that
date, all as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 275,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the City
of Chicopee, hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-10. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-11. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-12. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-13. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Chicopee
by impressing thereon the seal of the City as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-14. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Chicopee, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at
all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this
adopting ordinance, coupled with the availability of copies of the Code for
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-15. Amendments to Code. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the City
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the City of Chicopee shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-16. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-22A and prior to the effective date of this ordinance
given in § 1-11 are hereby deemed to be part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation
shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are
included.
§ 1-17. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
her, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in her office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-18. Sale of Code book. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by City Council, which may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-19. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Chicopee to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $200.
§ 1-20. Severability.
§ 1-14 CHICOPEE CODE § 1-20
1:8
§ 1-21. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-22. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-21 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code, and every
part of each section, is an independent section or part of a section, and
the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
A.
Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is
an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
B.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 6, 1989.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the City's indebtedness.
G.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:9
§ 1-23. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
K. Any ordinance providing for salaries or complements.
L. Any ordinance relating to traffic or parking.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
City Council that all said changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
B.
1. Editor's Note: The following sections were added or amended: §§ 11-2; 13-2; 13-4; 13-5;
16-48; 22-1A; 22-2; 22-3A; 22-4C(6); 22-5A(1), (2), (3) and (4); 22-8B; 34-25; 122-1D and
275-54C(1). The following article was added: Art. III of Ch. 11.
§ 1-22 CHICOPEE CODE § 1-23
1:10
Chapter 3
CITY COUNCIL
§ 3-1. Action upon receipt of school plan approval.
Not later than 30 days after receipt by the City Council of the certification
of approval of school plans as required to be sent to said Council by the
Chairman of the School Committee under Section 37 of the Charter of
the City of Chicopee, said Council shall cause to be convened a meeting
for the purpose of discussing said school plans, financial matters related
to the proposed school building and other relevant matters. The Mayor,
City Engineer, Superintendent of the Water Department, Superintendent
of Schools, School Committee members, Building Commission members,
architects and engineers working on the project and such other persons as
said Council may determine shall be requested to attend and to have with
them such relevant information and records as said Council may, in writing,
request.
§ 3-2. Final action upon approval of School Committee.
In further compliance with Section 36 of the Charter of the City of Chicopee,
the City Council shall not take any final action or vote on any School Board
issue until final plans and a sketch of the proposed school building have
been submitted to and approved by the School Committee.
§ 3-3. Legal counsel. [Added 2-17-1987]
§ 3-4. Council briefings. [Added 10-6-1987; amended 6-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-155]
All department heads shall appear before the City Council to explain all
financial orders and pertinent ordinances as requested by the Mayor and
the City Council or by the City Council.
Chapter 5
ASSESSORS
The City Council shall hire its own legal counsel to assist the City
Council in the preparation and formulation of legislation and in the
rendering of opinions concerning legal matters, either of a substantive
or procedural nature.
A.
B. Legal counsel shall be paid from the City Council budget.
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1
1:11
§ 5-1. Election of Chairman and Secretary.
During the month of January in each year, the Assessors shall meet and
organize by electing a Chairman and a Secretary in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 44 of the Acts of 1945 of the General Court.
§ 5-2. Oath of office.
Before performing any duties, an Assessor must take the oath provided for
in MGL c. 41, § 29.
§ 5-3. Duties.
The Assessors shall perform such duties as are required in MGL c. 59.
§ 5-4. Keeping of maps and records.
The Assessors shall maintain and keep in order maps and records of the
office and furnish the information to departments as required.
Chapter 8
DATA PROCESSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessors — See Ch. 5.
Collector — See Ch. 13.
Finances — See Ch. 32.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
§ 5-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 5-4
1:12
ARTICLE I
MIS Director
[Adopted 9-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-86B; amended in its entirety
3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-34]
§ 8-1. Appointment. [Amended 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-74]
The Management Information Service (MIS) Department shall consist of an
MIS Director appointed contractually by the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by the City Council, for a contract period of three years and such other
employees as shall be required and appropriated for. All appointments to
the position of MIS Director, both permanent and temporary appointments
which exceed 60 days, shall require confirmation by the City Council.
§ 8-2. Supervision of Department.
The Director shall have the overall responsibility for all administrative
and operational aspects of the City's MIS Department. The Director shall
also oversee all hardware and software applications and LAN/WAN
communications within the City.
§ 8-3. through § 8-4. (Reserved)
§ 8-5. Employee status.
The MIS Director shall be deemed to be a managerial and confidential
employee as defined in MGL c. 150E and shall not be included in a collective
bargaining unit or entitled to coverage under said chapter.
§ 8-6. Qualifications.
The MIS Director shall have the following qualifications:
Broad-based experience in information and telecommunications
technologies, including systems planning, management and operations,
training and programming.
A.
B. At least three years' experience in information systems management.
At least three years' experience in Unix operating system and database
administration.
C.
Bachelor's degree in computer science or information systems or
related field training preferred. [Amended 6-6-2000 by Ord. No.
00-48]
D.
Experience in all of the following preferred: Windows NT experience,
MUNIS financial software, local area networking and municipal
government.
E.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:13
§ 8-7. Power and duties.
The MIS Director shall be responsible for performing all day-to-day as listed
below:
Day-to-day system administration of the City's financial software
(currently Munis), the SCO Unix operating system and the Informix
database (used by Munis).
A.
Provides technical assistance to the City's departments, including
technical assistance on the operation of the City's financial software,
advice on streamlining day-to-day operations, and review contracts
concerning information services for technical content or omissions.
B.
Coordinates and plans all activities of the Information Systems
Department.
C.
Works with management to determine needs, uses of the computer
system and in what form input data and output data are to be
presented.
D.
Schedules computer system time to be allotted to different priority
projects.
E.
F. Determines new equipment needs.
G. Establishes work schedules of subordinate staff and reviews their work.
H. Prepares progress reports.
Reviews computer and peripheral equipment records of production,
breakdowns and maintenance to determine cost of rescheduling of
work.
I.
J. Directs training of all City personnel.
K. Administers operating budget and submits budget requests.
L. Performs all other related duties as driven by the MIS needs of the City.
§ 8-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 8-7
1:14
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 9-1. Functions.
It shall be the function of the Department of Emergency Management to
have charge of emergency management and preparedness activities for
the City of Chicopee as defined in Section 1, Chapter 639, Acts of 1950,
and to perform emergency management functions as authorized or directed
by said chapter or by any and all executive orders or general regulations
promulgated thereunder and to exercise any authority delegated to it by
the Governor under said Chapter 639. The Department will also perform
emergency management functions as authorized by Chapter 9 of the City
Code of Chicopee or by any and all executive orders or general regulations
promulgated thereunder and will exercise any authority delegated to it by
the Mayor of the City of Chicopee.
§ 9-2. Appointment and duties of Director of Emergency
Management.
The Department of Emergency Management shall be under the
direction of the Director of Emergency Management (hereinafter called
the "Director of Emergency Management") who shall be appointed by
the Mayor. Upon appointment the Director of Emergency Management
will be administered an oath of service to the City of Chicopee and
State of Massachusetts by the City Clerk. The Director of Emergency
Management shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration and operation of the Department of Emergency
Management and Emergency Operations Center (EOC), shall act as
commander of the EOC in time of emergency, will be subject to the
direction and control of the Mayor, and may receive such salary as
may be fixed from time to time by the City Council. The Director
of Emergency Management may, within the limits of the amount
appropriated therefor, appoint such experts, clerks and other assistants
as the work of the Department may require and may remove them
and may make such expenditures as may be necessary to execute
effectively the purposes of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950. The Director of
Emergency Management shall also have authority to appoint district
coordinators and may accept and may receive, on behalf of the City
of Chicopee, services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way
of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of emergency management, offered
by the federal government or any agency or officer thereof or any
person, firm or corporation, subject to the terms of the offer and
A.
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:15
the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. The
Director of Emergency Management shall cause appropriate records to
be kept of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Duties and responsibilities of the Director of Emergency Management.
The Director of Emergency Management shall be responsible for the
following duties as listed below.
(1) Coordinates the City's overall emergency preparedness activities.
Advises the Mayor on emergency management and local
declaration of emergency.
(2)
Informs the Mayor of all emergency management activities through
regular memos, briefings, etc.
(3)
Works collaboratively with the Chief of Fire and Chief of Police and/
or their designees to ensure effective implementation of emergency
management goals.
(4)
Works with City Fire, Police, Health, and Public Works departments
to coordinate City-wide emergency planning.
(5)
Works with City departments, private industry, and
nongovernmental organizations on emergency preparedness
issues.
(6)
Works as the liaison between the City of Chicopee and private
industry and nongovernmental organizations on emergency
preparedness issues.
(7)
Performs all day-to-day administrative duties of the Department of
Emergency Management.
(8)
(9) Maintains an up-to-date Hazardous Materials Emergency Plan.
Maintains an up-to-date City Comprehensive Emergency
Management Plan.
(10)
Maintains an up-to-date filing system for chemical inventories
submitted by City industry.
(11)
Acts as a liaison for the City to other local, state, and federal
emergency management agencies.
(12)
Coordinates resources from surrounding communities in the event
of an emergency.
(13)
(14)Acts as the City's Community Emergency Response Coordinator.
Acts as the City's Community Emergency Response Team (C.E.R.T.)
Director.
(15)
B.
§ 9-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 9-2
1:16
§ 9-3. Emergency Management Department Advisory Commission.
An Emergency Management Department Advisory Commission consists of
five members who shall serve without pay. Said commission shall consist
of three permanent members who shall be: Director of Emergency
Management, Chief of Fire, Chief of Police. Two other persons shall be
named by the Mayor to serve as Commissioners. The Mayor shall appoint
one member to serve as Chairman who shall be either the Police Chief
or Fire Chief. Said Commissioners shall serve subject to the direction
and control of the Mayor and shall advise the Mayor and the Director of
Emergency Management on matters pertaining to emergency management
within the City of Chicopee. In the absence of the Director of Emergency
Attends local, state, and federally sponsored meetings,
conferences, and workshops in the field of emergency management
and public safety.
(16)
Participates in state or federal professional development courses in
emergency management and public safety.
(17)
(18)Serves as Chairman of the Local Emergency Planning Committee.
(19)Establishes, develops, or maintains an emergency shelter system.
Establishes, develops, or maintains an emergency operations
center (E.O.C.).
(20)
Prepares and submits grants for the purpose of securing state
or federal money, equipment, etc., to meet the City's emergency
preparedness needs.
(21)
Coordinates public outreach and education in preparing for local
emergencies.
(22)
Coordinates regular exercises for the purpose of testing emergency
plans and procedures, and for the promotion of interdepartmental
cooperation, and cooperation between City, state, regional, and
federal agencies, as well as private industry and citizens' groups.
(23)
Coordinates emergency preparedness training for City employees
as needed.
(24)
The Director or, in his absence, the acting director shall be
available on a twenty-four-hour basis for matters concerning City
emergency management.
(25)
Prepares and submits an annual Emergency Management
Department budget.
(26)
Keeps the City Council informed on emergency management
activities through briefing and written reports. [Amended
9-1-2009]
(27)
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-3
1:17
Management, his duties shall be performed by the Chairman of the
Emergency Management Department Advisory Commission.
§ 9-4. Police aid to other cities and towns.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to go to aid another city or town
at the request of said city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms
of violence therein.
§ 9-5. Duration of provisions.
This chapter shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter
639, Acts of 1950, any act in amendment to or continuation thereof or
substitution therefor.
§ 9-6. References to statute.
All references to Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as now in force, shall be
applicable to any acts in amendment to or continuation of or substitution for
said Chapter 639.
Chapter 11
CLERK, CITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
§ 9-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 9-6
1:18
ARTICLE I
Assistant City Clerk
[Adopted as Ch. 12 of the 1976 Code]
§ 11-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Assistant City Clerk be and hereby is established in accordance
with MGL c. 41, § 18.
§ 11-2. Appointment; term; duties. [Amended 1-15-1991; 2-19-1991
by Ord. No. 91-1]
The Assistant City Clerk shall be annually appointed in January by the
City Clerk and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Clerk and shall
perform such duties as the City Clerk shall from time to time require.
§ 11-3. Effect of attestation.
The attestation of the Assistant City Clerk shall have same effect as that of
the City Clerk.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:19

ARTICLE II
Additional Duties
[Adopted 6-30-1981]
§ 11-4. Filing and report of court judgment.
The City Clerk shall maintain a file of all court judgments and decisions
on appeal filed by the City Solicitor as per § 46-11 of this Code.
A.
The City Clerk shall include as an agenda item for the next regular
meeting of the City Council a report of said judgments and decisions on
appeal. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
§ 11-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-4
1:21

ARTICLE III
Facsimile of Signature
[Adopted 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
§ 11-5. Validity.
A facsimile of the signature of a City Clerk or of a duly appointed Assistant
City Clerk, imprinted by either of them upon any original instrument in
attestation of the fact that said instrument has been recorded in the City
Clerk's office, shall have the same validity as the written signature of either
of them. (See MGL c. 41, § 18B.)
§ 11-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-5
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Documents on File
[Adopted 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-11; amended in its entirety
6-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-49]
§ 11-6. Documents kept on file.
All liquor licenses, renewals, license transfers, variances, waivers,
abandonments, contracts and amendments to contracts, including all union
and personnel contracts and amendments, shall be kept on file in the City
Clerk's office. All City contracts shall be filed with the City Clerk within one
week after their execution according to MGL c. 41, § 17.
§ 11-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6
1:25

ARTICLE V
City Clerk Fees
[Adopted 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 06-188]
§ 11-7. Discount for senior citizens.
Senior citizens age 65 or older, for personal use, shall be granted a discount
of 10% on appropriate fees.
§ 11-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7
1:27
Chapter 13
COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessors — See Ch. 5. Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
§ 13-1. Election.
For election of the City Collector, see Chapter 16 of the City Charter and
Chapter 43 of the Acts of 1945 of the General Court.
§ 13-2. Duties. [Amended 12-1-1981; 1-15-1991; 2-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-1]
For duties of the City Collector, see Section 40 of the City Charter and
Chapter 60 of the General Laws relating to collection of taxes. The City
Collector shall also perform the duties of the Parking Clerk as provided for
in MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2, relating to hearings and to the collection of fines
for parking violations.
§ 13-3. Collector to be bonded.
The City Collector shall be bonded according to law and shall file said bond
with the City Clerk.
§ 13-4. Assistant City Collector. [Amended 11-7-1985; 1-15-1991;
2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
The Assistant Deputy Collector, appointed by the City Collector under the
provisions of MGL c. 60, § 92, shall have, in addition to the powers of tax
collector granted under said appointment, the authority and power, under
the direction and supervision of the City Collector, to collect moneys due the
City from every source.
§ 13-5. Successor to Assistant Collector. [Amended 1-15-1991;
2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
Any successor to such office of Assistant Collector shall likewise have the
authority and power to collect moneys due the City as aforesaid.
§ 13-6. Information to be collected from property owners. [Added
4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-23]
A notice of preliminary tax for real estate and personal property shall
include an affidavit of address, to be signed and sworn to by the owner
of record of said property. The affidavit shall include the following
A.
§ 11-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 13-6
1:28
§ 13-7. Fees. [Added 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-12]
The Collector shall maintain and enforce a fee schedule as permitted by
MGL c. 60, §§ 15 and 23B, as most recently amended.
Chapter 16
COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES, COUNCILS AND
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
School Committee — See Charter, Art. V.
Committee on Finance — See Ch. 32, Art. I.
School Committee Statement of
Account — See Ch. 32, Art. II.
Commission on Flood Control — See Ch. 37.
Board of Library Trustees — See Ch. 48.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
Commission of Parks and Recreation — See
Ch. 206.
Committee on Sewers — See Ch. 230.
information: name of the owner, street number, street name, city or
town, state, zip code and telephone number of said owner.
In the event that the residence of the owner of record is located outside
of the commonwealth, he shall appoint an agent located within the
commonwealth, and the enclosed affidavit shall be completed by stating
the agent's full name, street number, street address, city or town, zip
code and telephone number. In no event shall post office boxes be
accepted as an address for purposes of this section.
B.
Any legal notice mailed to the address listed in the affidavit, whether
the address of the owner of record or his agent, shall be presumed to
be good and sufficient service for the purpose of instituting any legal
action relating to the property.
C.
In the event that there is a change of address for the owner of record
or his agent, the owner shall immediately notify the Board of Assessors
by mailing a new affidavit.
D.
If an owner fails to comply with this section, within 30 days, the City
shall issue a warning to the owner. Failure to respond to said warning
within 30 days shall result in the imposition of a fine of $100 per
preliminary tax bill issued to said owner. If the owner fails to respond to
and pay said fine within 30 days, the City may determine that said fine
constitutes a lien upon said property. All other remedies for the taking
of property by the City for failure to pay taxes shall be available under
this section.
E.
§ 13-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-7
1:29

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 50, Art. 50/I, of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-1. Residency requirements.
No person shall be appointed to any board or commission in the City of
Chicopee unless he is a resident of the City at the time of his appointment.
If, after appointment, he ceases to be resident of the City, his office as a
member or commissioner shall become vacant forthwith. Any vacancy in
such board or commission brought about by the nonresidency of a member
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment. ("Residency" shall mean place of abode.)
§ 16-2. Copies of minutes to be forwarded. [Amended 9-1-2009]
All boards and commissions of the City of Chicopee are required to forward
copies of the minutes of their meetings after each meeting to the City
Council. (See Chapter 67, Article I.)
§ 16-3. Time limit for appointments. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Mayoral appointments to various commissions and boards of the City, which
appointments are subject to confirmation by the City Council, are to be
made within 90 days from the date of expiration or vacancy.
§ 16-4. Meeting dates. [Added 12-2-1980; amended 2-3-19872]
§ 16-4.1. Holdover of appointees. [Added 12-18-1990]
Appointments to all boards, commissions and committees of all kinds shall
be automatically extended on a temporary basis until such time as the
incumbent is formally reappointed or until a successor is formally
appointed.
No appointed board or commission shall hold its regular meetings or
public hearings on the same dates the City Council meets (first and
third Tuesdays of the month). [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Penalties. Any action taken contrary to this article shall render those
actions null and void.
B.
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 2-17-1987, which veto was
overridden by a roll call vote on the same date.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4.1
1:31

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)3
§ 16-5. through § 16-7. (Reserved)
3. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Veterans Convention Commission, adopted as Sec. 50/II/1 of
the 1976 Code, as amended, was repealed 9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-39.
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:33

ARTICLE III
Development and Industrial Commissions
[Adopted as Sec. 50/II/2 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-8. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established a Development and Industrial Commission,
hereinafter called the "Commission," for the promotion and development
of the industrial resources of the City of Chicopee as provided by and in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8A, as amended, and which
shall consist of 15 members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the provisions of the City Charter.
§ 16-9. Terms.
Upon the passage of this article, the terms of the members shall be for
such length not exceeding five years and so arranged that the terms of
approximately 1/5 of the members will expire each year, and their
successors shall be appointed for terms of five years each.
§ 16-10. Removal from office. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Any member of the Commission so appointed may be removed for cause
after public hearing, if requested, by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council.
§ 16-11. Filling of vacancy.
A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 16-12. Appointment of other employees. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
require and expend such funds as may be appropriated by the City Council.
§ 16-13. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all the powers and exercise all of the duties as
are provided for in the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8A, as amended, and such
other powers as may be granted to such Commission under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 16-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-13
1:35

ARTICLE IV
Conservation Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 50/II/3 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-14. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established a Conservation Commission, hereinafter called
the "Commission," for the promotion and development of the natural
resources and for the protection of watershed resources of the City of
Chicopee as provided by and in accordance with the provisions of MGL c.
40, § 8C, and which shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to the provisions of the City Charter.
§ 16-15. Terms.
Upon the passage of this article, the terms of the members shall be for one,
two or three years and so arranged that the terms of approximately 1/3 of
the members will expire each year. and their successors shall be appointed
for terms of three years each.
§ 16-16. Removal from office.
Any member of the Commission so appointed may, after public hearing, if
requested, be removed by the Mayor for cause.
§ 16-17. Filling of vacancy.
A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Committee otherwise than
by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 16-18. Appointment of other employees. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
from time to time require and expend such funds as may be appropriated by
the City Council.
§ 16-19. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have all of the powers and exercise all of the duties
as are provided for in the provisions of the MGL c. 40, § 8C, and such
other powers as may be granted to such Commission under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 16-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-19
1:37

ARTICLE V
Consumer Advisory Commission
[Adopted as Sec. 50/II/7 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-20. Establishment; membership. [Amended 9-1-2009]
There is hereby established a Consumer Advisory Commission, which shall
consist of 19 members, which members shall be a representative of the
City Council; one representative from each of the following Departments of
the City: Police Department, Fire Department, Health Department, Weights
and Measures Department, Purchasing Department, Building Department,
Water Department, Electric Light Department and School Department; and
nine members of the general public. The members of the general public
shall be appointed by the Mayor, one from each ward of the City, for a term
of two years from the first day of April or until their successors are chosen
and qualified.
§ 16-21. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Commission shall conduct investigations and research into matters
affecting consumer interests and education and shall advise and report
the results of such investigations and research to the general public as
well as to local government authorities and law enforcement agencies. The
Commission shall submit an annual report to the City Council and the Mayor
in December of each year and shall send a copy thereof to the Consumers'
Council of the commonwealth.
§ 16-22. Compensation.
The members shall receive no salary for attendance at hearings or meetings
but shall be reimbursed for all necessary expenses.
§ 16-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-22
1:39

ARTICLE VI
Recreational Survey Committee
[Adopted as Sec. 50/III/1 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-23. Establishment; membership; organization.
There is hereby established a Committee, to be known as the "Recreational
Survey Committee," to consist of the Playground Commission, the
Playground Superintendent and eight citizens. The citizens shall be
appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office for the term of one year from
the date of their appointment and shall serve without compensation. They
shall, upon their appointment, organize by electing a Chairman and a Clerk.
§ 16-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this Committee shall be to make a recreational needs survey
of the City.
§ 16-25. Expenditures. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Committee may, for the purposes of this article, expend such moneys as
may be appropriated therefor by the City Council, and the Committee shall
account therefor to the City by filing with the City Clerk a report, in writing,
of all such expenditures within 30 days of the completion of said survey.
§ 16-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-25
1:41

ARTICLE VII
Censorship Committee
[Adopted as Sec. 50/III/2 of the 1976 Code; amended in its entirety
9-1-2009]
§ 16-26. Establishment; membership; responsibilities.
There shall be a Censorship Committee, consisting of three Councilors
appointed by the President of the City Council and such number of citizens
as the Council Committee deems necessary to investigate undesirable
movies, books and magazines.
§ 16-27. Expenditures.
The Committee is hereby authorized to expend funds from the City Council
expense account, in an amount not to exceed $100 per year, for expenses in
connection with said investigations.
§ 16-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-27
1:43

ARTICLE VIII
Industrial Development Financing Authority
[Adopted as Sec. 50/V/2 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-28. Declaration of need; other findings. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council declares that an Industrial Development Financing
Authority is needed in the City of Chicopee and that unemployment or
the threat thereof exists in the City of Chicopee or security against future
unemployment and lack of business opportunity is required in the City
and that unemployment or the threat thereof can be alleviated or the
security against future unemployment and lack of business opportunity
can be provided by attracting new industry to the City or substantially
expanding industry existing in the City through an industrial development
project or projects financed under Chapter 772 of the Acts of 1967. The
Council determines that there is a need for such an authority, and, in
making this determination, the Council has taken into consideration the
City's ability to adjust to any expected increase in the demand for municipal
facilities and services as a result of the expected increase in employment
and business activity from such industrial development.
§ 16-29. Filing of records with state.
The Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this article, together
with the names of the duly appointed and qualified original directors,
with the State Industrial Finance Board, the Department of Commerce
and Development and the Secretary of State of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
§ 16-30. Request for certificate of organization.
The City of Chicopee respectfully requests a certificate of organization,
which certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the lawful establishment of
the Industrial Development Financing Authority of the City of Chicopee and
the Directors thereof.
§ 16-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-30
1:45

ARTICLE IX
Traffic Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 21 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-31. Appointments; terms; filling of vacancies.
§ 16-32. Advisory members. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Chief of the Fire Department, the police officer designated by the Chief
of Police as head of the Traffic Bureau, a member of the Planning Board
designated by the Planning Board and the President of the City Council
shall, ex officio, be advisory members of the Traffic Commission.
§ 16-33. Organization.
The Commission shall organize annually in the month of June and elect a
Chairman and a Clerk.
§ 16-34. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Commission shall make surveys of the traffic conditions in the City of
Chicopee and make such recommendations to the City Council as it deems
advisable, subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works.
§ 16-35. Employment of assistants; expenditures. [Amended
9-1-2009]
The Commission may employ assistants and expend such moneys as may be
appropriated therefor by the City Council.
§ 16-36. Advisory members may designate other representatives.
Those persons identified in § 16-32 of this article as ex officio advisory
members of the Commission shall be permitted to send designees in their
stead and shall be expanded to include the City Engineer and the
Superintendent of Streets.
A Traffic Commission, consisting of five members, shall be appointed by
the Mayor, which members shall hold office for the term for which they
are appointed and until their successors have been appointed and have
qualified.
A.
The original appointments shall be for the terms of one, two, three, four,
and five years, and thereafter, in the month of May of each year, the
Mayor shall appoint a citizen as a member of said board to hold office
for a term of five years from the first Monday of June next.
B.
Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term, and any member
may be removed for cause by the Mayor.
C.
§ 16-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-37
1:47
§ 16-37. Public hearings.
The Commission shall have powers relative to the holding of public hearings
on any matter within its area of review.
§ 16-38. Review of transportation matters. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council shall refer for review to the Commission any
transportation-related matter and shall, in turn, review recommendations
presented to it by the Commission.
§ 16-37 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-38
1:48
ARTICLE X
Chicopee Veterans’ Memorial Committee4
[Adopted as Ch. 48 of the 1976 Code]
§ 16-39. Appointment; purpose. [Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-38]
A Chicopee Veterans’ Memorial Committee consisting of three members,
who shall be veterans, shall be appointed by the Mayor not later than the
first day of February of each year for the purpose of commemorating the
services and sacrifices of persons who served in the wars of the United
States and the proper observance of Memorial Day.
§ 16-40. Oath of office; organization.
They shall be sworn in by the City Clerk as prescribed by the City Charter
and shall organize by electing a Chairman and Clerk.
§ 16-41. Expenditures; filing of report. [Amended 9-1-2009;
9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-37]
The Director of Veterans’ Services shall serve as the Treasurer of the
Chicopee Veterans’ Memorial Committee. The Committee may, for the
purposes of this article, expend such moneys as may be appropriated
therefor by the City Council, and the Committee shall file a report with
the City Clerk within 15 days after Memorial Day, in writing, of all such
expenditures.
4. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 11-36, adopted 9-21-2011, changed the name of this
committee from the Memorial Day Observance Committee to the Chicopee Veterans’
Memorial Committee.
§ 16-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-41
1:49

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Building Commissions
[Adopted 6-7-1977; amended in its entirety 12-15-2009 by Ord. No.
09-37]
§ 16-42. Authority to appoint; purpose.
There is hereby established authorization to appoint a Municipal Building
Commission, whose duties shall be to oversee the construction and/or
renovations of all municipal buildings erected under contract by the City
of Chicopee. This section shall not apply to school building projects which
shall be governed by § 16-112 through § 16-118.
§ 16-43. Projects requiring Commissions.
All municipal buildings constructed for use by the City of Chicopee or
any of its departments or residents as well as any renovations to existing
city-owned buildings or municipal construction projects where the total
contract price totals $2,000,000 or more shall require the appointment of
a Municipal Building Commission formed and empowered to act under the
provisions of this article. Each such municipal project shall have a separate
Municipal Building Commission.
§ 16-44. Composition. [Amended 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-52]
§ 16-45. Powers and duties.
No less than one month prior to the solicitation of request for proposal
in connection with a bid for construction of any project requiring a
Commission in accordance with § 16-43, the Mayor shall appoint a total
of nine members, all of whom shall be subject to confirmation upon the
affirmative vote of nine Councilors. The nine members shall be selected
as follows:
(1) Seven members shall be selected by the City Council; and
(2) Two members shall be selected by the Mayor.
A.
Nothing herein shall prevent a department head, elected or appointed
official or employee of the City from serving on the Commission as one
of the nine members, except that no members of the City Council shall,
during the term of which he/she is elected, hold any other office in or
under City government.
B.
As soon as practical after their appointment, members of the Municipal
Building Commission shall hold an organizational meeting and elect
a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary, who shall be chosen by a
majority vote of the members present and voting.
A.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman shall have the duty of calling all
regular meetings of the Commission upon 48 hours' notice posted
B.
§ 16-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-45
1:51
§ 16-46. Duration.
The Commission shall have the power to act from the time of its
appointment and shall cease to exist, or any member shall be removed, upon
one of the following conditions:
§ 16-47. Removal of members.
A person shall cease to be a member of the Municipal Building Commission
upon removing his or her residence from the City of Chicopee or for any of
the reasons specified in § 16-46. In the event that a person is to be removed,
he or she shall be notified, in writing, by the Mayor and given the reasons
for such removal. The person will, upon a request in writing, not later than
seven days after receipt of such notice of removal, be given a hearing upon
such reasons for removal, said hearing to be held by the City Council within
15 days from the request for said hearing. An affirmative vote of nine shall
be required before the removal becomes final.
§ 16-48. Regulations to be distributed.
Each member of the Municipal Building Commission shall, upon
appointment, be given a copy of this article and also a copy of MGL c. 30A,
§§ 11A and 11A 1/2, and MGL c. 39, §§ 23A and 23B (Open Meetings Law).
according to law. His duties shall include presiding over meetings of
the Commission and all functions traditionally given to a Chairman.
In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall serve in
that capacity. The Secretary shall record the minutes of each meeting
and shall be responsible for transmitting all minutes and documents
received by the Commission to the City Clerk upon the dissolution of
the Commission. A special meeting of the Commission shall be called
upon written request of nine members.
The Commission shall have the duty to oversee the municipal
construction project and shall elect a Bills Committee, which members
shall review all incoming bills and vouchers and recommend approval
for payment to the full Commission. An affirmative vote of nine
members of the Commission shall be required for approval of the bills,
and at least four members must sign the bills, which will then be
presented to the City Auditor.
C.
A. When the building or project is finally accepted by the City; or
Upon a direction or order of the Mayor, who shall then transmit the
termination notice to the City Council. The procedure for termination
under this section shall be held in accordance with § 16-47 of this
article.
B.
§ 16-45 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-48
1:52
ARTICLE XII
Ambulance Service Commission
[Adopted 10-4-1977]
§ 16-49. Purpose. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The purpose of this article is to create a Commission to study rates for
ambulance service provided by the City, recommend rate schedules to the
City Council and oversee the collection of payments to the City.
§ 16-50. Membership; terms. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Ambulance Commission shall consist of five members, each of whom
shall serve for a term of three years and will be nominated by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council. Upon passage of this article, the appointment
of the first Commission members shall initially be as follows: one member
shall be appointed for three years, two members shall be appointed for two
years, and two members shall be appointed for one year.
§ 16-51. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the power to study the rates for ambulance
service and, from time to time, shall recommend a rate schedule to
the City Council, who shall establish ambulance service rates. After
the Council establishes rates, the Commission shall have the power to
oversee the collection of payments to the City as hereinafter specified.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
As soon as practical after their appointment members of the Ambulance
Commission shall hold an organizational meeting and elect a Chairman,
Vice Chairman and Secretary, who shall be chosen by a majority vote of
the members present and voting.
B.
The Chairman shall have the duty of calling all regular meetings of
the Commission upon 48 hours' notice posted according to law. His
duties shall include presiding over meetings of the Commission and
all functions traditionally given to a Chairman. In the absence of the
Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall serve in that capacity. The Secretary
shall record the minutes of each meeting and shall be responsible for
transmitting all minutes and documents received by the Commission to
the City Clerk upon dissolution of the Commission. A special meeting of
the Commission shall be called upon written request of three members.
Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
C.
Payments due. [Amended 7-5-19785; 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 02-47]
The Chief of the Fire Department, on behalf of the Ambulance
Commission, shall keep a record of the use of the ambulance. On
behalf of each, the Chief of the Fire Department shall assure that
(1)
D.
5. Editor's Note: This amendment also repealed former Subsection E.
§ 16-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-51
1:53
§ 16-52. Availability of service; administration.
the necessary documents are forwarded to the contracted billing
agency to ensure payment for the use of the ambulance service.
The contracted billing agency will issue a bill for the use of the
ambulance and provide a list of payments due to the City. The
contracted billing agency, on behalf of the Ambulance Commission
and the Chief of the Fire Department, will file a list of payments
due to the City with the City Treasurer and City Auditor.
The Chief of the Fire Department will sign and forward to the
Ambulance Commission, City Treasurer and City Auditor a list
of customary partial abatements as they are received from the
contracted billing agency. Customary partial abatements are those
granted to Medicare, Medicaid, MassHealth and others required by
statute or agreement.
(2)
If any person does not have the ability to pay for the ambulance
service, he/she may petition the Ambulance Commission for an
abatement of the bill. The Ambulance Commission shall investigate
the application for abatement and, at its discretion, hold a hearing
on the matter. The Ambulance Commission shall have the power to
grant the abatement in full; grant a partial abatement; or deny the
abatement.
(3)
At least quarterly, the Ambulance Commission shall list abatements
granted. The list of abatements shall be signed by the Chairperson
of the Ambulance Commission, or its designee, and forwarded to
the contracted billing agency, City Treasurer and City Auditor.
(4)
So long as ambulance service shall be provided by the City of Chicopee,
it shall be available to all persons who are in need of said service as per
emergency conditions as to Fire Department guidelines in effect and
who are transported from within the City limits. [Amended 7-5-1978]
A.
Nothing contained in this article shall interfere with the power of
the Fire Chief or any other department head who is assigned to the
ambulance to administer the operation of the ambulance service.
B.
§ 16-51 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-52
1:54
ARTICLE XIII
Council on Aging
[Adopted 5-2-1978]
§ 16-53. Membership; compensation; terms; vacancies. [Amended
5-16-1989]
§ 16-54. Designation of Chairman.
The Chairman of the Council shall be designated by a majority vote of the
Council on Aging and shall be elected annually.
§ 16-55. Appointment of successors.
Appointees to the Council shall hold office until their successors are
designated.
§ 16-56. Appointment of other employees; expenditures. [Amended
6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-41; 9-1-2009]
The Council may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may require
and expend such funds as may be appropriated by the City Council and
subject to approval by the Mayor and Human Resources Director.
The Council on Aging shall consist of 15 members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. [Amended
6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-41; 9-1-2009]
A.
All members shall be citizens of the City of Chicopee and shall serve
without compensation. These members shall be fitted by education,
training and experience to perform the duties of the office. [Amended
6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-41]
B.
The Council on Aging shall be appointed such that the terms of five
members shall expire every year. In order to achieve that schedule, the
following appointments shall be made: [Amended 6-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-41; 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 01-84]
For terms that expire in June 2001: two members shall be
appointed to three-year terms thus expiring in 2004. Five members
shall be appointed to two-year terms thus expiring in 2003.
(1)
For terms that expire in June 2002: five members shall be
appointed to three-year terms thus expiring in 2005. Two members
shall be appointed to two-year terms thus expiring in 2004.
(2)
All subsequent appointments to the Council on Aging shall be for
three-year terms.
(3)
C.
Vacancies shall be filled to complete the remainder of the three-year
term.
D.
§ 16-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-57
1:55
§ 16-57. Duties. [Amended 6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-41]
§ 16-57.1. Executive Director; power and duties; appointment.
[Added 6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-41]
The Council on Aging duties shall be to:
(1) Identify the total needs of the elders residing in the City.
Educate the community and City officials and enlist support and
participation of all citizens concerning those needs.
(2)
(3) Design, promote or implement services to fill those needs.
(4) Coordinate existing services in the community.
Promote and support any other programs which are designed to
assist elder programs in the community.
(5)
Identify funding sources, apply for appropriate grants and
administer grant-funded programs.
(6)
A.
The Council on Aging shall cooperate with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Executive Office of Elder Affairs and shall be cognizant
of state and federal legislation concerning funding, information,
exchange and program planning which exists for better community
programming for elders.
B.
There is hereby established within municipal government the position
of Council on Aging Executive Director. The Executive Director, under
the general supervision of the Council on Aging and the Mayor, shall
supervise, coordinate or carry out programs designed to meet problems
of the elder population.
A.
Responsibilities shall include providing technical assistance to the
Council on Aging in the fulfillment of their duties. The Executive
Director will be responsible for implementation of council and
municipal policies.
B.
The Mayor shall appoint the Council on Aging Executive Director from
a minimum of two candidates recommended by the Council on Aging
and the Human Resources Director. The Council on Aging Executive
Director shall be a department head with City government. The
Executive Director currently holding the position shall continue to be
the Executive Director after the enactment of this ordinance change.
C.
§ 16-57 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-57.1
1:56
ARTICLE XIV
Energy Conservation Commission
[Adopted 9-4-1979]
§ 16-58. Establishment.
An Energy Conservation Commission is established.
§ 16-59. Purpose. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Energy Conservation Commission would scrutinize all aspects of energy
use used in the City of Chicopee and would develop a comprehensive
energy saving policy to be approved by the Mayor and the City Council for
implementation.
§ 16-60. Membership. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Energy Conservation Commission would consist of seven members,
one electrical engineer from the Chicopee Electric Light Department, the
Superintendent of the Central Maintenance Garage, the City Messenger,
the Superintendent of School Maintenance and three lay people be
appointed by the Mayor with final approval of the City Council.
§ 16-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-60
1:57

ARTICLE XV
Historical Commission
[Adopted 10-2-1979]
§ 16-61. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby created a Chicopee Historical Commission under authority
of Chapter 697, Acts of 1963,6 consisting of seven members to be appointed
by the Mayor. On original appointment, two members shall serve for one
year, two for two years and three for three years, and their successors shall
be appointed for a term of three years each, beginning on the first day of
February.
§ 16-62. Powers.
The Chicopee Historical Commission shall have all powers vested in them
by Chapter 697, Acts of 1963.7
6. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40, § 5, Clause (56).
7. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40, § 5, Clause (56).
§ 16-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-62
1:59

ARTICLE XVI
Historic District Commission
[Adopted 10-2-1979]
§ 16-63. Establishment of historic districts.
Historic districts may be established in the City of Chicopee in accordance
with MGL c. 40C.
§ 16-64. Powers and duties.
§ 16-65. Power to regulate external features of buildings.
The Historic District Commission shall have the power to control and
regulate the exterior architectural features of buildings within the district,
including any demolition or construction within the district.
§ 16-66. Required certificates.
No building permits shall be issued nor shall any exterior features be
altered without a certificate of appropriateness, nonapplicability or
hardship. A certificate of appropriateness is issued for those changes which
are in conformance with the guidelines and/or are acceptable for the
district. A certificate of hardship is issued for those changes which are
An Historic District Commission shall be established in conjunction
with the establishment of an historic district in accordance with MGL
c. 40C, consisting of five members and three alternate members to be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
A.
When an Historic District Commission is initially established, one
member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two members shall
be appointed for terms of two years, two members shall be appointed
for terms of three years, and their successors shall be appointed in like
manner for terms of three years, beginning on the first day of October.
B.
Membership of the Historic District Commission shall be made up as
follows:
One member from two nominees submitted by the Chicopee
Historical Commission.
(1)
One member from two nominees submitted by the Western
Massachusetts Chapter of the American Institute of Architects.
(2)
One member from two nominees submitted by the Greater
Holyoke/Chicopee Real Estate Board.
(3)
(4) At least one member who is a resident of the Historic District.
(5) One additional member without designation.
C.
§ 16-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-66
1:61
not appropriate but which may be necessary due to economic, physical,
social or other special conditions. A certificate of nonapplicability is issued
for those changes which affect features not controlled by the Commission.
To obtain a certificate, any person shall file with the Commission plans,
elevations, specifications, material and other information, including, in the
case of demolition or removal, a statement of the proposed condition and
appearance of the property thereafter, to enable the Commission to make a
determination of the application.
§ 16-67. Certificate of appropriateness.
If the Commission determines that the construction or alteration for which
a certificate of appropriateness has been filed is appropriate for and
compatible with the preservation of the historic district, the Commission
shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. In the case of disapproval, the
Commission shall place upon its records the reasons for such determination
and shall issue a notice of its determination and reasons as set forth
in the records of the Commission to the applicant. The Commission may
make recommendations to the applicant with respect to appropriateness
of design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. Prior to the
issuance of any disapproval, the Commission shall notify the applicant of
its proposed action accompanied by recommendations of changes in the
applicant's proposal which, if made, would make the application acceptable
to the Commission. If, within 14 days of receipt of such notice, the applicant
files a written notification of original application in conformity with the
recommended change of the Commission, the Commission shall issue a
certificate of appropriateness.
§ 16-68. Certificate of nonapplicability.
In the case of a determination by the Commission that an application for
a certificate of appropriateness or nonapplicability does not involve any
exterior architectural feature or involves an exterior architectural feature
not subject to review by the Commission, the Commission shall issue a
certificate of nonapplicability to the applicant.
§ 16-69. Certificate of hardship.
If the construction or alteration for which an application for certificate of
appropriateness has been filed shall be deemed inappropriate or, in the
event of an application for a certificate of hardship, the Commission shall
determine whether, owing to conditions especially affecting the building
involved but not affecting the historic district generally, failure to approve
an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise,
to the applicant and whether such application may be approved without
substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial
derogation from the intent and purposes of this article. If the Commission
determines that, owing to such conditions, failure to approve an application
will involve substantial hardship to the applicant, and approval thereof may
be made without such substantial detriment and derogation, or, in the event
§ 16-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-69
1:62
of failure to make a determination on an application within the specified
time, the Commission shall issue a certificate of hardship.
§ 16-70. Criteria to be considered.
The Commission shall consider the historic and architectural value and
significance of the site, the building, the general design arrangement,
texture, material and color of the features involved and the relation of such
features to buildings and structures in the surrounding area. In the case of
new construction or additions to existing buildings, the Commission shall
consider the appropriateness of size and shape of the building in relation
to the land area upon which the structure is situated and to buildings
and structures in the vicinity. The Commission shall not consider interior
arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view. The
Commission shall not make any recommendations or requirements except
for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic
aspects or architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the
historic district.
§ 16-71. Signing and dating of certificates.
Each certificate issued by the Commission shall be dated and signed by its
Chairman.
§ 16-72. Exemptions from requirements.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural features
within an historic district which does not involve a change in design,
material, color or outward appearance there nor shall it be construed to
prevent the meeting of requirements of a duly authorized public officer to
be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe situation or alteration
under a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of the applicable
historic district ordinance.
§ 16-73. Public hearings.
Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and shall be called at the request of two members of the Commission. A
majority of the members constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a
majority of the members of the Commission shall be necessary to issue
a certificate of the appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability and
a certificate of hardship.
A.
A public hearing is required for all applications for a certificate of
hardship or a certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of
nonapplicability may be issued by the Historic District Commission
without a public hearing. The determination of whether or not to issue
a certificate of nonapplicability must be made within 14 days of the
application. If an application for a certificate of nonapplicability is not
issued by the Historic District Commission, a public hearing shall be
B.
§ 16-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-73
1:63
§ 16-74. Review of decisions.
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within
20 days after the filing of the ordinance of such determination with the
City Clerk, file a written request with the Historic District Commission
for a review by a person or persons of competence and experience in
such matters as designated by the Lower Pioneer Valley Regional Planning
Commission.
§ 16-75. Records to be kept.
held. The Historic District Commission shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing on any application and shall give public notice of the time,
place and purpose thereof at least 14 days before said hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Chicopee. Notice of
the hearing shall be mailed to the owners of all adjoining property, to
include property within 300 feet of the property line within the historic
district boundaries and other property deemed by the Commission to
be materially affected thereby, as they appear on the most recent real
estate tax list of the Board of Assessors; to the Planning Board of
the City of Chicopee; to any person filing written request for notice
of hearings, such requests to be renewed yearly in December; to the
Chicopee Historical Commission; and to such other persons as the
Historic District Commission shall deem entitled to such notice.
[Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-3]
As soon as convenient after such public hearing but in any event within
60 days after the filing of the application or within such further time
as the applicant may allow in writing, the Commission shall make
a determination of the application. If the Commission shall fail to
make a determination within such period of time, the Commission shall
thereupon issue a certificate of hardship.
C.
A public hearing on an application need not be held if such hearing is
waived in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof. In addition,
a public hearing on an application may be waived by the Commission
if the Commission determines that the exterior architectural feature
involved or its category or color, as the case may be, is so insubstantial
in its effect on the historic district that it may be reviewed by the
Commission without public hearing on the application; provided,
however, that if the Commission dispenses with a public hearing on an
application, notice of the application shall be given to the owners of all
adjoining property and other property deemed by the Commission to be
materially affected thereby as above provided, and 10 days shall elapse
after the mailing of such notice before the Commission may act upon
such application.
D.
The Commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions,
transactions and determinations and the vote of each member
participating therein. The Commission may adopt and amend rules not
A.
§ 16-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-75
1:64
§ 16-76. Design of lights and other appurtenances.
A Commission may, after public hearing, set forth in such a manner as it
may determine the various designs of certain appurtenances, such as light
fixtures, which will meet requirements of an historic district and a roster of
certain colors of paint and roofing materials which will meet requirements
of an historic district, but no such determination shall limit the right of an
applicant to present other designs or colors to the Commission for approval.
§ 16-77. Additional duties and responsibilities.
inconsistent with MGL c. 40 and prescribe such forms as it shall deem
desirable and necessary for the regulation of its affairs and conduct of
its business. The Commission shall file a copy of any such rules with the
City Clerk.
The Commission shall file with the City Clerk all notices of its
certificates and determinations of disapproval issues.
B.
All maps of historic districts shall be kept on file in the Department of
Planning and Development.
C.
The Commission may administer on behalf of the City any properties
or easements, restrictions or other interests in real property within
the district which the City or town may have or may accept as gifts
or otherwise and which the City may designate the Commission as
administrator thereof.
A.
The Commission shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and
duties granted by this article and MGL c. 40C, such other powers,
authority and duties as are delegated or assigned by vote of the City
Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
§ 16-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-77
1:65

ARTICLE XVII
Church Street and Springfield Street Historic District Commissions
[Adopted 10-2-1979; amended in its entirety 9-19-1991 by Ord. No.
91-60]
§ 16-78. Establishment of districts.
§ 16-79. Commission established.
The Church Street Historic District Commission and the Springfield Street
Historic District Commission are hereby established in accordance with
MGL c. 40C and Chapter 275 of the Chicopee City Code. Said Commissions
shall have all the duties and responsibilities of Historic District
Commissions as described in MGL c. 40C and Articles XV, XVI and XVII of
this Chapter 16 of the City of Chicopee Code and comply with all rules and
regulations contained therein.
§ 16-80. Features subject to control.
The following features shall be subject to the control of the Church Street
Historic District Commission and the Springfield Street Historic District
Commission:
There is hereby established the Church Street Historic District in
accordance with MGL c. 40 as shown on the plan of the Church Street
Historic District, said plan being on file with the City Clerk.
A.
There is hereby established the Springfield Street Historic District in
accordance with MGL c. 40 as shown on the plan of the Springfield
Street Historic District, said plan being on file with the City Clerk.
B.
Exterior architectural features subject to view from public ways in
order to preserve the historical significance and architectural integrity
of the district.
A.
B. The vegetation and signs to preserve environmental beauty.
Fences and obstructions on all property in order to preserve openness
of interior.
C.
§ 16-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-80
1:67

ARTICLE XVIII
Municipal Incentive Committee
[Adopted 12-16-1980]
§ 16-81. Establishment; composition. [Amended 9-1-2009]
There shall be a Municipal Incentive Committee consisting of the
Administrative Aide, City Auditor and a member of the City Council to
be named by the President of said Council. They shall serve without
compensation.
§ 16-82. Functions.
Said Committee shall meet monthly and shall submit to the Mayor the name
or names of those individual municipal employees who, in the judgment
of the Committee, submit the most valuable suggestions for improving
municipal services. Those individuals shall receive a cash award as
determined by the Committee.
§ 16-83. Limitation on awards.
In no event shall the total sum of awards exceed, in any one year, one onethousandth
of one percent (.001 of 1%) of the equalized valuation of the City
as defined in MGL c. 44, § 1 or more than $1,000.
§ 16-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-83
1:69

ARTICLE XIX
Police Commission
[Adopted 6-30-1981]
§ 16-84. Establishment; composition. [Amended 9-1-2009]
There is hereby established a Police Commission, hereinafter called the
"Commission." Said Commission shall consist of five persons who shall be
appointed by a majority of all the members of the City Council.
§ 16-85. Terms. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council shall, on the first Tuesday of the month of July, appoint
to the Commission five members, whose original terms of office shall be
as follows: one member for three years, two members for two years, and
two members for one year. Upon expiration of the original appointments,
subsequent terms for new members of the Commission shall be for terms of
two years, commencing on the first Tuesday of July.
§ 16-86. Qualifications of members. [Amended 9-1-2009]
No person shall be appointed a member of the Commission who has not
been a resident of the City of Chicopee for at least five continuous years
previous to said appointment or who is a member of the City Council or
holds any municipal office for which he receives compensation. If, after
appointment, a member of the Commission ceases to be a resident of
the City, becomes a member of the City Council, or holds any municipal
office for which he receives compensation, the office as a member of the
Commission shall forthwith become vacant.
§ 16-87. Filling of vacancies.
A vacancy in such board shall be filled in the manner of an original
appointment within 30 days of its occurrence. The members of said
Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 16-88. Rules of procedure; Chairman.
The Commission shall adopt and from time to time amend its rules of
procedure. It shall choose one of its members as Chairman and shall
prescribe the length of term of office.
§ 16-89. Meetings. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Commission shall meet at least once a month. It shall, in the month of
June, submit a written report to the Mayor and City Council detailing the
work of the Commission during the previous year.
§ 16-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-90
1:71
§ 16-90. Rules for maintenance.
The Police Commission shall make such lawful rules for the maintenance of
the Police Department, including the regulation, government and discipline
of such members and employees as it deems wise and proper.
§ 16-91. Investigation of absences from Department.
The Police Commission shall have the power to examine into the absence
of members and employees of the Department, other than those allowed by
law or ordinance, and may recommend the approval or disapproval of the
payment of salary for the period of any absences.
§ 16-90 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-91
1:72
ARTICLE XX
Public Safety Committee
[Adopted 9-20-1984; amended in its entirety 9-1-2009]
§ 16-92. Establishment; responsibilities.
The City Council establishes a Public Safety Committee of five members
which would be responsible for the following areas:
A. Police Department.
B. Fire Department.
C. Health Department.
D. Building Department.
E. Sealer of Weights and Measures.
F. Military affairs.
§ 16-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-92
1:73

ARTICLE XXI
Insurance Commission
[Adopted 6-17-1986; amended in its entirety 9-1-2009]
§ 16-93. Creation; membership; responsibility.
The City Council creates a five-member Insurance Commission to oversee
all the City of Chicopee insurances and policies.
§ 16-94. Composition.
This Commission is to be composed of the Mayor, one member of the City
Council to be assigned by the President of the Council, the City Auditor, the
Personnel Director and a member of the School Department.
§ 16-95. Duties.
The duties of this Commission will be to review all insurance coverage
and recommend to the Mayor and City Council the necessary insurance
coverage for liabilities.
§ 16-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-95
1:75

ARTICLE XXII
Claims and Accounts Committee8
[Adopted 9-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-569]
§ 16-96. Membership; powers and duties.
§ 16-97. General duties of City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall give a bond to the City in such sums as the
Commissioner of Corporations and Taxation may from time to time
determine and with such sureties as may be approved by the Committee
on Finance, which bond, after its approval, shall be kept by the Mayor,
who shall be authorized to bring suit thereon upon any violations of the
conditions thereof. He shall be the custodian of all money belonging to the
City. At the close of the financial year, he shall make a report of all receipts
and expenditures during the year and submit the same to the Committee on
Finance.
§ 16-98. General duties of City Auditor.
The City Auditor shall act as the Clerk of the Committee on Finance and
of the Committee on Claims and Accounts. It shall be his duty to carefully
examine all claims which may be presented against the City, see that the
The President of the City Council shall appoint a standing Committee on
Claims and Accounts, which shall consist of five members, whose duties
shall be to investigate all disputed claims and accounts which may be
referred to it by the City Auditor or by any committee or board and
direct what part of the same shall be allowed and paid; in case of any
disagreement between different departments of the City government as
to which shall bear certain items of expense, to determine the same and
instruct the Auditor in reference thereto. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Said Committee shall investigate all claims which may be presented
against the City for personal property alleged to have been received
upon highways or from any cause and may, after consultation with
the City Solicitor, settle and adjust any such claim to an amount not
exceeding $300 and may take such steps as may be deemed best for
the defense of the City in all suits at law. In order to make such
claims, however, a person must make the claim within 30 days of said
incident on the form to be provided by the City Auditor. Any such claim
must include a bill, paid or unpaid, or an estimate of the bill. At the
Committee's discretion it may require the presence of the claimant at
the hearing. The Committee shall, after making its decision, cause the
claimant to be notified of its decision in writing. [Amended 5-18-1999
by Ord. No. 99-27]
B.
8. Editor's Note: Former Article XXII, Claims and Accounts Committee, adopted 6-21-1988,
was deleted 9-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-43.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect 2-1-1999.
§ 16-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-98
1:77
same are correctly cased, that the amounts charged are proper and in
accordance with the contract under which the charges were made and that
the same are legal. If he finds the claims correct, he shall approve the same
in writing and submit them to the Mayor, who may order payment thereof.
If he shall disapprove any claim, he shall return it to the officer, board or
committee from whom it came for revision, and if it is not corrected and
he still disapproves of it, he shall refer it to the Committee on Claims and
Accounts, with his objections thereto. He shall examine the accounts of the
City Collector and of all other persons, committees and boards who may be
charged with the collection or disbursement of the funds of the City and
for this purpose shall have the access to all the books and vouchers which
relate to said accounts. At the close of the financial year, he shall prepare a
detailed report of the finances of the year and of all accounts examined by
him and submit the same to the Committee on Finance.
§ 16-99. (Reserved)
§ 16-98 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-99
1:78
ARTICLE XXIII
Sewer Commission
[Adopted 5-16-1989]
§ 16-100. Powers and duties.
§ 16-101. Membership; terms; meetings.
The Sewer Commission shall have the power to set the rates subject to
approval of the City Council in accordance with Chapter 230 to provide
the revenue necessary to operate and maintain sewage treatment and
sewage works, to pay its debt service thereon, to manage and enforce
the federally mandated Industrial Pretreatment Program and to
maintain a reasonable reserve as determined by the City Council, but
which will not exceed 25% of its annual budget. The Commission shall
set its rates prior to July 1 of each year in order to conform to its
budget. [Amended 6-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-33; 9-1-2009]
A.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall determine the annual cost of
operations of the City's sewage treatment and sewage works program
and prepare and submit an annual budget and report of operations to
the Sewer Commission for approval and submission to the Mayor as
part of the regular budgetary process.
B.
The Sewer Commission shall serve as the hearing board with the
powers and duties as enumerated in § 230-50 of the Revised Ordinances
of the City of Chicopee, § 230-50.
C.
The Sewer Commission shall consist of a five-member board, appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the City Council, all of
whom shall be residents of the City of Chicopee. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
All members shall serve five-year terms, except for the initial five years
from the date of the article: one member shall be up for determined by
the Mayor at the time of appointment.
B.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman and shall
have a minimum of one meeting per month, to be held at a time
which does not conflict with regularly scheduled City Council meetings.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
Not fewer than three members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum.
D.
The Commission shall be advised at all meetings by the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works or his designee and shall have the
help of the City Auditor.
E.
The Mayor may remove a member of the Sewer Commission for cause
at any time. "Cause" shall include but not be limited to conviction for
any crime.
F.
§ 16-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-101
1:79
No member of the Sewer Commission shall be an employee of the
City of Chicopee or have been employed within the past three years
by the Sewage Treatment Facility or by any agency providing services
directly to the Sewage Treatment Facility of the City of Chicopee or
be an employee of any industry included in the Industrial Pretreatment
Program.
G.
All meetings and business of the Commission shall be conducted in
compliance with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the
Open Meeting Law of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
H.
§ 16-101 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-101
1:80
ARTICLE XXIV
Commission on Disability
[Adopted 1-16-1990; amended in its entirety 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
99-114]
§ 16-102. Purpose.
Said Commission shall research local problems of people with disabilities
and shall coordinate its activities with other local groups organized for
similar purposes.
§ 16-103. Records.
Said Commission shall keep records of its meetings and actions.
§ 16-104. Composition; terms. [Amended 9-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-38]
§ 16-105. Removal of members; vacancies.
Any member of said Commission may be removed by the appointing
authority for cause. Any member so removed may request a hearing before
the appointing authority by filing a written notice objecting to his or her
removal within 10 days of the receipt of notice of said removal. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the
unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment, within 30
days.
§ 16-106. Choosing of Chairman.
The Chairman of the Commission shall be chosen annually by a majority
vote of said Commission members.
§ 16-107. Duties.
Said Commission shall work in conjunction with the coordinator for the
disabled and shall investigate and research specific problems it believes to
be confronting the people with disabilities.
Said Commission shall consist of seven members and two alternative
members. An alternative member shall sit on the Commission in the
case of absence, inability to act or apparent conflict of interest on the
part of any Commission member. Said Commission shall report local
problems of people with disabilities to the local coordinator for the
disabled and shall make recommendations to the City's Coordinator for
the Disabled and shall suggest means to correct problems confronted
by the people with disabilities in Chicopee.
A.
Terms of office for permanent and alternative members shall be three
years.
B.
§ 16-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-108
1:81
§ 16-108. Appointments. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Mayor shall be the appointing authority, with confirmation by the City
Council, to take effect February 1, 1990.
§ 16-109. Compensation.
The Commission shall receive no compensation.
§ 16-108 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-109
1:82
ARTICLE XXV
EDIP Project Review Committee
[Adopted 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 02-19; amended in its entirety
9-1-2009]
§ 16-110. Establishment; membership.
There is hereby established an EDIP Project Review Committee to consist
of the City Treasurer, the City Solicitor, the Chair of the Board of Assessors,
a councilor at large, the ward councilor in whose ward the proposed project
is to be located, the Director of Planning and Development and the Director
of the Office of Community Development.
§ 16-111. Purpose.
The purpose of said Committee shall be to review proposed protects under
the Economic Development Incentive Program (EDIP) including special tax
assessment (sta) and tax incentive financing (tif). The Committee shall
make recommendations to the Mayor and the City Council pursuant to the
guidelines established in 420 CMR 2.00-2.18.
§ 16-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-111
1:83

ARTICLE XXVI
School Building Commissions
[Adopted 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-83]
§ 16-112. Authority to appoint: purpose.
There is hereby established authorization to appoint a School Building
Commission, which duties will be to oversee the construction and/or
renovations of all school buildings erected under contract by the City of
Chicopee. The purpose of the School Building Commission shall be to both
monitor and assist in the application for funds and advise and assist in the
construction of a school building and/or renovation project.
§ 16-113. Projects requiring Commission.
All buildings constructed for use by the City of Chicopee School Department
or any of its departments and any renovations to existing school buildings
where the total contract price totals $2,000,000 or more. Each such school
project shall have a separate Building Commission.
§ 16-114. Composition.
Upon the solicitation of request for a proposal in connection with a bid
for construction of any project requiring a Commission in accordance
with § 16-113, the Mayor shall appoint a total of 13 members, as
follows:
(1) A member of the Chicopee School Committee.
(2) The Chicopee Superintendent of Schools.
(3) The Chicopee Inspector of Buildings.
(4) Director of Maintenance for School Department.
(5) School principal of the subject school.
A member who has knowledge of the educational mission and
function of the facility to be built or renovated.
(6)
(7) A member of the City of Chicopee Finance Committee.
Members of the community with architecture, engineering and/or
construction experience to provide advice relative to the effect of
the proposed project on the community and to examine building
design and construction in terms of its constructability. [See 963
CMR 2.10(3)(b).]
(8)
The City Council shall recommend five appointments to the Mayor
from Subsection A(8).
(9)
(10)The Mayor shall appoint one member from Subsection A(8).
A.
§ 16-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-114
1:85
§ 16-115. Powers and duties.
§ 16-116. Duration.
The Commission shall have the power to act from the time of its
appointment and shall cease to exist, or any member shall be removed, upon
one of the following conditions:
§ 16-117. Removal of members.
A person shall cease to be a member of the Building Commission upon
removing his or her residence from the City of Chicopee or for any of the
reasons specified in § 16-116. In the event that a person is to be removed,
All appointments by the Mayor to the School Building Commission must
be submitted to the City Council for confirmation by a majority vote of
seven except for Subsection A(1) through (7).
B.
As soon as practical after his or her appointment to the Building
Commission, the Superintendent of Schools shall call an organizational
meeting to elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman, who shall be chosen
by a majority vote of the members present and voting. The Secretary
shall be hired by a majority of members present and voting. The Mayor
shall appoint legal counsel to attend all meetings of the Commission as
requested by the Chairman.
A.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman shall have the duty of calling all
regular meetings of the Commission upon 48 hours' notice posted
according to law. His duties shall include presiding over meetings of
the Commission and all functions traditionally given to a Chairman.
In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall serve in
that capacity. The Secretary shall record the minutes of each meeting
and shall be responsible for transmitting all minutes and documents
received by the Commission to the City Clerk upon the dissolution of
the Commission. A special meeting of the Commission shall be called
upon written request of nine members.
B.
The Commission shall have the duty to oversee the school construction
project and shall elect a Bills Committee, which members shall review
all incoming bills and vouchers and recommend approval for payment
to the full Commission. An affirmative vote of nine members of the
Commission shall be required for approval of the bills, and at least four
members must sign the bills, which will then be presented to the City
Auditor.
C.
A. When the building or project is finally accepted by the City; or
Upon a direction or order of the Mayor, who shall then transmit the
termination notice to the City Council. The procedure for termination
under this section shall be held in accordance with § 16-117 of this
article.
B.
§ 16-114 CHICOPEE CODE § 16-117
1:86
he or she shall be notified, in writing, by the Mayor and given the reasons
for such removal. The person will, upon a request in writing, not later than
seven days after receipt of such notice of removal, be given a hearing upon
such reasons for removal, said hearing to be held by the City Council within
15 days from the request for said hearing. An affirmative vote of nine shall
be required before the removal becomes final.
§ 16-118. Regulations to be distributed.
Each member of the School Building Commission shall, upon appointment,
be given a copy of this article and also a copy of MGL c. 30A, §§ 11A and
11A 1/2, and MGL c. 39, §§ 23A and 23B (Open Meetings Law).
§ 16-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-118
1:87
Chapter 18
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commissions, committees, councils and
authorities — See Ch. 16.
§ 18-1. Miscellaneous regulations.
As of June 30, 1979 for effective and passed budgets of community
development:
Chapter 22
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES ADMINISTRATION
§ 22-1. Title; word usage.
All line budget items shall be spent by their categories. Any additional
moneys necessary shall first be by the Mayor's recommendation and
confirmed by a two-thirds vote of the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
A.
Contingency funds shall follow the same course for any and all
expenditures.
B.
The hiring of any and all consultants, engineers and architects shall
follow the same course of action; Mayor's recommendation and a twothirds
vote by the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
The Director of Community Development shall present the fiscal year's
community development budget to the City Council the same time he
presents the City's fiscal budget. [Amended 2-20-1990; 9-1-2009]
D.
The City Council, on September 15 of each year, shall receive, in
writing, a status report from the Director of Community Development
on each of the economic tax incentives (TIFs) previously approved by
the City Council. [Added 7-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-47; amended
9-1-2009]
E.
There is hereby established an ordinance establishing a Department of
Human Resources Administration in the administrative service of the
City of Chicopee, creating the position of Human Resources Director,
setting forth the powers and duties of the Human Resources Director
and establishing personnel procedures. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-1]
A.
§ 16-118 CHICOPEE CODE § 22-1
1:88
§ 22-2. (Reserved)
§ 22-3. Composition. [Amended 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-75]
The Department of Human Resources Administration shall consist of a
Human Resources Director appointed by the Mayor and subject to
confirmation by the City Council. All appointments to the position of Human
Resources Director, both permanent and temporary which exceed 60 days,
shall require confirmation by the City Council. The Mayor, with confirmation
by the City Council, shall employ the Human Resources Director for a
contract period of three years, as well as such other employees as shall
be required and appropriated for. The Human Resources Director shall be
deemed to be a managerial and confidential employee as defined in MGL c.
150E and shall not be included in a collective bargaining unit or entitled to
coverage under said chapter.
§ 22-4. Powers and duties.
The Human Resources Director shall be responsible for developing policy
and directing and coordinating human resources activities, such as
employment, compensation, benefits, labor relations, employee services
and training by performing the following duties personally or through
subordinates:
Unless a different construction is clearly required by the context, the
words and phrases appearing in this chapter shall be construed in
conformity with meanings established by MGL c. 4, 31 and 152, as may
be amended.
B.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Department of
Human Resources Administration of the City of Chicopee."
C.
Identifies legal requirements and government reporting regulations
affecting human resources functions and ensures policies, procedures
and reporting are in compliance. Writes and delivers presentations to
municipal officers or government officials regarding human resources
policies and practices. Consults legal counsel to ensure that policies
comply with federal and state law.
A.
Writes directives advising the Mayor, City Council and department
heads of municipal policy regarding affirmative action, equal
employment opportunities, compensation and employee benefits.
Coordinates management training in preparing and maintaining job
descriptions, interviewing, hiring, terminations, promotions,
performance review, safety and sexual and other prohibited
harassment. Advises the Mayor, City Council and department heads
in appropriate resolution of employee-relations issues. Responds to
inquiries regarding policies, procedures, and programs. [Amended
9-1-2009]
B.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-4
1:89
§ 22-5. Qualifications.
The Human Resources Director shall have the following qualifications:
Develops and maintains a human resources information system (HRIS)
that meets the Mayor's, City Council's and department heads'
information needs. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
Oversees the analysis, maintenance and communication of records
required by law or local governing bodies or other departments in
the organization. Keeps records of benefits plans participation such as
insurance, pension and retirement plans, personnel transactions such
as job descriptions, hires, promotions, transfers, performance reviews
and terminations and employee statistics for government reporting.
D.
Studies legislation, arbitration decisions and collective bargaining
contracts (civil service) to assess municipal and public entity trends.
Represents management in negotiating collective bargaining
agreements for civil service employees.
E.
Prepares personnel forecast to project employment needs. Recruits,
interviews, tests and selects employees to fill vacant positions.
F.
Administers performance review program to ensure effectiveness,
compliance and equity within organization.
G.
Administers salary administration program to ensure compliance and
equity within the municipality and all defined salary guidelines.
Conducts wage surveys within labor market to determine competitive
wage rate. Analyzes wage and salary reports and data to determine
competitive compensation plan.
H.
Prepares employee separation notices and related documentation and
conducts exit interviews to determine reasons behind separations.
I.
Investigates accidents and prepares reports for insurance carrier.
Analyzes the safety programs and OSHA compliance.
J.
K. Prepares budget of human resources operations.
Is responsible for the overall direction, coordination, supervision and
evaluation of this unit. Directly supervises two nonsupervisory
employees. Carries out supervisory responsibilities in accordance with
the municipality's policies and applicable laws. Responsibilities include
interviewing, hiring and training employees; planning, assigning and
directing work; appraising performance; rewarding and disciplining
employees; addressing complaints and resolving problems.
L.
Performs all other related duties as driven by the Human Resources
needs of the City.
M.
§ 22-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 22-5
1:90
§ 22-6. Affirmative action program.
§ 22-7. Workers' compensation.
§ 22-8. Collective bargaining.
Chapter 24
A minimum of a bachelor's degree from a four-year college or university
and one to two years of related experience and/or training (or an
equivalent combination of education and experience).
A.
B. A minimum of two years of human resources management experience.
The Department of Human Resources Administration shall be
responsible for implementing the City's affirmative action and equal
opportunity policies and programs.
A.
The Department shall file all necessary forms, evaluations and other
documentation as may be required by the state and federal
governments.
B.
The Department shall gather and maintain all necessary statistical
information as required by the federal and state governments.
C.
The Department of Human Resources Administration shall be
responsible for the discharge of all duties and functions incident to
the orderly administration of the Workmen's Compensation Insurance
Program.
A.
These duties and functions shall include but not be limited to the
securing and filing of all accident reports, claims and other necessary
information.
B.
The Department shall serve in concert with the Law Department as
liaison between the City and the Industrial Accident Board of the
commonwealth.
C.
The Department of Human Resources Administration shall be
responsible for maintaining copies of all records pertaining to the
negotiation of agreements between the City of Chicopee and its
municipal labor organizations. Said maintenance shall consist of
keeping on file copies of all agreements duly executed by the parties.
A.
The Human Resources Director is assigned to the negotiating of
collective bargaining agreements by and between the City of Chicopee
and its municipal employee organizations, in company with such other
officials as the Mayor may deem appropriate.
B.
The Human Resources Director shall review all collective bargaining
agreements prior to their approval by the Mayor.
C.
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-8
1:91
DOCUMENTS, EXECUTION OF
§ 24-1. Deeds and other conveyances.
All deeds and other conveyances of real estate, assignments and discharges
of mortgages to be given by the City shall be signed in the name of the City
by the Mayor and City Treasurer and acknowledged by one of them and
shall have the City Seal impressed thereon or affixed thereto.
§ 24-2. Notes and bonds. [Amended 9-1-2009]
All notes and bonds, either for temporary or permanent loans, which may be
authorized by the City Council, shall be signed in the name of the City by the
City Treasurer, countersigned by the Mayor, approved upon the face thereof
by the Auditor and bear an impress of the Seal of the City. All interest
coupons attached to such notes or bonds may bear thereon a facsimile of
the signature of the Treasurer and shall not require any other signature.
§ 24-3. Manner of signing and execution.
All contracts which are duly authorized shall be signed on the part of
the City by the Chairman of the committee or board or by the officer
authorized to make the same and countersigned or approved by the Mayor.
All contracts shall be made in quadruplicate, copies to be deposited with
the City Clerk and City Auditor as prescribed in MGL c. 41, § 17, and other
copies to be for the use of the committee, board or officer having charge
of the work to which the contract relates and for the use of the other party
to the contract. All contracts shall be submitted to the City Solicitor for
approval as to form before final execution.
Chapter 26
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notice of meetings — See Ch. 58.
§ 26-1. Date of municipal preliminary elections.
The municipal preliminary elections shall be held on the third Tuesday of
September. (See MGL c. 54, § 103P.)
§ 22-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 26-1
1:92
Chapter 28
ENGINEER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
§ 28-1. General duties.
§ 28-2. Custody of surveys and plans.
The City Engineer shall have the custody of all surveys, measurements,
levels, plans, profiles, estimates and descriptions and shall keep the same
in the office provided by the City.
§ 28-3. Rules covering plans and papers.
The City Engineer shall make such rules and regulations covering taking of
plans and papers from his office as he may deem necessary to ensure their
safety.
§ 28-4. Classification and indexing of plans and profiles.
The City Engineer shall keep all plans, profiles, surveys, measurements,
etc., properly classified and indexed and shall deliver the same to his
successor.
§ 28-5. Keeping and furnishing of line and grade information.
The City Engineer shall keep a record, properly classified and indexed, of
all surveys made in relation to the laying out, widening, extending and
grading of streets and the establishing of correct lines and shall give to all
applicants, without charge, so far as the files and records of his office will
The City Engineer shall make all surveys, measurements, levels, plans,
profiles, estimates and descriptions necessary for the laying out,
establishing and construction of streets, sidewalks, water mains,
common sewers, drains, underground conduits, bridges, culverts and
other structures and public works of the City and shall perform such
other services and give such information concerning any department of
the City's affairs relative to the office of the City Engineer as may be
required of him by the Mayor or City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Prior to the establishment of any new street, building or occupancy, the
notification of the Police Department, Fire Department and Municipal
Coordinators for Enhanced 9-1-1 is required. [Added 4-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-11]
B.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:93
permit, any information desired as to the lines and grades of the streets on
which their estates are situated or upon which they intend to build.
§ 28-6. Certification of contract work.
The City Engineer shall measure all work done by contract for the City and
shall furnish a certificate of such measurements to the City Auditor before
said Auditor shall pass any contract bill for payment. The certificate shall be
attached to and filed with the bill.
§ 28-7. Duty to assign street numbers.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to assign a number to all tenements
and buildings on all streets, whether public or private, in the City of
Chicopee.10
§ 28-8. Assistant City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall have an assistant who shall be a resident of the
City of Chicopee, appointed by the Mayor, and shall perform such duties as
required by the City Engineer. Whenever, by reason of absence, illness or
other cause, the City Engineer is unable to perform the duties of his office,
the Assistant City Engineer shall perform such duties and when so doing
shall exercise all of the powers and assume all of the responsibilities of the
office of the City Engineer.
§ 28-9. Abandonment of City property. [Added 1-6-1987; amended
4-7-1987; 2-16-1988; 11-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-55]
Any property to be abandoned is to be reviewed by the City Engineer
for his comments.
A.
If surveying is necessary, it is to be paid for by the person who wants
the property abandoned.
B.
Steps to be followed.
Step 1: Upon receipt of a request by the City Council, the City
Engineer shall notify all departments for input regarding needs
or utilities that may be in the proposed area of abandonment.
The departments notified shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: Assessors, Building, Electric Light, Conservation, DPW,
Engineering, Fire, Planning, Wastewater, Water, Parks Department,
Police Department, Mayor's office, and Law Department.
[Amended 9-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-66; 9-1-2009]
(1)
Step 2: If there are no requests by any departments to retain
ownership. of proposed areas or ways to be abandoned, then the
City Council shall request the City Engineer to prepare a
(2)
C.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 243, Art. I, Street Numbering.
§ 28-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 28-9
1:94
Chapter 32
FINANCES
description and plan for the area to be abandoned. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Step 3: Notwithstanding the provisions of Step 2, the preparation
of plans, deeds and the filing thereof, along with any filing fees,
for the area to be abandoned shall be the responsibility of the
interested abutting owners. The plan submitted by interested
abutter(s) shall be from a certified engineer.
(3)
Step 4: The interested abutter(s) shall supply an appraisal of the
property from a certified appraiser.
(4)
Step 5: The City Council, by a two-thirds vote, may authorize the
conveyance of such land, or of part thereof, or the abandonment of
such easement or right or part thereof, and specify the minimum
amount to be paid for such conveyance or abandonment.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(5)
Step 6: The Mayor, for such amount as stated by the City Council
or larger amount, and upon such other terms as the Mayor shall
consider proper, shall convey said land or part thereof, by deed, or
declare said easement or right, or part thereof, to be abandoned.
Such declaration, being recorded in the Hampden County Registry
of Deeds, shall extinguish the easement or right, or part thereof.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(6)
Step 7: When in receipt of the new deeds, the Assessors shall
provide the new owner(s) with a valuation of the land for tax
purposes.
(7)
§ 28-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-9
1:95

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 9 of the 1976 Code]
§ 32-1. Standing Committee on Finance. [Amended 9-1-2009]
§ 32-2. Duties of City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall give a bond to the City in such sums as the
Commissioner of Corporations and Taxation may from time to time
determine and with such sureties as may be approved by the Committee
on Finance, which bond, after its approval, shall be kept by the Mayor,
who shall be authorized to bring suit thereon upon any violations of the
conditions thereof. He shall be the custodian of all money belonging to the
City. At the close of the financial year, he shall make a report of all receipts
and expenditures during the year and submit the same to the Committee on
Finance.
§ 32-3. Duties of City Auditor. [Amended 4-16-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24]
The City Auditor shall act as the Clerk of the Committee on Finance and
of the Committee on Claims and Accounts. It shall be his duty to carefully
examine all claims which may be presented against the City, see that the
same are correctly cased, that the amounts charged are proper and in
The general charge of the financial interest of the City shall be in a
standing Committee on Finance, which shall consist of the President
of the City Council and six members of the Council appointed by the
President. Said Committee shall annually in the months of November
and December meet to compile recommendations for the City Council
budget for the ensuing municipal year, which recommendations shall be
passed upon by the City Council for referral to the Mayor.
A.
It shall be the duty of this Committee at least once in each year to
examine all funds, securities and vouchers held by the City Treasurer
or by any other officer, committee or board, to approve the sureties
on all bonds required to be given to the City by any officer thereof
and to require new bonds from such officers whenever, in its judgment,
existing bonds are insufficient; and to receive and examine the annual
financial reports as made by the various officers and boards of the City
and report the same to the City Council in proper form for printing,
together with its suggestions and recommendations thereon. The
decision of said Committee in all matters relating to the sureties on
all bonds of any City official shall supersede that of any other officer,
committee or board and shall be subject to revision only by the City
Council with the approval of the Mayor.11
B.
11.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 9/I/2, Powers and duties of Standing Committee on Claims and
Finance, which section originally followed this subsection, was repealed 9-20-1984.
§ 32-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:97
accordance with the contract under which the charges were made and that
the same are legal. If he finds the claims correct, he shall approve the same
in writing and submit them to the Mayor, who may order payment thereof.
If he shall disapprove any claim, he shall return it to the officer, board or
committee from whom it came for revision, and if it is not corrected and
he still disapproves of it, he shall refer it to the Committee on Claims and
Accounts, with his objections thereto. He shall examine the accounts of the
City Collector and of all other persons, committees and boards who may
be charged with the collection or disbursement of the funds of the City,
and for this purpose shall have access to all the books and vouchers which
relate to said accounts. At the close of the financial year, he shall prepare
a detailed report of the finances of the year and of all accounts examined
by him and submit the same to the Committee on Finance. The City Auditor
is to provide a report listing general funds receipts and revolving funds for
each department for all budget hearings.
§ 32-4. Auditor to keep books of accounts. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Auditor shall keep such books of account as he may deem
necessary, which shall comply with the state system of accounting, in which
he shall credit the several departments with the appropriations which may
be made relating thereto, and in which he shall charge against the several
appropriations all claims approved by him. He shall keep an account with
the City Collector in which he shall charge the Collector with the amount
of all taxes assessed and of all claims due to the City. He shall also keep an
account in which he shall charge the City Treasurer with all notes and other
obligations given by the City and of all other matters which it is the duty of
the Treasurer to receive and in which he shall credit the Treasurer with the
amount of all orders drawn upon him, so that the balance of this account
may at any time show the financial condition of the City. Furthermore, the
Auditor shall by August 15 of each fiscal year report to the City Council the
closing balances of all accounts of the City for the previous fiscal year.
§ 32-5. Approval of certain claims by Auditor. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Previous to the passage of the annual appropriations by the City Council,
the Auditor shall approve only such claims as are necessary for the regular
current business of the City, in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 34, or are
specially authorized by vote of the City Council on the recommendation of
the Mayor. After such annual appropriations have been made, whenever the
appropriation in any department is exhausted, the Auditor shall not approve
any further claims in that department until provision for payment of the
same shall have been made by the City Council, either by an additional
appropriation or by a transfer, but he shall immediately report the condition
to the Committee on Finance.
§ 32-6. Reports due City Auditor.
All officers and boards in whose departments any accounts, except taxes,
may become due to the City shall deposit with the City Auditor on or
§ 32-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 32-6
1:98
before the 10th day of each month a statement of all such accounts as have
become due up to the first day of the month and not previously certified
by them, and the Auditor shall charge the amounts thereof against the
City Collector and then deliver the same statements to said Collector. The
Assessors of Taxes shall deliver to the Auditor a statement of all taxes which
are committed by them for collection immediately after their commitment.
Any officer or board having authority to make any abatement or discount
in the amount of any account due to the City shall deliver to the Auditor a
certified statement of all abatements and discounts made by him or them as
soon as made, and the amounts thereof shall be credited to the accounts of
the City Collector and of the City Treasurer.
§ 32-7. Approval, delivery and payment of bills.
All bills and claims against the City shall, as far as possible, be obtained and
approved by the proper officers and forwarded to the City Auditor forthwith.
All bills will be processed for payment on the 15th and 30th of each month.
All officers shall submit bills for processing at least five days before the
above payment dates. The Auditor shall examine all bills and after approval
shall draw his order for payment thereof in season to enable the Treasurer
to make payment as set forth above.
§ 32-8. Financial votes and orders. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Clerk shall deliver to the Auditor a certified copy of all votes and
orders of the City Council authorizing the expenditure of money as soon as
possible after the same shall have been adopted, and the Auditor shall not
approve any bill under such vote or order until such certified copy has been
filed with him.
§ 32-9. Approval and verification of payments and claims. [Amended
1-4-1983; 9-20-1983; 9-1-2009]
No bill or claim against the City shall be paid by the Treasurer until the
same shall have been approved by the Auditor and payment thereof ordered
by the Mayor. All salaries of officers, principal and interest on permanent
and temporary loans when due, taxes and license fees due the state or
county, final judgments in actions in court against the City, monthly gas
bills, weekly freight bills, abatements of taxes, allowances of state aid and
military aid and soldier's relief and all sums ordered paid by vote of the City
Council may be paid upon approval of the Auditor and order of the Mayor.
Weekly payrolls of the employees of the City who are entitled by law to
receive their pay weekly shall be made up by the Superintendent or board
under whom the employees have worked and be submitted to the Auditor.
All bills contracted by the School Committee, after being approved in the
manner provided in the regulations of the Committee, shall be submitted to
the Auditor. Upon verification that the submitted bills have been approved
in the manner prescribed, the Auditor shall examine the same and, if
found correct, approve the same for payment. For verification purposes,
the School Committee shall submit with its schedules of bills payable an
§ 32-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-9
1:99
affidavit, properly signed by the Superintendent of Schools or, in his
absence, the Assistant Superintendent of Schools, stating the meeting dates
when actions were taken, the motions made and the votes taken on all bills
submitted for payment.
§ 32-10. Custody of approved bills.
All approved bills upon which payment has been ordered shall be filed with
and remain in the custody of the Auditor.
§ 32-11. Required statement on schedules of bills payable.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
The following statement shall be attached to all schedules of bills payable
submitted by each department head unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council under the provisions of Section 59 of the City Charter.
"I, the undersigned, hereby certify under penalties of perjury that I have
no beneficial interest, either directly or indirectly, in the following bills
submitted for payment, nor will I benefit personally in any manner as a
result of payment of said bills."
§ 32-12. Disclosure of tax receivables. [Added 11-1-1977; 9-1-2009]
§ 32-12.1. Departmental revolving funds. [Added 6-19-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-21]
Listing of tax amounts receivables. On or before May 15 of each fiscal
period, the City Collector and the City Treasurer shall submit to the City
Council complete lists of all tax amounts receivables in their charge.
These lists shall include the names and addresses of the individuals in
arrear, the amounts of the tax delinquencies and any and all interest
charges assessed.
A.
Listing of property valuations, tax assessments and abatements. On or
before July 15 of each year, the Board of Assessors shall submit to the
City Council complete lists of all property valuations, tax assessments
and tax abatements applicable to the fiscal period just completed.
These lists shall include all property valuations (buildings and land),
owner's names and addresses, actual tax assessments and any and
all abatements with the reasons for their being granted (the chapter,
section and, if any, the clause of the General Laws so used).
B.
Publishing of tax amounts receivable, property valuations, tax
assessments and abatements. Upon receipt of the lists of tax amounts
receivable, property valuations, tax assessments and abatements, the
City Council shall make them public by having them posted in easily
accessible areas of the City Hall, the main library, and all branch
libraries. In addition, the City Treasurer and City Collector shall make
available to the news media copies of these lists to be published.
C.
§ 32-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 32-12.1
1:100
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to codify, establish and authorize
revolving funds for use by City departments, boards, committees,
agencies or officers in connection with the operation of programs or
activities that generate fees, charges, or other receipts to support all or
some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving
funds are established under and governed by General Law Chapter 44,
§ 53E1/2.
A.
Expenditure limitations. A department or agency head, board,
committee, or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies
from a revolving fund established and authorized by this section
without appropriation subject to the following limitations:
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are
paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
(1)
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of
the fund.
(2)
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the
amount authorized by City Council on or before July 1st of that
fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that
is later approved during that fiscal year by the Mayor and City
Council.
(3)
B.
Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund
established by this section shall be credited to the general fund.
C.
Procedures and reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter
44, § 53E1/2, this section, the City Charter, or any other state or local
law, ordinance, rule, regulation, policy or procedure that governs the
receipt and custody of City monies and the expenditure and payment
of City funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and
authorized by this section. The City Auditor shall include a statement
of the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and
expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available for
expenditure in the regular report the City Auditor provides the
department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations
made for its use.
D.
Authorized revolving funds. The Table in Exhibit A12 establishes:
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a City department,
board, committee, agency or officer;
(1)
The department or agency head, board, committee, or officer
authorized to spend from each fund;
(2)
The fee, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with
(3)
E.
12.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 32-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-12.1
1:101
the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall
be credited to each fund by the City Auditor.
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may
be used;
(4)
(5) Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
(6) Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
(7) The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this section.
§ 32-12.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 32-12.1
1:102
ARTICLE II
School Committee Statement of Account
[Adopted 7-6-1976]
§ 32-13. Form of statement. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The School Committee, through its Business Manager, shall reconcile its
accounting books with the City Auditor monthly and submit to the City
Council by the 25th of the following month a statement of account on a line
basis in the following manner:
Item
Annual
Budget
Budget Year-To-
Date
Expenditures
Year-To-Date Difference
§ 32-14. Other required submissions.
In addition to the statement of account, the School Committee shall submit
a copy of the dates of its meetings, motions made and passed, votes taken
on all payments of bills and all transfers made.
§ 32-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-14
1:103
Chapter 34
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32-14 CHICOPEE CODE § 32-14
1:104
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 44 of the 1976 Code]
§ 34-1. Composition. [Amended 6-17-1981; 8-4-2015 by Ord. No.
15-45; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-83]
The Fire Department of the City of Chicopee shall consist of one Fire Chief,
five Deputy Chiefs to be designated First, Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth
Deputy Chiefs, respectively, 13 Captains, 23 Lieutenants, 105 firefighters,
one Administrative Assistant, one Principle Clerk, one Senior Clerk, one
Fire Tech/Foreman.
§ 34-2. Membership qualifications.
No person shall be eligible to appointment as a member of the Department
unless he is a citizen of the United States, at least 21 years old, a resident
of the City of Chicopee for at least two years, of good health and character
and able to read and write in the English language and comply with all rules
and regulations of the Civil Service Commission.
§ 34-3. Membership applications.
Applications for membership in the Department may be made upon blanks
to be provided for that purpose, which shall be filled out and signed by
the applicant and filed with the Civil Service Commission. Members shall
be assigned as far as possible to the companies which are located nearest
to their places of residence but may at any time be transferred to other
companies by the Chief when, in his judgment, the good of the Department
requires such transfer.
§ 34-4. Members to be sworn in.
Each member, before entering upon his duties, shall be sworn in by the City
Clerk for the faithful performance of his duties.
§ 34-5. Advisory Board. [Amended 9-1-2009]
An Advisory Board of the Fire Department of the City of Chicopee shall
consist of the Fire Chief and the Deputy Chiefs. The Chief shall preside
at all meetings of the Board when present, and in his absence one of the
Deputy Chiefs shall preside. The Board may make rules and regulations not
inconsistent with law and the ordinances of the City for its own government
and for the government, discipline and good order of the members and
employees of the Department and for the extinguishment of fires; subject,
however, to the approval of the City Council.
§ 34-6. General powers and duties of Chief.
The Chief shall, under the general direction of the Mayor, have the
supervision, care and control of all the fire apparatus and other
A.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-6
1:105
property of the City held and used for fire purposes and shall cause
the same to be kept in good repair and in condition for immediate use.
He shall have the general care and control of all hydrants, cause them
to be frequently inspected and, in case of any defect therein, notify
the Superintendent of the Water Department, who shall immediately
put the same in good order. He shall have the authority to appoint all
janitors and other employees of the Department other than members
and may remove the same as provided in Section 48 of the Charter of
the City; subject, however, to the approval of the Civil Service Rules and
Regulations.
He shall keep an accurate account of all moneys that may be received
and expended on account of the Department. He shall be responsible
to the Mayor for the discipline, good order and prompt conduct of
the whole Department and shall have control over the officers and
members of the several companies attached to the Department.
B.
At the close of the financial year, he shall make a report to the City
Council of the state and condition of the Department, of the cost of
maintaining the same in detail, of all accidents by fire which may have
happened within the preceding year, with the causes thereof so far
as the same can be ascertained and the number and description of
buildings destroyed or injured thereby, together with the names of the
owners and occupants thereof. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
He shall have supervision over and general care of the rooms,
machinery, apparatus, fixtures and wires of the fire alarm service and
shall see that they are at all times kept in good working order. If
any part thereof shall become defective or in need of repair, he shall
immediately notify the Manager of the Electric Light Department of
the City or the person in charge of the electric light station of the
City who shall cause the necessary repairs to be made and the defects
remedied forthwith, the expense thereof to be charged by the Electric
Light Department to the City and paid out of the appropriation for the
Fire Department. He shall allow one hour for dinner to each member of
the permanent Fire Department while on duty for 24 hours.
D.
These powers shall include the issuing of Fire Department rules and
regulations which shall be available from the Chief's office and the City
Clerk under separate cover.
E.
Rapid-entry locked boxes. [Added 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 91-27]
When a property is protected by an automatic alarm system or
access to or within a structure or an area on that property is unduly
difficult because of secured openings or knowledge of stored
hazardous materials is necessary and where immediate access is
necessary for lifesaving or fire-fighting purposes, the head of the
Fire Department may require a rapid-entry locked box to be
installed in an approved location. The rapid-entry locked box shall
(1)
F.
§ 34-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 34-6
1:106
§ 34-6.1. Compensation of Fire Department Chief. [Added
9-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-6613]
§ 34-7. Defacing or tampering with alarm system; penalty.
No person shall willfully deface, injure or destroy the fire alarm system or
any part thereof or in any way disturb the wires or the operation thereof or
open any of the signal boxes connected therewith, except to give an alarm
of fire or by authority of the Chief, or interfere with the poles by which the
wires of the fire alarm system are supported by breaking, cutting, injuring
or defacing them or by posting placards or bills upon them or in other
manner. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $20 for each offense.
be of a type approved by the head of the Fire Department. Such
rapid-entry locked boxes shall contain:
Keys for entry to the premises, as deemed necessary by the
head of the Fire Department.
(a)
Material safety data sheets (MSDS) and other information as
deemed necessary by the Head of the Fire Department, if
hazardous materials are stored on the premises.
(b)
Keys to other areas within the building or complex, as directed
by the head of the Fire Department.
(c)
All rapid-entry locked boxes shall be approved by the head of the
Fire Department prior to installation.
(2)
The regular, full-time Fire Chief and the regular, full-time Chief of
Police of the City of Chicopee shall receive an annual base rate of
compensation which shall not be less than tow times the highest annual
rate of compensation of a regular, full-time firefighter or a regular fulltime
police officer or patrolman, as the case may be.
A.
In addition, parity shall be maintained relative to the compensation
rates paid to the Police Chief and the Fire Department Chief for the City
of Chicopee.
B.
The highest annual rate of a regular full-time firefighter or a regular
full-time police officer or patrolman is to be construed and interpreted
as the "base rate" and shall not include any other additional forms
of compensation, and if, given this definition, the rates of the Fire
Department Chief and the Police Chief would mathematically come
out to different levels of compensation, then the lower rate shall be
adjusted to the higher rate in order to maintain parity between the two
Department heads.
C.
13.Editor's Note: See also § 77-3.1.
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-8
1:107
§ 34-8. Reward for information regarding false alarms.
The sum of $25 shall be paid as a reward to any person furnishing evidence
which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person ringing false fire
alarms.
§ 34-9. Duties of Department members.
It shall be the duty of the permanent members to take care of the fire
apparatus and the buildings in which the same are kept and to keep the
same and all things entrusted to their care clean and in order for immediate
use and to the satisfaction of the Chief. They shall clear the snow from
sidewalks and driveways connected with the houses under their care and
perform such other duties relating to the Department as may be required of
them by the Chief.
§ 34-10. Notification of Chief's absence.
The Chief, before leaving the City to be absent one day or more, shall notify
the Mayor of his intention to be so absent.
§ 34-11. Marking of vehicles. [Amended 10-19-1993 by Ord. No.
93-53]
All vehicles and apparatus owned and operated by the Fire Department in
the City of Chicopee, excluding the Chief's and Deputy Chief's cars, shall be
painted red with black letters three inches in height. The Chief's and Deputy
Chief's cars shall be painted white with three-inch black letters.
§ 34-12. Conduct at fires.
The officers and members of each company, upon an alarm of fire in that
part of the City in which the company is located, shall immediately go to
their respective apparatus and convey the same in an orderly manner to or
near the place where the fire may be and place and use the same as directed
by the Chief and exert themselves to their best ability in the performance
of any duty which they may be called upon to do by any Deputy Chief and,
after their services are no longer needed, upon permission or order of the
Deputy in charge or in the absence of all the Deputies, on the order of
their respective Captains, return the apparatus to their respective places of
deposit in a quiet and orderly manner.
§ 34-13. Members to wear badges.
Every member of the Fire Department, when on duty, shall wear a suitable
badge to be furnished by the City, and any member who shall lose, destroy
or dispose of his badge shall be required to pay to the City the cost of
replacing the same. The Captains of the several companies shall have the
care of these badges when not in use and shall see to the distribution
thereof. When any member of a company shall leave the Department, he
shall immediately return his badge to the Captain of his company.
§ 34-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 34-14
1:108
§ 34-14. Removal of delinquent members.
The Chief shall report to the Mayor any company, officer, member or
employee of the Department who may be delinquent in the performance
of any duty assigned him. He shall have power to suspend from the
Department any officer, member or employee for insubordination or
disorderly conduct and in such case shall immediately report to the Mayor
the facts in relation thereto. Any member suspended shall not further act
as the member of the Department or be entitled to any compensation until
reinstated by the Mayor.
§ 34-15. Authority to demolish buildings.
Whenever it shall be determined at any fire, by the Chief or Deputy Chief in
command, to be necessary to pull down or demolish any building in order
to prevent the spreading of the fire, the same may be done by his order in
accordance with the statute in such case made and provided.
§ 34-16. Removal of apparatus from City. [Amended 10-6-1987]
No fire apparatus or vehicle under the control of the Fire Department shall
be taken from the City at any time, except the Chief or his designee may
authorize any fire apparatus or vehicle to be taken from the City for the
purpose of having the same repaired or to be used to transport personnel
on official business; provided, however, that in case of a fire and such other
emergencies or potential public disaster that might arise in a neighboring
town, city or area under federal jurisdiction, the Chief or his designee may
order any fire apparatus or vehicle to be taken to such town, city or area
under federal jurisdiction for the purpose of assisting in the extinguishment
of such fire and such other emergencies or potential public disasters that
might arise.
§ 34-17. Conduct by non-Department members.
All persons not members of the Department are hereby enjoined and
required to obey the orders and directions of the officer in command at
any fire and to render their services if ordered so to do by him. No person
not wearing the badge of the Department shall, except by permission of
the Chief, Deputy Chief or Captain, enter within the lines formed at any
fire. No person not a member of the Department being present at a fire
shall assume, without authority, to exercise control over any members of the
Department in respect to their duty, and no such person shall in any way
hinder or interfere with the members of the Department in the discharge of
their duties at a fire or be guilty of disorderly conduct of any kind at a fire.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to a fine
not exceeding $20 for each offense.
§ 34-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-18
1:109
§ 34-18. Driving over hose prohibited.
Whenever any hose is placed in any street by order of any officer of the
Department during a fire, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the
same without consent of some officer of the Department.
§ 34-19. Authority to order removal of combustible materials;
penalty.
It shall be the duty of the Chief to examine all buildings and other places
where ashes, shavings or other combustible materials may be collected and
deposited and at all times to be vigilant in causing the removal of the same,
whenever, in his opinion, the same, if not removed or otherwise disposed of,
will expose the City to danger from fires, and in such case he shall direct the
tenant, occupant or lessee of any such place to remove or otherwise safely
dispose of such ashes, shavings or other combustible materials; and in case
such tenant, occupant or lessee shall refuse so to do, the Chief shall remove
or cause to be removed the same at the expense of said tenant, occupant
or lessee. Any such tenant, occupant or lessee who shall neglect or refuse
to remove any such ashes, shavings or other combustible material when
directed to by said Chief shall be liable to a fine of not more than $20.
§ 34-20. Inspection of buildings by Chief; penalty for
noncompliance.
The Chief, when requested by two or more citizens representing that ashes
or combustible materials are kept in any place in the City in an insecure
or unsafe or illegal manner or that the funnels, flues, fireboards or heating
apparatus of any building in the City are insecure and dangerous, shall
make a personal examination of such place or building and give the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof written notice of such changes, alterations and
repairs which, in his judgment, public safety may require, and any person
who shall refuse or neglect to make such changes, alterations and repairs
when so required or who shall prevent the examination or obstruct said
Chief in attempting to carry out the provisions of this section shall be liable
to a fine of not more than $20 for each offense.
§ 34-21. Work hours.
§ 34-22. Vacations.
The regular workweek for members of the fire-fighting force shall be 42
hours (averaged).
A.
The regular workweek for members of the fire prevention maintenance,
training and fire alarm division shall be 40 hours.
B.
C. The regular workweek for the fire alarm dispatchers shall be 42 hours.
A. Fire fighters shall receive the following vacation schedule:
§ 34-18 CHICOPEE CODE § 34-22
1:110
§ 34-23. Personal leave.
Each employee of the Fire Department shall be granted one personal leave
day per calendar year for good cause shown. An employee desiring to take
a personal leave day shall request the same in writing at least 48 hours in
advance, but this requirement may be waived by the Chief or Deputy for
good cause. Personal leave days shall not accumulate from year to year.
Ten or more years of service with the City: 20 working days of paid
vacation annually.
(1)
Five or more years of service but less than 10 years of service with
the City: 15 working days of paid vacation annually.
(2)
Thirty weeks or more of service but less than five years of service
with the City: 10 working days of paid vacation annually.
(3)
All employees who, pursuant to the foregoing, are entitled to more than
10 working days of paid vacation annually may take any five working
days of vacation in single days or combinations thereof throughout the
calendar year upon notice of not less than 48 hours in advance, so long
as to do so will not substantially impair the ability of the Department to
carry out its primary duty.
B.
§ 34-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-23
1:111

ARTICLE II
Ambulance Service
[Adopted 10-4-1977]
§ 34-24. Service to be provided. [Amended 7-5-1978; 9-7-1982;
2-21-1984]
The Fire Department shall provide ambulance service to persons within the
City of Chicopee as per emergency conditions as to the Fire Department
guidelines in effect.
§ 34-25. Fees. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1; 9-1-2009]
The fees for said service shall be as set from time to time by the City
Council. The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 34-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-25
1:113

ARTICLE III
Inspection Fees
[Adopted 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11I]
§ 34-26. Fees established; liability for payment.
Beginning January 1, 2007, a single-family home inspection would be
increased to $25, a two-family home would be $50, a dwelling with six or
fewer units would be $75, and a dwelling with more than six units would be
$250. The fees are for the sale and transfer of property only. Fees are to be
paid by the seller.
§ 34-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-26
1:115
Chapter 37
FLOOD CONTROL DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Emergency
Management — See Ch. 9.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80.
Dike system — See Ch. 142.
§ 37-1. Establishment.
There shall be in the City of Chicopee a Department to be called the "Flood
Control Department," which shall be under a Commission known as the
"Commission on Flood Control."
§ 37-2. Membership.
This Commission shall consist of five members as follows: City Engineer,
who shall be Chairman; Superintendent of the Highway Department;
Superintendent of the Water Department; Superintendent of the Electric
Light Department; and one member to be appointed by the Mayor for a term
of three years.
§ 37-3. Duties.
Said Commission on Flood Control shall have full charge of repair and
supervision of the dikes, including the pumping stations in connection with
the dikes and all other machinery used in the care and operation of the dikes
along the Connecticut River and the Chicopee River and any other dikes
that are now erected or may be erected in the City. This Commission shall
serve without compensation.
Chapter 39
FORESTRY DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 16, Art.
IV.
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80.
Trees — See Ch. 257.
§ 39-1. Establishment; duties.
There shall be a Forestry Department, under the direction of the Tree
Warden, which shall have the general charge of the care and control of all
public shade trees, shrubs and growths in the City, except those within a
§ 34-26 CHICOPEE CODE § 39-1
1:116
state highway and those in public parks, and shall maintain and preserve
such trees, shrubs and growths.
§ 39-2. Composition.
The Forestry Department shall consist of a Senior Tree Climber and
Surgeon who shall, in addition to his duties, have the duties of Tree Warden;
and one (1) or more tree climbers and such other permanent and temporary
tree climbers or laborers as shall from time to time be deemed necessary.
§ 39-3. Appointments.
All appointments to positions in this Department shall be made by the
Mayor, subject to the provisions of civil service.
§ 39-4. Seniority or classification of existing members.
All persons presently holding positions as described in this chapter, under
the supervision of the Tree Warden, shall retain their said positions with no
change in status, seniority or classified service.
§ 39-5. Consolidation of Tree Warden and Senior Tree Climber and
Surgeon duties.
The Duties of Tree Warden, as defined by MGL c. 87, shall be added to
the duties of the Senior Tree Climber and Surgeon, and the sum of $1,320
yearly shall be paid said person to whom these duties are assigned. The
Senior Tree Climber and Surgeon shall be the one having longevity of
service in said position.
§ 39-6. Disposal of wood. [Added 3-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-13]
Wood chips produced from small-diameter limbs and branches will first
be made available for use on City property, as needed. Full loads of
excess wood chips will be dumped within the City limits for anyone
requesting them per Subsection D. Wood chips will be disposed of at
the landfill as a last resort.
A.
Small-diameter limbs will be cut up and left on the tree belt for
neighborhood residents to take.
B.
Large-diameter trunks (tree butts) will also be made available for
private use. The City will dump full loads of these large-diameter pieces
within the City limit's for anyone requesting them per Subsection D.
Landfill disposal will be a last resort. (NOTE: These butts are not split
or cut into small pieces and must be accepted as loaded and dumped
from City trucks. The City accepts no liability for damage to private
property which may result or arise or be related to or connected to
in any way the City's actions in making large-diameter trunks or wood
chips available as herein provided.)
C.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-6
1:117
Chapter 46
LAW DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 46-1. City Solicitor; auxiliary staff.
§ 46-2. Appointment of City Solicitor, Assistant and Associates.
The City Solicitor and three of the four Associate City Solicitors shall be
appointed by the Mayor on the first Monday of January of each year. The
fourth Associate City Solicitor shall be nominated by the Mayor on the first
Monday of January of each year and confirmed by a majority vote of the
City Council, at which time the appointment shall become effective. The
Assistant City Solicitor shall be appointed for a two-year term and shall be
a full-time municipal employee governed by an employment contract. The
City Solicitor and Associate City Solicitors may be removed from office by
the Mayor for cause, after public hearing held by the Mayor, upon a sevenday
notice, in writing, setting forth the cause and the time and place of
hearing. Any vacancy occurring in the Law Department, with the exception
of the fourth Associate City Solicitor who is counsel to the City Council,
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term. Any
vacancy occurring in the position of the legal counsel to the City Council
shall be filled by the Mayor nominating an attorney for the position, subject
to confirmation by the majority of the City Council, at which time the
appointment becomes effective.
Requests for loads of wood chips or large-diameter tree trunks should
be forwarded, in writing, to the General Foreman of the Forestry
Department at the Department of Public Works. All material will be
distributed as it becomes available in the order of requests received.
D.
The Law Department shall be under the supervision and control of the
City Solicitor, who shall be an attorney, admitted to practice before the
courts of the commonwealth and admitted to practice law before the
federal court.
A.
There shall be attached to the office four Associate City Solicitors and
one Assistant City Solicitor, who shall be attorneys admitted to practice
before the courts of the commonwealth and admitted to practice before
the federal court and who shall, under the direction of the City Solicitor,
assist the City Solicitor in the performance of official duties.
B.
There shall be assigned to the office additional support staff as may be,
from time to time, funded through the appropriation or budget process
in any given fiscal year.
C.
§ 39-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 46-3
1:118
§ 46-3. Assignment of Associate City Solicitors.
§ 46-4. General departmental duties.
The City Solicitor shall perform all the duties required by the General Laws
of Massachusetts, the City Charter and the ordinances of the City. The
City Solicitor shall be legal advisor to the Mayor, City Council, boards,
commissions and department heads. The City Solicitor shall defend the City
in all legal actions and prosecute actions on behalf of the City. The Law
Department shall prepare and approve legal documents, give opinions on
legal points and represent the City as required before the courts, state
departments and legislative committees. The City Solicitor shall, by statute,
represent the City Assessors in proceedings before the Appellate Tax Board.
In all cases in which the attendance upon business of the City shall be
required out of the City, the members of the Law Department shall be
entitled to receive their reasonable expenses therefore in addition to their
salary.
§ 46-5. Legal opinions.
The City Solicitor shall, when requested, furnish the Mayor and other
officers and boards of the City, who may need the same in the discharge of
official duty, a legal opinion upon any subject touching the duties of their
respective offices, but the City Solicitor shall not be required to give a
written opinion unless the question upon which the opinion is desired be
submitted in writing.
§ 46-6. Investigation of claims.
The Chief of Police shall, subject to the approval of the City Solicitor,
designate a police officer who shall, as a part of official duties, investigate
all claims against the City, under the directions of the City Solicitor.
§ 46-7. Written notice of claim required.
Every officer in charge of a department shall make a report, in writing, to
the Law Department whenever any transaction, act or negligence in any
way involving the Department in his charge occurs which results in or may
occasion the bringing of a claim by or against the City.
The City Solicitor shall assign to the fourth Associate City Solicitor,
which appointment is contingent upon being nominated by the Mayor
and confirmed by the majority of the City Council, the responsibility
to assist the City Council, and perform additional duties as may be
assigned by the City Solicitor.
A.
The City Solicitor shall assign the Assistant and Associate City
Solicitors in a manner consistent with the volume of legal business
and in a manner most efficient to the operation of this Department;
however, one Associate City Solicitor shall be named the Chief of
Litigation.
B.
§ 46-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:119
§ 46-8. Employ of special counsel.
The City Solicitor may, with the consent of the Mayor and the City Council,
employ special counsel in important cases wherein he or she feels such
special counsel would be advantageous to the City's interests. He or she
may likewise employ expert assistance and stenographic services when
such are necessary to the successful prosecution of City legal affairs.
§ 46-9. Disposition of taxable costs received by Solicitor.
All taxable costs which may be received by the Law Department from
the adverse party in any suit wherein the City or any of its boards or
departments is a party shall be paid by the City Solicitor to the City
Treasurer within 30 days after payment to him or her.
§ 46-10. Keeping of proceedings, actions, suits and opinions.
The City Solicitor shall keep a properly indexed record of all proceedings,
actions or suits in which the City is a party or which affect, directly or
indirectly, any interest of the City or any of its departments, and he or she
shall keep a properly indexed record of all opinions rendered by the Law
Department during that City Solicitor's term of office and shall surrender to
any successor in office all such reports.
§ 46-11. Annual report of court judgments.
The City Solicitor shall transmit to the Mayor and City Council, annually in
the month of January, a report of the business done by the Law Department
during the preceding year.
§ 46-12. Determination of validity of signatures.
The Law Department shall determine the validity of the signature of a
property owner on all written protests filed against a zone change petition
as required in MGL c. 40A, § 70.
§ 46-13. Out-of-court settlements.
All out-of-court settlements shall be made subject to the approval of the
appropriating body. Nothing in this chapter shall interfere with the
authority of a duly authorized and funded Claims and Accounts Committee
of the City Council.
Chapter 48
LIBRARY TRUST ACCOUNT
§ 46-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 48-1
1:120
§ 48-1. Establishment.
The Board of Library Trustees, under authority granted to it by Section 43
of the Charter of the City of Chicopee, shall establish within the Treasurer's
office of the City of Chicopee a special trust account.
§ 48-2. Administration.
Said account, as established by § 48-1 of this chapter, shall be administered
by the Board of Library Trustees. Any gifts or bequests shall be deposited
within said account and shall be administered in accordance with the
provisions of said gifts or bequests. Any gifts or bequests without specific
provisions thereto shall be deposited within said account and may only be
used for such purposes as will improve the services of the library for the
benefit of the public.
Chapter 53
MAINTENANCE GARAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80.
§ 53-1. Establishment; duties.
There is hereby established the Central Maintenance Garage, under the
direction of the Supervisor of Motor Equipment Repairs, which will affect
repairs to and maintenance of all City-owned vehicles and equipment,
except Fire Department vehicles and equipment; however, said Central
Maintenance Garage will effect repairs to Fire Department vehicles and
equipment in emergency situations.
§ 53-2. Personnel.
The Central Maintenance Garage shall consist of the following personnel:
One Supervisor of Motor Equipment Repairs who shall, under the
direction of the Mayor, be the head and shall have general supervision
of the Central Maintenance Garage.
A.
One Senior Accounts Clerk who shall perform such duties as required
by the Supervisor of Motor Equipment Repairs, and whenever, by
reason of absence, illness or other cause, the Supervisor of Motor
Equipment Repairs is unable to perform the duties of his office, the
Senior Accounts Clerk shall perform such duties.
B.
C. Seven or more motor equipment repairmen.
D. One or more garagemen/motor equipment operators.
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-2
1:121
§ 53-3. Status of existing personnel.
All persons presently holding positions as described in this chapter, under
the supervision of the Highway Superintendent, shall retain their said
positions with no change in status, seniority or classified service.
§ 53-4. Appointments.
All appointments to positions in the Central Maintenance Garage shall be
made by the Mayor, subject to the provisions of civil service.14
Chapter 56
MAYOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 26. Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
§ 56-1. Acting Mayor at time of disability or absence.
Whenever, by reason of sickness or other causes, the Mayor shall be
disabled or absent from performing the duties of his office, the President of
the City Council or, in his/her absence or disability, the City Treasurer or,
in his/her absence or disability, the City Collector or, in his/her absence or
disability the City Clerk shall, under the style of Acting Mayor, perform the
duties of Mayor. Such officer shall, during the continuance of such disability
or absence, have all the rights and powers of the Mayor, except that he/she
shall not when so acting have the power of removal.
Chapter 58
MEETINGS, NOTICES OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections — See Ch. 26.
E. One or more garagemen.
Such other permanent and temporary employees or laborers as shall
from time to time be deemed necessary.
F.
14.Editor's Note: Former § 53-5, Location, which immediately followed, was repealed
3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-11.
§ 53-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 58-1
1:122
§ 58-1. Calling of meetings.
All meetings of qualified voters of the City for the purpose of voting at
elections shall be called in accordance with MGL c. 54, §§ 63 and 64.
§ 58-2. Forms of notice. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The form of notice to be given by the City Clerk shall be substantially
as follows:
CITY OF CHICOPEE
The qualified voters of the City of Chicopee are hereby notified to
meet at their several polling places within the wards or voting
precincts in which they severally reside, said polling places being
located as follows, namely:
on __________ the ________ day of ________________ A.D.
__________________ at __________________ o'clock in the forenoon, at
which time the polls shall be open, then and there to bring in their
ballots for _______________________________.
All of the foregoing are to be voted for on one ballot.
The polls will be closed at _________ o'clock in the afternoon.
By order of the City Council, passed on the _______ day of _________ in
the year of Our Lord one thousand __________________.
CITY CLERK
A.
Notices for general meetings of the voters of the city to be held as
provided in Section 8 of the City Charter shall be in substantially the
following form:
CITY OF CHICOPEE
Notice is hereby given that a general meeting of the qualified voters
of the City of Chicopee will be held on the ________ day of ___________
A.D. _________________ at __________ o'clock in the ________________ noon,
at which time and place the following articles of business will be
considered, namely: _______.
By order of the City Council, passed on the ________ day of __________ in
the year of Our Lord one thousand ___________________.
CITY CLERK
B.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:123
Chapter 61
MESSENGER, CITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80.
§ 61-1. Service of notices, summons and precepts. [Amended
9-1-2009]
The City Messenger shall serve all notifications, summons and precepts,
the service of which is not otherwise provided for, issued by the Mayor, the
City Clerk, the President of the City Council, the City Council or by any
committee of the same and make due return of such service; shall notify
all members of committees of meetings thereof when requested by the City
Clerk or the Clerk or Chairman of any committee; and shall deliver all
notifications to officers of the City, elected or appointed, except as otherwise
provided.
§ 61-2. Other responsibilities. [Amended 9-4-1979]
The City Messenger shall:
§ 61-3. Assistants.
The Assistant City Messenger and all other employees having the care and
maintenance of the City Hall buildings and grounds shall be responsible to
the City Messenger, under the direction of the Mayor.
§ 61-4. Retention of certain fees.
The City Messenger shall in no case receive any fee, other than his salary,
for his services in or about the City buildings, except for services at balls,
Be custodian of the City Hall and Annex, the public safety complex, the
Little Red School House, the library and fire station, the public building
on Britton Street and the C&ROP building on Center Street. The City
Messenger shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be custodian of all
City buildings listed above. He shall be responsible for the maintenance
of the buildings and grounds and have charge of all employees and
records pertaining to the same.
A.
Prepare rooms selected for polling places and have equipment available
in due time for the proper conduct of elections.
B.
Attend upon the sessions of the City Council and, under the direction of
the committee or officers, provide such things as may be necessary for
their accommodation or the accommodation of the committees while in
session. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
§ 58-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 61-4
1:124
fairs or festivals, rendered after the hour of 9:00 p.m. and any such fees
received by him may be retained by him as his own property.
§ 61-5. Subdivision and assignment of parking spaces. [Amended
10-16-199015]
The City Messenger is directed to subdivide, line and number the municipal
parking lot adjoining the City Hall Annex into 26 parking spaces, two
designated for handicapped parking. The remaining parking spaces shall be
assigned by the City Messenger for the use of municipal departments.
Chapter 64
(RESERVED)
Chapter 67
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Council — See Ch. 3.
Assessors — See Ch. 5.
City Clerk — See Ch. 11.
Collector — See Ch. 13.
Department of Human Resources
Administration — See Ch. 22.
Elections — See Ch. 26.
Engineer — See Ch. 28.
Mayor — See Ch. 56.
City Messenger — See Ch. 61.
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 10-23-1990, which veto was
overridden 11-8-1990.
§ 61-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:125

ARTICLE I
Duties of Officers and Boards
[Adopted as Ch. 3 of the 1976 Code]
§ 67-1. Required annual report; Municipal Register to be published.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
Every officer or board having charge of any department of the City's affairs
shall, not later than October 1 after the close of the preceding financial year,
prepare a report, in writing, of the work of the department during the year
and deliver same to the City Clerk, who shall submit it to the Mayor and City
Council for approval. After said reports are approved by the Mayor and City
Council, they shall be published by the City Clerk in convenient pamphlet
form to be called the "Municipal Register," for free distribution among the
voters of the City. The City Clerk shall also publish in the register such other
matters of public interest relative to the affairs of the City as the Mayor
or City Council may direct or the Charter and ordinances of the City may
require.
§ 67-2. Copies of minutes to be forwarded to Councilors. [Amended
9-1-2009]
All boards and commissions of the City of Chicopee are required to forward
copies of their meeting minutes to all members of the City Council within
six weeks after any meeting.
§ 67-3. Determination of compensation. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Except as otherwise provided by law, the rate of compensation of all
subordinates and employees in all departments shall be determined from
time to time by the City Council.
§ 67-4. Enforcement of statutes and regulations.
Every officer and board in charge of a department shall, to the best of his
ability, cause all statutes, regulations and orders relating to the duties of his
department to be observed and enforced and shall prevent, if possible, the
assignment of wages by person employed by him for the City.
§ 67-5. Required record books and inventories.
Every officer and board in charge of a department shall keep a record of the
acts and doings of the department in books kept specially for that purpose
and shall include therein a memorandum of all contracts made by him and
all changes and alterations made in contracts or specifications for work and
materials furnished for his department and also an inventory to be made at
the beginning of each financial year of the property belonging or used by
the department.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-6
1:127
§ 67-6. Authority to sell surplus City equipment. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Every officer and board in charge of a department may, by a vote of the
City Property Committee and the City Council and with the approval of
the Mayor, sell any surplus City equipment or property or any unnecessary
material not required by such department after advertising the same in the
paper of local distribution at least once a week for two successive weeks.
§ 67-7. Conditions placed on certain licenses and permits.
§ 67-8. Payment of fees into City treasury.
Every officer receiving a salary from the City, for whose services as such
officer any fees, charges or commissions are allowed by law, shall, unless
otherwise specially provided, pay all such fees, charges and commissions
received by him into the City treasury to become the property of the City.
§ 67-9. Conduct; conflicts of interest.
The provisions of the Massachusetts Conflict of Interest Statute shall prevail
in matters pertaining to the conduct of officers, boards and employees. No
officer, board or employee of the City of Chicopee shall accept, directly
or indirectly, from any person, firm, corporation or organization to which
any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded any rebate, gift or
anything of value whatsoever, except when it is given for the use or benefit
of the City of Chicopee.
§ 67-10. Residence phones not to be charged to City accounts.
Department heads or employees are prohibited from charging residence
telephones to City accounts.
Every officer or board in charge of a department issuing a license
or permit shall insert therein a condition that the person accepting
the same shall conform to all statutes and ordinances and also to the
specifications in the license or permit; that the license or permit may be
revoked at any time by the authority issuing it; that the violation of any
of its specifications shall work an immediate revocation of the license
or permit and that such person shall indemnify and save harmless the
City from any damage it may sustain or be required to pay by reason
of the doing of the work licensed or permitted or by reason of any act
or neglect of himself or of any one of his employees relating to such
work or by reason of any violation of any specifications, provided that
nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the insertion of
any other conditions and limitations deemed advisable by the authority
issuing such license or permit.
A.
The City Clerk shall notify any license holder of the upcoming
expiration of his license or permit at least 30 days prior to expiration.
Such notification of the upcoming expiration shall be given in writing.
B.
§ 67-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 67-11
1:128
§ 67-11. Delivery of documents to Mayor for signature. [Added
9-5-1978; amended 9-1-2009]
The City Clerk shall deliver to the Mayor all orders, ordinances and
resolutions for his signature within three working days after all regular City
Council meetings.
§ 67-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-11
1:129

ARTICLE II
Office Hours
[Adopted as Ch. 4 of the 1976 Code]
§ 67-12. Establishment.
The offices of all of the municipal departments, excepting the Police and
Fire Departments, shall remain open to the public for the transaction of
business every day from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excepting on Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays and after 12:00 noon on Good Friday.
§ 67-13. Time of services rendered; lunch hour.
The services of persons employed in the respective offices of the municipal
departments shall be performed during the period of time that such offices
are required to remain open, except that each person shall be given one
hour off for lunch, so arranged that each such office shall remain open to
the public for the transaction of business during the hours provided for by
the within chapter.
§ 67-14. Designation of additional legal holidays by Mayor.
The Mayor may, by a proclamation in writing filed with the City Clerk,
designate such other days or parts of days as legal holidays for the purposes
of the within chapter as he may deem necessary for the social or civic wellbeing
of the citizens.
§ 67-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-14
1:131

ARTICLE III
Strikebreakers
[Adopted as Sec. 51/I/4 of the 1976 Code]
§ 67-15. Hiring prohibited.
No industry, corporation or business shall make employment available to
people for the purpose of strikebreaking while said industry, corporation or
business finds itself involved in a labor dispute or strike.
§ 67-16. Activity as strikebreaker prohibited.
No person, either resident male or female or outside resident or out-of-state
resident, will partake in the profession of strikebreaking or participate in
the act of such during any labor dispute within the limits of the City of
Chicopee and its abounding area.
§ 67-17. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article will be punishable by a fine of not less than $500 and
not more than $1,000 or imprisonment of one year, or both.
§ 67-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-17
1:133

ARTICLE IV
Civil Service Positions
[Adopted 5-18-1976; amended in its entirety 9-1-2009]
§ 67-18. Approval required.
All department heads, before submitting any descriptions of a job or
specifications for any job to civil service, first must come before the City
Council for approval.
§ 67-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-18
1:135

ARTICLE V
Posting of Vacancies
[Adopted 6-29-1977]
§ 67-19. Location.
All appointing authorities shall post any and all existing vacancies in their
department. Future vacancies shall be posted on the bulletin boards at both
entrances to City Hall.
§ 67-20. Removal of posting.
No posting shall be removed until a minimum period of seven days has
elapsed and until such time as the vacancy is filled by a qualified individual.
§ 67-21. Required information.
All such vacancies shall be posted with the following information:
department name, job title, job description, starting salary, permanent or
temporary and also if the job is covered by civil service.
§ 67-22. Nonapplicability.
In the case of attrition where the vacancy will not be filled, this chapter shall
not apply.
§ 67-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-22
1:137
Chapter 69
PAGE TRUST FUND
§ 69-1. Establishment.
The trust fund bequeathed to the City of Chicopee by the last will and
testament of Alice J. Page, late of said Chicopee, shall be called "Irving H.
Page and Alice J. Page Trust Fund" and shall be kept by the City Treasurer
invested in bonds or notes of the City of Chicopee or in securities in which
funds of savings banks may by law be invested.
§ 69-2. Duties of City Treasurer.
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to keep a separate account of said
fund and the income therefrom. He shall pass to the credit of said account
the interest of said bonds and notes as the same become due and shall
disburse the same upon order of the Trustees of the Irving H. Page and Alice
J. Page Trust Fund. The City Treasurer shall act as agent for said Trustees.
§ 69-3. Board of Trustees; membership; terms. [Amended 9-1-2009]
§ 69-4. Duties of Trustees.
The duties of the Trustees of said trust fund shall be to defray the expenses
of deserving boys and girls, graduates of the Chicopee High School, in
accordance with the provisions of said will, being Case No. 51872 and
recorded in Hampden County Probate Court.
§ 69-5. Election of Chairman and Secretary.
The Trustees shall elect a Chairman and Secretary on the first Monday of
June in each year.
Chapter 75
The Board of Trustees of said trust fund shall consist of three members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the City Council,
who shall serve without compensation. The term of office of the
members first appointed shall commence at the date of their
appointment and shall be so arranged as to expire at the end of two,
four and six years from the first Monday of June on the year of their
appointment, the date of expiration to be specified in their respective
commission, and thereafter a member shall be appointed for a term of
six years from the first Monday of June of the year in which the previous
term expires.
A.
All Trustees shall hold office until their respective successors are
appointed and qualified. They may be removed by the Mayor for cause,
said removal to be approved by a two-thirds vote of the City Council .
B.
§ 67-22 CHICOPEE CODE § 69-5
1:138
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Community development — See Ch. 18. Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 69-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:139

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 75-1. Establishment; membership; vacancies; removal of
members.
§ 75-2. Advisory members.
The City Clerk, the City Engineer or the person performing the functions of
the City Engineer, and the Building Inspector shall, ex officio, be advisory
members of the Planning Board.
§ 75-3. Organization; employment of assistants.
The Planning Board shall organize annually in the month of April, by the
election of a Chairman and a Clerk, and the Board may employ experts and
clerical and other assistance and a custodian of its plans and records.
§ 75-4. Quorum.
A quorum for the transaction of business by said Board shall consist of no
fewer than three appointed members.
§ 75-5. Powers and duties. [Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
The Planning Board, as established hereunder, shall have all of the powers
and exercise all of the duties as are provided for in the provisions of MGL
c. 41, §§ 81B and 81Y, both sections inclusive, as amended. The Planning
Board shall also exercise all powers and duties as are provided for in
Chapter 391 of the Acts of 1984.
§ 75-6. Holding of public hearings.
The Planning Board is established in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81A,
to consist of five members and three associates. [Amended 6-3-1986]
A.
In the month of March of each year, the Mayor shall appoint a citizen as
a member of said Board, subject to the confirmation by the City Council,
to hold office for a term of five years from the first Monday of April next.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
Any vacancy in the existing Planning Board or any vacancy occurring
otherwise than by the expiration of a term shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the City
Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
Any member may be removed from office for cause, after a public
hearing held by the Mayor, which removal shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
D.
The public hearings required to be held by the Planning Board under
the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 6, as amended, shall be held within a
A.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-6
1:141
reasonable time after referral to said Planning Board of any proposed
zone change amendment, additions or repeal by the City Council, but in
no event shall such hearings be held later than 60 days from the date
of receipt by the Planning Board of notice of such referral by the City
Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The public hearing required to be held by the Planning Board under the
provisions of § 4 of Chapter 391 of the Acts of 1984 shall be held within
15 days from the date of application of the original license request,
request for transfer from one location to another or application for a
change in the description of the licensed premises. [Added 2-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-14]
B.
§ 75-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 75-6
1:142
ARTICLE II
Department of Planning and Development
§ 75-7. Establishment. [Amended 9-1-2009]
There is hereby established a Department of Planning and Development
to administer governmental and municipal functions and responsibilities in
the field of city planning; to coordinate efforts directed toward the future
development of the City; to assure its continued improvement, consistent
with its physical, social and economic conditions and resources and to
provide necessary information and services to the Mayor, City Council and
Planning Board.
§ 75-8. Composition. [Amended 9-5-1989]
The Department of Planning and Development shall consist of a Director of
Planning and Development and a Development Manager.
§ 75-9. Appointments; terms; removal from office; salaries.
[Amended 9-5-1989]
§ 75-10. Qualifications. [Amended 9-5-1989; 3-19-1991 by Ord. No.
91-20]
Appointments. The Director and the Development Manager shall be
appointed by the Mayor with confirmation by the City Council. All
permanent appointments to the position of Director and the
Development Manager and temporary appointments which exceed 60
days shall require confirmation by the City Council. [Amended
2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-76]
A.
Terms of office. Terms of office shall be for a period of three years for
the above.
B.
The Director and the Development Manager may be removed for just
cause by the Mayor and two-thirds vote of the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
C.
Salaries. Salaries of the Director and the Development Manager shall
be set by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
D.
The positions of the Director and the Development Manager appointed
pursuant to this chapter shall not be subject to the provisions of civil
service regulations. All other personnel will be subject to the provisions
of MGL c. 31.
E.
The Director of the Department of Planning and Development
appointed pursuant to this chapter shall have a minimum of a master's
degree in planning, urban design, geography, landscape architecture
or a related field, with at least three years' experience in municipal
planning, private or public.
A.
§ 75-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:143
§ 75-11. Duties of Planning Director. [Amended 9-5-1989]
The Planning Director shall, with the assistance of appropriate staff:
The Development Manager should possess a bachelor's degree in urban
or regional planning or a related field and at least three years of
appropriate experience. A master's degree in urban or regional
planning or related field may be substituted for three years' experience.
B.
Any Assistant Director or Associate Planner appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall have a minimum of a bachelor's degree in urban planning
or a related field. He should have at least one year's experience in the
field of urban planning or a related field and should be able to write and
speak effectively. A master's degree in planning may be substituted for
one year's experience.
C.
Work under broad policies, determined by the Mayor, City Council and
Planning Board. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Supervise staff and coordinate projects, including those assigned to
consultants.
B.
Prepare plans and recommendations for submission to the Mayor, City
Council and the Planning Board. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
Develop and oversee the implementation of overall comprehensive
community plans consisting of various individual coordinated plans:
For the use of land for residential, commercial, industrial,
recreational and other purposes.
(1)
(2) For controlling shifts of population.
For situating public and private ways, bridges, parks, public
buildings, public utilities, public and private housing projects, slum
clearance and urban redevelopment projects, garages and parking
facilities.
(3)
For affording further facilities for the housing, transportation,
employment, health, safety and general welfare of the population.
(4)
D.
Act as technical advisor to the Mayor, City Council, Planning Board
and other City agencies or officials on municipal planning matters.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
E.
Keep our City Master Plan up-to-date and develop capital improvement
programs.
F.
Administer the Subdivision Control Law, process preliminary and
definitive plans and coordinate plans submitted for approval of the
Planning Board.
G.
§ 75-10 CHICOPEE CODE § 75-11
1:144
§ 75-12. Additional duties of Planning Director. [Amended
9-5-1989; amended 9-1-2009]
The Planning Director shall perform such other duties related to the
function, duties and authorities set forth herein, as may be prescribed by
the Mayor, City Council or Planning Board or as may be set forth in any
applicable state or local laws and ordinances.
§ 75-12.1. Responsibilities and duties of Development Manager.
[Added 9-5-1989]
Prepare recommendations for changes in zoning bylaws and the
Planning Board's rules and regulations governing the development of
land.
H.
Represent the Planning Board on City planning matters, attend public
meetings and address civic organizations, confer with agencies
requesting information regarding City planning and trends in the
development and growth of the City.
I.
Coordinate the programs and activities of the Urban Renewal Authority
Housing Authority and federal and state agencies in order to formulate
a comprehensive community development program.
J.
Coordinate federal programs within the City, including making
applications for new projects or programs and assisting various
agencies to make applications to either the state or federal
governments.
K.
Keep abreast of new and changing state and federal legislation which
could affect the City to assure that the Mayor and City Council are
aware of impending changes, to include making oral and verbal reports
to the Mayor and City Council on significant issues. [Amended
9-1-2009]
L.
Responsibilities.
The Development Manager will report directly to the Director of
Planning and Development and administer, coordinate, monitor
and evaluate plans and programs for residential, commercial and
industrial development projects within the City of Chicopee as part
of the City's existing project review.
(1)
The Development Manager will work with municipal line agencies
to determine the impact of proposed projects on the land,
neighborhood, economy and municipal services.
(2)
The Development Manager will further coordinate the review of
projects with Commissions and Boards such as the Planning Board,
City Council, Conservation Commission and Historic Commission
and other interested groups, in addition to federal, state and
(3)
A.
§ 75-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-12.1
1:145
regional agencies and private consultants and developers.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
The duties of the Development Manager are:
Developing and implementing City plans for land use and facilities
development.
(1)
To analyze and interpret statistical indicators (e.g., United States
census, etc.) describing the economic, physical and social factors
affecting land use and development activity.
(2)
To confer with the Mayor, municipal department, private
developers, regional and state agencies, consultants, citizen
groups and local boards (e.g., the City Council, Planning Board and
Board of Appeals) on issues affecting land use and development
activity. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(3)
To ensure that project review is effective and efficient by ensuring
coordination among City agencies/activities and evaluating the
potential and actual effects of growth.
(4)
To prepare recommendations to the Mayor and City Council for
changes in governmental controls affecting land use, public
utilities, community facilities, housing, transportation and
environmental quality. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(5)
To offer technical advice to the Mayor, Planning Board and City
Council on issues affecting the City's growth and development.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(6)
B.
§ 75-12.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 75-12.1
1:146
ARTICLE III
Lower Pioneer Valley Regional Planning District
§ 75-13. Membership authorized. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40B and by this, the vote of its City
Council, the City of Chicopee shall hereafter be a member of the Lower
Pioneer Valley Regional Planning District.
§ 75-14. Annual cost.
The annual cost to the City of Chicopee shall be an apportioned cost
determined by the District Planning Commission on a per capita basis
provided in MGL c. 40B, § 7, or an amount not to exceed $0.12 per capita
according to the most recent federal decennial census of population.
§ 75-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-14
1:147
Chapter 77
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Emergency
Management — See Ch. 9.
Traffic Commission — See Ch. 16, Art. IX.
Public Safety Committee — See Ch. 16, Art.
XX.
§ 77-1. Personnel. [Amended 6-17-1981]
§ 77-2. Eligibility for service.
No person shall be eligible to appointment in this Department unless he
is a citizen of the United States, a resident of the City of Chicopee for at
least two years, able to read and write in the English language, has not
been convicted of crime within five years and is of good moral character and
habits.
§ 77-3. Bonding of Chief; responsibilities. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Chief of Police shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give
a bond to the City in such form as the City Solicitor shall approve in the
sum of $2,000, with sureties to be approved by the Committee on Finance,
for the faithful performance of the duties of his office, which bond shall
be filed with and remain in the custody of the City Treasurer. He shall be
responsible for the discipline and efficiency of his Department and shall
have entire control of the patrolmen, chauffeurs and all reserve and special
policemen when in the service of the City. He shall keep an account of all
duties performed and of all absences from duty with a memorandum of the
cause thereof and shall, on the last day of each month and at other times
when specially required, make a written report to the Mayor of the doings of
his department and of all misconduct, neglect of duty or want of efficiency
in any member of the force. He shall devote all his time to the duties of
his office and shall exert himself to the best of his ability to preserve the
The Police Department of the City of Chicopee shall consist of one
Chief, five Captains, seven Lieutenants, 14 Sergeants, not more than
120 patrolmen, such number of reserve patrolmen as prescribed by
Chapter 314 of the Acts of 1986 (M.G.L. c. 147, §§ 11 and 12), and
special officers as may from time to time be appointed. [Amended
4-4-1989; 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-12; 11-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-83A; 4-15-2008 by Ord. No. 08-04; 2-15-2011 by Ord. No.
11-08; 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-9; 3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-15;
12-1-2015 by Ord. No. 15-61; 12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-82]
A.
There shall be included two canine units within the Police Department.
[Added 9-7-1982]
B.
§ 75-14 CHICOPEE CODE § 77-3
1:148
peace, order and cleanliness of the City and to see that the special laws and
ordinances of the City and the orders of the Mayor and City Council are
observed and obeyed. On the last day of each week, he shall make up the
weekly payroll of the members of the department and certify the same to
the City Auditor. At the end of the financial year, he shall make a written
report of the organization, condition and doings of his Department for the
preceding year and submit the same to the Mayor.
§ 77-3.1. Compensation of Police Chief. [Added 9-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-6616]
§ 77-4. Location of Chief's office; responsibilities to District Court.
The Chief of Police shall have the office at the police station in the City Hall
and shall be at his office at reasonable hours on every day and evening for
the purpose of receiving complaints and, if satisfied that there has been a
willful violation, shall make complaint thereof to the District Court, but this
provision shall not be construed to prevent any person from making such
complaints directly to the Court. He shall attend all sessions of the District
Court and render such services in connection therewith as may be required
by said Court.
§ 77-5. Notice to Mayor of Chief's absence.
The Chief of Police shall notify the Mayor of his intended absence from the
City whenever such absence may continue for a longer period than one day.
§ 77-6. Requirements of patrolmen.
The regular, full-time Fire Chief and the regular, full-time Chief of
Police of the City of Chicopee shall receive an annual base rate of
compensation which shall not be less than two times the highest annual
rate of compensation of a regular, full-time fire fighter or a regular fulltime
police officer or patrolman, as the case may be.
A.
In addition, parity shall be maintained relative to the compensation
rates paid to the Police Chief and the Fire Department Chief for the City
of Chicopee.
B.
The highest annual rate of a regular full-time fire fighter or a regular
full-time police officer or patrolman is to be construed and interpreted
as the "base rate" and shall not include any other additional forms
of compensation, and if, given this definition, the rates of the Fire
Department Chief and the Police Chief would mathematically come
out to different levels of compensation, then the lower rate shall be
adjusted to the higher rate in order to maintain parity between the two
Department heads.
C.
16.Editor's Note: See also § 34-6.1.
§ 77-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6
1:149
§ 77-7. Duties of police officers in case of fire.
All officers of the Police Department shall, in such manner as the Chief
of the Fire Department of the City may direct, aid the Fire Department
in case of a fire by keeping the streets and grounds in the immediate
vicinity thereof clear and by performing such other police service as may be
required so that the members of the Fire Department may not be hindered
or obstructed in the performance of their duties.
§ 77-8. Disability pay.
Any police officer, including the Chief of Police, who may be disabled while
on actual duty shall be entitled to receive full pay for the time he is off duty
in consequence thereof for a period not exceeding two months, the fact of
the disability and the cause thereof being proven to the satisfaction of the
Mayor.
§ 77-9. Appointment and powers of special policemen.
Each patrolman shall acquaint himself as thoroughly as possible with
the business of the Department and hold himself ready at all times to
render police service when needed and to answer the calls and obey
the orders of his superior officers. He shall make daily reports to the
Chief of Police of his doings and of all important facts coming to his
knowledge.
A.
The hours of duty for members of the Police Department shall be based
on an eight-hour day on a four-days-on, two-days-off work schedule.
B.
Whenever any member of the Police Department performs authorized
police duties beyond his or her normal eight-hour day or beyond his or
her regular work schedule, he or she shall be paid overtime at 1 1/2
times the regular hourly rate as computed from the salary ordinances.
C.
All overtime work shall be assigned by the Chief of Police or by those
designated by him.
D.
The Mayor may, from time to time, appoint such special policemen as
he may consider necessary who shall have all the power of constables
except the service of civil process and who shall serve without pay,
except when assigned the duty by the Chief of Police.
A.
Should the Mayor be of the opinion that an emergency exists which
requires additional protection for the property of any person, firm or
corporation within the City, he may appoint any citizen of the United
States a special policeman, provided that such person so appointed is,
at the time, in the opinion of the Mayor, an employee of said person,
firm or corporation, and the provisions of § 77-2 of this chapter shall
not apply to such appointment. The term of such appointments shall
be during the continuance of the emergency, and the emergency shall
be deemed to continue until the Mayor shall file in the office of the
B.
§ 77-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 77-9
1:150
§ 77-10. Chief to be keeper of the lockup.
The Chief of Police shall be the lockup keeper and, as such, shall receive
into his custody and safely keep all persons arrested for any criminal offense
and cause them to be brought before the next session of the District Court,
unless otherwise lawfully disposed of.
§ 77-11. Furnishing of revolvers.
The City of Chicopee shall furnish the regular police officers with revolvers.
§ 77-12. Compensation. [Amended 9-1-2009]
They shall receive such compensation as the City Council may from time to
time determine.
§ 77-13. Uniforms to be worn in conformance with specifications.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
The regular members of the Police Department shall be required to wear
uniforms to conform to specifications adopted by the Chief of Police, subject
to the approval of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 77-14. Tours of duty; seniority.
The Chief of Police shall establish tours of duty for the regular patrolmen
and shall fix the hours of each tour of duty, which shall be consecutive
hours. Each patrolman shall be permitted to designate the tour of duty upon
City Clerk a certificate setting forth that the emergency under which
said appointments were made no longer exists, and thereupon the term
of office of said special policeman shall cease and terminate. These
last-mentioned special policemen shall have all the power of constables
except the service of civil process, and they shall serve without pay.
Should the Chief of Police at any time see fit to exercise any control
over such special policemen, he may do so, and they shall act under his
orders. For any failure to obey said orders, he may suspend said special
policeman and report the fact of such suspension to the Mayor, and said
special policeman shall not thereafter act until he is reinstated. The
special policeman appointed under this subsection, may be removed by
the Mayor at his discretion at any time. The person, firm or corporation
for the protection of whose property the aforesaid special policemen
are appointed shall give the City a bond in the sum of $1,000 for each
special policeman so appointed, with one or more sureties as in each
instance shall be required by the Mayor and as approved by him. The
condition thereof shall be to save the City of Chicopee harmless from
any and all acts of said special policeman and to pay to any person
injured in his person or property by said special policeman, in the
course of his duty, such damages to which he may be legally entitled.
Said bond may be sued upon by any person, at his own expense, who
has been so injured by any of said special policemen.
§ 77-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-14
1:151
which he prefers to work, and the Chief of Police shall assign patrolmen to
duty upon the duty so designated in the order of their seniority in service as
regular patrolmen. Whenever the tours of duty or the hours fixed therefor
shall be changed or there shall be a vacancy in any tour of duty, each
patrolman in the order of seniority in service shall be entitled to designate
his preference for a tour of duty and be assigned to duty upon such tour
of duty in the order of seniority as a patrolman. "Seniority in service" shall
mean the length of time in service following appointment to the regular and
not the reserve force and when the service of more than one patrolman
begins on the same day, seniority shall be determined in the order of the
badge number issued, the lowest number having priority. A patrolman by
this chapter shall not acquire any right or preference by seniority in service
or otherwise to select the beat which he shall patrol or the kind of duty
he shall perform, all of which shall remain under the control of the Chief
of Police. Except as to the establishment of seniority rights in assignments
upon a tour of duty as provided herein, nothing in this chapter shall repeal
or affect any provision of any other ordinance or any rule or regulation of
the Police Department approved by the Mayor, nor shall this chapter, except
as to such seniority by rights, be construed as limiting or diminishing the
control of the Mayor and Chief of Police over the officers, patrolmen or
other persons engaged in the service of the Police Department.
§ 77-15. Transportation of canine unit. [Added 9-7-1982]
The canine unit shall be transported in properly marked vehicles at all
times.
§ 77-16. Bulletproof vests. [Added 7-7-1987]
§ 77-17. Reserve for Appropriation Account. [Added 3-7-1989;
amended 3-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-7A]
There is hereby established an account to be called "Reserve for
Appropriation - Sale of Abandoned and Confiscated Items." Said account
shall be held in reserve for the Police Department of the City of Chicopee
and shall be used only for the purpose of establishing a Public Safety Work
Program and Crime Watch Prevention Program. Funds held in the Reserve
for Appropriation Account may be utilized only by specific appropriation
thereof, in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53, as amended.
Chapter 80
The City of Chicopee shall provide every member of the Chicopee
Police Force with bulletproof vests/jackets. These vests shall be part of
uniform in the future.
A.
B. These vests shall be worn at the discretion/option of the officer.
Any second-chance vest purchased shall be equal to or better than
Level 2. A second-chance vest shall be maximum coverage.
C.
§ 77-14 CHICOPEE CODE § 77-17
1:152
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood Control Department — See Ch. 37.
Forestry Department — See Ch. 39.
Maintenance garage — See Ch. 53.
City Messenger — See Ch. 61.
Cemeteries — See Ch. 129.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 266.
Water — See Ch. 269.
§ 80-1. Establishment.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law or any
ordinance, there shall be established a Department of Public Works.
§ 80-2. Superintendent of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works shall be supervised by a
Superintendent of Public Works appointed by the Mayor and subject
to confirmation by at least seven members of the City Council. All
appointments to the position of Superintendent of Public Works, both
permanent and temporary appointments which exceed 60 days, shall
require confirmation by the City Council. [Amended 2-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-02; 2-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-77]
A.
B. The Superintendent shall be appointed for a term of five years.
The Superintendent shall be the head and have general supervision of
the Department of Public Works.
C.
The Superintendent shall have all powers and duties prescribed by this
chapter.
D.
The Superintendent may be removed for just cause by the Mayor, with
the approval of seven members of the City Council, after public hearing
held by the Mayor, upon a seven-day notice, in writing, at the residence,
preferably in hand, setting forth the cause and the time and place of
hearing. [Amended 9-1-2009]
E.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall not be a
civil service position.
F.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall be deemed
to be a managerial and confidential employee as defined in MGL c.
150E and shall not be included in a collective bargaining unit or entitled
to coverage under said chapter.
G.
Qualifications shall include an engineering degree, preferably in civil
engineering, with three to five years of management experience. The
Superintendent shall be a registered professional engineer in
H.
§ 77-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-2
1:153
§ 80-3. Functions of Department. [Added 6-17-198617; amended
11-7-1991 by Ord. No. 91-69A, 91-69B, 91-69C and 91-69D;
2-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02-02; 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-54]
§ 80-4. Organization of Divisions. [Added 6-17-1986; amended
2-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02-02]
Massachusetts (civil or related field). [Amended 2-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-02]
The Department of Public Works shall have all the duties,
responsibilities, powers and function vested by general or special law
or any ordinance in any of the following Departments, which are hereby
abolished as separate entities: Engineering, Parks, Flood Control,
Cemeteries, Highway, Sanitation, Wastewater Treatment, Forestry and
Central Maintenance Garage. Recreational programs will not be the
responsibility of the Department of Public Works.
A.
The Department of Public Works shall have the duties, responsibilities,
powers and function of the City of Chicopee Water Department as
vested by the City of Chicopee Water Commission. Such duties shall
include the general supervision of the day-to-day operations of the
City of Chicopee Water Department. The City of Chicopee Water
Commission, however, shall retain sole authority over all contracts, all
purchases, the value of which exceeds $10,000, abatements, disputes,
including, but not limited to, those issues upon which the
Superintendent of Water and the Superintendent of Public Works
cannot agree, all final hiring decisions, promotions, and the setting of
water rates. [Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-70]
B.
The Department of Public Works shall be organized to include the
following Divisions:
Administrative Division: consisting of all managerial, business, and
clerical functions of the office of the Superintendent of Public
Works.
(1)
Public Utilities Division: consisting of all water pollution control
operations and flood control.
(2)
Public Services Division: consisting of all street, sidewalk, and
infrastructure construction and maintenance, integrated solid
waste management operations, including solid waste pickup and
recycling, DPW building maintenance, as well as any forestry
services.
(3)
Engineering Division: consisting of all engineering services
required by the City.
(4)
A.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Sections III through
VIII.
§ 80-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 80-4
1:154
§ 80-5. Powers and duties of Superintendent. [Added 6-17-1986;
amended 2-5-2002 by Ord. No. 02-02]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
Parks and Cemetery Division: consisting of all parks and cemetery
maintenance purposes.
(5)
Water Division: consisting of the general supervision of the day-today
operations of the City of Chicopee Water Department as vested
to the Department of Public Works by the City of Chicopee Water
Commission. [Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-71]
(6)
The Superintendent may arrange the organization of the department
functions, divisions, and groups as shall be necessary to most efficiently
manage the personnel and equipment of the Department.
B.
Have the overall responsibility and shall supervise and direct all
municipal public works projects, excluding those undertaken by the
Electric Light Department.
A.
Supervise, direct and control the construction, alteration, repair and
maintenance of all City parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and public
grounds, along with any structures or facilities on those grounds,
except that all recreational programs and the setting of rules and
regulations for the use of park grounds and apparatus shall not be a
function of the Department of Public Works but rather shall remain
a function of the Parks and Recreation Commission. All powers and
duties previously vested in the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation
relative to parks and cemetery maintenance shall hereby be assumed
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
B.
Supervise, direct and control all construction, alteration, repair and
maintenance of public streets, roads, lanes, squares, sidewalks,
bridges, sewers, storm drains and all appurtenances thereto. All powers
and duties previously vested in the Superintendent of Streets according
to Chapters 16, Art. IX; 230; 243 and 260 of the Code of the City
of Chicopee shall hereby be assumed by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
C.
Have charge of the collection and disposal of all garbage, ashes,
rubbish and other wastes. Wherever Chapter 169 of the Code of the
City of Chicopee refers to "Superintendent," it shall mean
Superintendent of Public Works. Recycling programs mandated under
Chapter 223 of the Code of the City of Chicopee shall be under the
supervision and control of the Superintendent of Public Works.
D.
Supervise and direct the operation and maintenance of all water
pollution control activities, including treatment facilities, pump
stations, sewer collection system, and combined sewer overflow
mitigation, as well as the City's pretreatment program.
E.
§ 80-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:155
§ 80-6. Existing commissions. [Added 6-17-1986; amended 2-5-2002
by Ord. No. 02-02]
It is the intent of this chapter that any and all commissions affected by this
chapter would continue to exist, except that the Flood Control Commission
shall be hereby abolished. In that regard, the Parks and Recreation
Commission and the Commissioners of the Fairview Cemetery, will continue
to function as policy-making bodies and shall retain control and
responsibility for any and all programs previously under their jurisdiction.
These Commissions shall no longer be responsible for the repair,
maintenance or construction of buildings, structures and grounds
previously under their jurisdiction or for the employ of persons responsible
for such repair and maintenance.
Have full charge of the management and operation of the municipal
flood-control system, which shall include supervision, repair and
maintenance of dikes, pumping stations in connection with the dikes
and all other machinery or equipment used in the care and operation of
the dikes along the Connecticut River and the Chicopee River and any
other dikes that are now erected or may be erected in the City.
F.
Be responsible for and in control of all engineering services,
examinations, plans, statements and specifications which may be
needed by any department in the City in the discharge of its duties. The
City Engineer shall continue to be responsible for the duties specified
in Chapter 28 of the Code of the City of Chicopee under the direction of
the Superintendent of Public Works.
G.
Supervise, direct and control all forestry services in the City, which
services shall include the care, preservation and maintenance of all
public shade trees, shrubs and growth in the City, including any
removal, trimming or planting of trees as necessary.
H.
Be responsible for and in control of all Department of Public Works
purchasing, the solicitation of bids, inventory control and overall
personnel management.
I.
Supervise the work of all private contractors working on City property
or pursuant to municipal authority.
J.
Review plans and supervise construction of all municipal public works
projects, including all federally financed and/or state-financed public
works projects.
K.
Supervise, direct and manage all construction, alterations, repair and
maintenance of the water distribution system, including all
appurtenances thereto, owned by the City of Chicopee, all of which
shall be subject to the final approval of the City of Chicopee Water
Commission. [Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-72]
L.
§ 80-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 80-7
1:156
§ 80-7. Transfer of employees. [Added 6-17-1986; amended
9-1-2009]
All persons employed by or under any departments whose functions are
consolidated by this chapter shall, upon the effective date of this chapter,
be transferred to the Department of Public Works without loss of pay
or change in rating, seniority privileges, retirement or pension rights or
any other privileges under any provisions of law, ordinance or contract,
except as a result, if any, of the consolidations which shall be approved
by the Mayor and City Council. Subject to approval of civil service, job
titles may be changed or eliminated based on the recommendations of the
Superintendent upon approval of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 80-8. Department heads. [Added 6-17-1986]
§ 80-9. Succession from prior departments. [Added 6-17-1986]
No contracts, obligations or liabilities in force on the date when this chapter
becomes fully effective shall be affected by its passage. The Department of
Public Works shall in all respects be the lawful successor of all departments
and commissions abolished under §§ 80-3 and 80-6.
Chapter 82
PURCHASING
The incumbent department heads whose functions are consolidated by
this chapter shall, upon the effective date of this chapter, be transferred
to the Department of Public Works and shall be subject to the direction
and control of the Superintendent of Public Works and shall report
to him. Subject to the discretion of the Superintendent, they may be
assigned duties which correspond with their prior positions or they may
be assigned additional duties in order to effectuate this chapter.
A.
Under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, each
department head (i.e., City Engineer, Park Superintendent, Wastewater
Chief Operator) shall be deemed a Deputy Superintendent having
control and authority over the division assigned to him/her. During the
temporary absence or disability of the Superintendent, each Deputy
shall exercise full authority over the division(s) under his/her control.
The Superintendent may, by letter filed with the Mayor, designate a
qualified member of the Department or other City official to perform
administrative duties as required. In the event of the failure of the
Superintendent to make such a designation, the Mayor may so
designate such person to perform the administrative duties of the
Superintendent until his return or his disability shall cease.
B.
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-9
1:157

ARTICLE I
Department of Purchases
[Adopted 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-0118]
§ 82-1. Title.
§ 82-2. Department established; compliance with statutes and
exercise of sound business practices required.
§ 82-3. City Purchasing Agent.
This article is an ordinance establishing a Department of Purchases in
the administrative service of the City of Chicopee, creating the office of
City Purchasing Agent, setting forth the powers and duties of the City
Purchasing Agent, establishing purchasing procedures and prescribing
penalties for the violation of its provisions.
A.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing
Ordinance of the City of Chicopee."
B.
There is hereby established in the administrative service of the City of
Chicopee the Department of Purchases and, in said Department, the
office of City Purchasing Agent.
A.
The City shall comply with MGL Chapter 30B, as it may hereafter be
amended, in the procurement and surplus disposition of those items
to which said law applies, including the acquisition and disposition of
real estate. Procurement and surplus disposition of items not subject
to MGL Chapter 30B shall be undertaken in accordance with the
applicable statutes within which they fall, including MGL c. 30, § 39M,
MGL Chapter 149 and MGL c. 7, §§ 38A 1/2 to 38O.
B.
C. The City shall exercise sound business practices for all purchases.
Duties. The City Purchasing Agent shall be the head and shall have
general supervision of the Department of Purchases. He shall have all
the powers and duties prescribed by this chapter. The City Purchasing
Agent shall be the Chief Procurement Officer for the City as required
by MGL Chapter 30B.
A.
Specifications.
Appointment. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
(1)
Term of office. The term of office shall expire January 1, 1975.
Subsequent terms of office shall be for a period of six years.
(2)
B.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 82, Purchasing, which consisted of
Art. I, Department of Purchases, adopted as Ch. 16 of the 1976 Code, as amended, and
Art. II, Bidding, adopted 9-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-60.
§ 82-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:159
Experience requirements. The Purchasing Agent shall have had,
prior to his appointment, at least five years' experience in
purchasing in a position of major responsibility such as purchasing
agent, assistant purchasing agent, buyer or similar grade with
public or business enterprises which operate on justified
requisitions based on store control with perpetual inventories of
stock on hand. He shall also have had a bachelor's degree from a
four-year accredited college or university, preferably with a major
in business administration, economics, commerce or some field of
business.
(3)
In the absence, inability to serve, removal, resignation or death of
the Purchasing Agent, the Mayor shall designate the person who
shall carry out the duties of the Purchasing Agent until his return
or until his successor shall have been appointed, such appointment
to be for the unexpired term of the Purchasing Agent.
(4)
Bond. The City Purchasing Agent shall furnish bond for the faithful
performance of his duties in a sum to be determined by the Mayor.
(5)
Additional employees.
There shall be established additional employees of the Central
Purchasing Agency as follows:
One senior clerical assistant who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and whose term of office shall be for a period of four
years.
[1]
[2] There may be two additional clerical assistants.
One Assistant Purchasing Agent who shall be appointed by
the Mayor for a term of five years and shall furnish bond
for the faithful performance of his duties in a sum to be
determined by the Mayor. The Assistant Purchasing Agent
shall be under the direct supervision of the Purchasing
Agent. He shall have at least two years' experience in
purchasing with either public or private enterprises.
[3]
(a)
The persons employed in the positions described herein shall
be under the direct supervision of the Purchasing Agent.
(b)
(6)
Powers and duties of Purchasing Agent.
Be responsible for the procurement and disposal of all supplies,
materials, equipment and property for all departments and offices
of the City, including contracts for construction, reconstruction or
alteration of City buildings or property and any services incident
thereto and all laws covered under the Uniform Procurement Act,
MGL c. 30, § 39M, MGL Chapter 30B, MGL c. 7, §§ 38A 1/2 to
38O and MGL Chapter 149. It shall be the responsibility of the
(1)
C.
§ 82-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 82-3
1:160
Purchasing Agent to assure that all procurements subject to these
statutes are conducted in accordance therewith.
Have authority to order or make inventories of the supplies,
materials, equipment and furnishings of any department. Any
department possessing excess or surplus personal property of
any kind shall not sell, exchange, transfer or dispose thereof
without first certifying such personal property as surplus to
the Purchasing Agent; and, thereupon, the Purchasing Agent
shall circularize all departments as to their needs for such
surplus personal property, and if such need is determined, the
Purchasing Agent may order transfer of such property from
one department to another.
(a)
If the value of property to be disposed of is estimated to be
more than $5,000, the Purchasing Department shall advertise
for bids in a daily paper having a general circulation in the
City for at least two consecutive weeks and shall award the
sale of such property to the highest responsible bidder. If it
is in the best interest of the City, the Purchasing Agent may
reject any and all bids. When the value of the property to be
sold is less than $5,000, the Purchasing Agent may, without
advertising, dispose of the property in the best manner, using
sound business practices.
(b)
All disposition of surplus property shall first be subject to a
vote of the City Property Committee prior to the Purchasing
Agent acting thereupon.
(c)
Encouraging competitions. He shall discourage uniform bidding
and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on
all purchases and sales.
(2)
Rules and regulations. He shall establish reasonable regulations
and policies, not inconsistent with the statutes and this article to
carry out the duties of the office.
(3)
Purchasing analysis. He shall keep informed of current
developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions
and new products and secure for the City the benefits of research
done in the field of purchasing by the Massachusetts Office of the
Inspector General.
(4)
Forms. He shall prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find
reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter, provided that
all such forms shall have the approval of the City Auditor prior to
their enforcement.
(5)
Standard nomenclature. He shall prepare and adopt a standard
purchasing nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers.
(6)
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:161
§ 82-4. Purchasing through Department required.
Except as herein provided or as may be specifically authorized by the
Purchasing Agent or as specifically exempt under provisions of the laws of
the commonwealth, it shall be unlawful for any City employee or official
to purchase any supplies or services other than through the Purchasing
Department and in accordance with this chapter.
§ 82-5. Standardization and specification process.
Vendors' catalog file. He shall prepare, adopt and maintain a
vendors' catalog file. Said catalog shall be filed according to
materials and shall contain descriptions of vendors' commodities,
prices and discounts.
(7)
Bulk purchase. He shall explore the possibilities of buying in bulk
so as to take full advantage of discounts.
(8)
Federal tax exemptions. He shall act so as to procure for the City
all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled.
(9)
Cooperation with Auditing Department. He shall cooperate with
the City Auditor so as to secure the maximum efficiency in
budgeting and accounting.
(10)
Disqualification of bidders. He shall have the authority, with the
concurrence of the Mayor, to declare vendors who default on their
quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from
receiving any business from the municipality for a stated period of
time.
(11)
There is hereby established in the administrative service of the City of
Chicopee a standardization and specification process.
A.
Process. In cooperation with the relevant department heads or their
designees, the Purchasing Agent shall establish standards and
specifications for the City of Chicopee.
B.
Duties of Purchasing Agent. It shall be the duty of the Purchasing
Agent:
Classification: to classify all the supplies used by the various
branches of the City government.
(1)
Standardization: to establish as standards the minimum number
of quantity, sizes and varieties of supplies consistent with the
successful operation of the City government.
(2)
Specifications: to assist in the preparation and approve all written
specifications.
(3)
Circulation: to make available to any interested party copies of
such classifications, standardizations and specifications.
(4)
C.
§ 82-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 82-5
1:162
§ 82-6. Conflict of interest.
§ 82-7. Construction contracts.
This section shall apply to all vertical construction projects awarded by the
City of Chicopee.
Effect of establishment. After its establishment, each standard
specification shall, until revised, apply alike in terms and effect to
every future purchase and contract for the supply described in such
specifications; however, the Agent shall have the authority to exempt
any using agency of the City if requested to do so for a valid purpose,
in writing, by the head of the using agency.
D.
Consultation with using agencies. The Agent shall consult with heads
and other officials of the using agencies to determine their precise
requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those standards which
meet the needs of the majority of such agencies.
E.
Nature of specifications. All specifications shall be definite and certain
and shall permit competition; provided, however, that the provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to noncompetitive types and kinds of
supplies.
F.
The provisions of the Conflict of Interest Statute, MGL c. 268A, and
Section 59 of the City Charter of the City of Chicopee shall prevail in
matters pertaining to the conduct of City employees.
A.
Gifts and gratuities. The Purchasing Agent and every officer and
employee of the City are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly
or indirectly, from any person, firm, corporation or organization to
which any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded any
rebate, gift or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the
use or benefit of the City of Chicopee.
B.
The general contractor and all subcontractors under the general
contractor shall make a good faith effort to employ local workers when
qualified local workers are available for work.
A.
The general contractor and all subcontractors under the general
contractor must comply with the obligations established under MGL
c. 149 to pay the appropriate lawful prevailing wage rates to their
employees.
B.
The general contractor and all subcontractors under the general
contractor must maintain appropriate industrial accident insurance
coverage for all the employees on the project in accordance with MGL
c. 152.
C.
The general contractor and all subcontractors under the general
contractor must properly classify employees as employees rather than
independent contractors and treat them accordingly for purposes of
D.
§ 82-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-7
1:163
workers' compensation insurance coverage, unemployment taxes,
social security taxes, and income tax withholding. (See MGL c. 149,
§ 148B, on employee classification.)
Bids submitted by all general contractors and subcontractors whose
total bid exceeds $2,000,000 and all subcontractors whose total filed
sub bid under MGL c. 149, § 44F, exceeds $500,000 shall at the time
of bidding maintain or participate in a bona fide apprentice training
program as defined by MGL c. 23, §§ 11H and 11I for each
apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in their workforce that
is approved by the Division of Apprentice Training of the Department
of Labor and Workforce Development ("Division") and must register
all apprentices with the Division and abide by the apprentice to
journeyman ratio for each trade prescribed therein in the performance
of any work on the project. All general contractors and subcontractors
shall provide a certificate of compliance from the Division as part of
their bid submittal and periodically thereafter as determined by the
City of Chicopee.
E.
The general contractor and all subcontractors under the general
contractor must at the time of bidding certify that all employees to
be employed at the worksite will have successfully completed a course
in construction safety and health approved by the United States
Occupational Safety and Health Administration at the time the
employee begins work. The general contractor and all subcontractors
shall furnish documentation of successful completion at the time the
employee begins work.
F.
The general contractor and all subcontractors under the general
contractor must at the time of bidding and throughout the duration
of the construction contract furnish, at their expense, hospitalization
and medical coverage for all their workers at a level not less than
that available through the Massachusetts Health Care Connector. For
purposes of this hospitalization and medical coverage requirement, a
general contractor or subcontractor may satisfy this requirement by
providing proof acceptable to the City of Chicopee that any or all of
their workers are a covered person under a medical and hospitalization
plan provided by a parent, spouse, partner or otherwise with coverage
at a level not less than that available through the Massachusetts Health
Care Connector.
G.
All general contractor and subcontractors under the general contractor
who are awarded or who otherwise obtain construction contracts with
the City of Chicopee shall comply with all of the above detailed
obligation at the commencement of the contract and throughout full
contract period.
H.
Any general contractor or subcontractor under the general contractor
who fails to comply with the obligation detailed above shall be subject
to any one or more of the following sanctions as determined by the
I.
§ 82-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 82-7
1:164
§ 82-8. Formal contract procedure.
Building Commission and Purchasing Agent with the concurrence of the
Mayor:
(1) Cessation of work on the project until compliance is obtained;
Withholding of payment due under any contract or subcontract
until compliance is obtained;
(2)
(3) Permanent removal from any further work on the project;
Liquidated damages payable to the City of Chicopee in the amount
of 5% of the dollar value of the contract.
(4)
If any provision of this article, or the application of such provision to
any person, entity or circumstances, shall be enjoined or held to be
invalid, the remaining provisions of this section, or the application of
such section to persons or circumstances, other than that which is
enjoined or held invalid shall be not affected thereby.
J.
The City of Chicopee shall conform to state standards in all bidding
processes to conform to state statute MGL c. 30B, §§ 4, 5, 6 and 7,
to allow for procurement contracts up to $25,000 to be made without
the requirement for formal, advertised bidding, but do require three
written quotations from at least three suppliers.
A.
Every contract shall provide that an item equal to that named or
described in said specifications may be furnished. An item shall be
considered equal to the item so named or described if it is at least equal
in quality, durability, appearance, strength and design; it will perform
at least equally the function imposed by the general design for the
work being contracted for or material being purchased; and it conforms
substantially, even with deviations, to the detailed requirements for the
item in said specification.
B.
Bidders' list. The Agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible
prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to
a bidders' list, which the Agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy
of such newspaper notice or such notice as will acquaint them with the
proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitation sent to the vendors
on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar
in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the
invitations are sent.
C.
Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Agent, bid deposits shall
be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders
shall be entitled to return of surety where the Agent has required such.
A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the Agent upon
failure on his part to enter a contract within 30 days after the award.
All such bid deposits or other security shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer.
D.
§ 82-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-8
1:165
Bid opening procedure.
Sealed. Bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Agent and shall
be identified as bids on the envelope.
(1)
Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notices.
(2)
Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for
public inspection.
(3)
E.
Rejection of bids.
The Agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all
bids or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services
included in the proposed contract when the public interest will be
served thereby.
(1)
Bidders in default to City. The Purchasing Agent, with the
concurrence of the Mayor, may not accept the bid of a contractor
who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other moneys
due the City.
(2)
F.
Award of contract.
Authority of Purchasing Agent. The Agent shall have the authority
to award contracts within the purview of this chapter.
(1)
Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible
bidder, in addition to price, the Purchasing Agent shall consider:
The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.
(a)
Whether the bidder can perform the service required and
provide the service promptly or within the time specified,
without delay or interference.
(b)
The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
(c)
(d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service.
(e)
The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service.
(f)
The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
(g)
The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract.
(h)
(2)
G.
§ 82-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 82-8
1:166
§ 82-9. Cooperative purchasing.
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to join other units of
government (federal, state, county, municipal and municipal subdivisions,
including such quasi-municipal agencies as water districts, sewer districts,
etc.) in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the City
would be served thereby and such action is in accordance with and pursuant
to law.
§ 82-10. Other duties of Agent.
The Purchasing Agent shall perform such other duties related to the
functions, duties and authorities set forth herein as may be prescribed by
the Mayor or any applicable state or local laws and ordinances.
§ 82-11. Annual report.
The City Purchasing Agent shall submit to the Mayor and the City Council
an annual report on the work of his office in carrying out the provisions of
this article.
(i) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to
the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reason for
placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the Purchasing
Agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction.
(3)
Tie bids.
Local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the
contract shall be awarded to a local bidder.
(a)
Outside vendors. Where Subsection G(4)(a) is not in effect, the
Purchasing Agent shall award the contract to one of the tie
bidders by drawing lots in public.
(b)
(4)
Performance bonds. The Purchasing Agent shall recommend to the
Mayor the requirement for a performance bond, in accordance with
the provisions of the City Charter of the City of Chicopee.
(5)
Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
H.
§ 82-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-11
1:167
Chapter 87
SEAL AND FLAG
§ 87-1. Description of Seal.
The following shall be the device of the Seal of the City of Chicopee: a
shield argent upon a field azure, with olive branch fruited proper, and motto
"Industriae variae," all within a circle bearing the top inscription "City of
Chicopee" and at the bottom the inscription "Town 1848: City 1890."
§ 87-2. Custody of Seal. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Seal shall remain in the custody of the City Clerk and be affixed by
him to such deeds, obligations and documents as may be required by law,
ordinance or vote of the City Council.
§ 87-3. Description of flag.
The City shall adopt and hereby does adopt a City flag, in detail as follows:
Said flag shall have a white field; in the center of said white field on both
the front and reverse thereof shall be a silver shield argent upon a field
of azure, with olive branch fruited proper, a white ribbon across the shield
upon which shall appear the words in gold "Industriae variae," all within a
circle bearing at the top the inscription in gold "City of Chicopee" and at the
bottom the inscription in gold "Town 1848: City 1890."
Chapter 89
SEALER OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 89-1. Salary; accounting of fees. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The Sealer of Weights and Measures, appointed according to law, shall
receive such salary as may be fixed in amount and time of payment by the
City Council, which shall be payment in full for all services rendered by him
in the performance of his official duties. He shall account for and pay to the
City Collector at the end of each month all adjusting and sealing, plumbing
and building fees received by him by virtue of his office and at the same
time shall render to said Collector a written statement thereof in detail. Said
position may be less than full-time. If less than full-time, the position shall
require five hours' work per day.
§ 89-2. Deputy Sealer's compensation and accounting of fees.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
The Deputy Sealer of Weights and Measures, appointed according to law,
shall receive such salary as may be fixed in an amount and time of payment
by the City Council, which shall be payment in full for all services rendered
by him in the performance of his official duties. He shall account for and pay
§ 82-11 CHICOPEE CODE § 89-2
1:168
over to the City Collector at the end of each month all adjusting and sealing,
plumbing and building fees received by him by virtue of his office and at
the same time shall render to said Collector a written statement thereof in
detail. Said position may be less than full-time. If less than full-time, the
position shall require five hours' work per day.
§ 89-3. Duties.
In accordance with state laws, regulations and municipal ordinances, the
Sealer of Weights and Measures:
Supervises and/or participates in adjusting, sealing, testing and
condemning any weighing or measuring devices involved with public
sale such as commercial scales; liquid and dry capacity measures;
linear, area, fabric and cordage measuring devices; and commercial
meters.
A.
B. Inspects prepacked food and merchandise and its labels.
C. Calibrates vehicle tank trucks.
Checks vendors for licenses and issues transient vendor, hawker and
peddler licenses.
D.
E. Collects and accounts for sealing fees.
Investigates complaints of short weights, measures and counts and
prepares evidence of such for courts.
F.
Seizes unsealed weighting or measuring devices or those not
conforming to legal requirements.
G.
Plans, directs, supervises, lends assistance to and reviews work of
Deputies.
H.
The Sealer shall also be responsible for the duties required under either
Subsection I(1) or (2) below, but not both.
The Sealer inspects buildings under the provisions of the General
Laws; enforces the provisions of the Building Code and local zoning
laws; examines or approves plans for new buildings and the repair,
alteration and safety conditions of existing buildings; inspects
egress facilities of buildings; may see that elevators are inspected;
performs supervision over lower-grade personnel and related
administrative duties; maintains records of permits granted and
inspections; and coordinates all activities in the area with the
Building Commissioner.
(1)
The Sealer inspects and tests new and existing plumbing systems
and water-heating systems for conformance with laws; inspects
and tests water-circulation, piping, fixtures, equipment, air
conditioning and water-storage systems; examines plans for
plumbing systems and advises plumbers and builders; issues
(2)
I.
§ 89-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-3
1:169
§ 89-4. Duties of Deputy Sealer.
Under supervision of the Sealer or Inspector of Weights and Measures, the
Deputy Sealer:
permits for installation, alteration, repair and connecting plumbing
to sewers; investigates complaints of violations, issues orders for
corrections and keeps necessary records and coordinates all
activities in the area with the Plumbing Inspector.
Tests, adjusts, seals or condemns computing scales, liquid and dry
capacity measures, linear and area measuring devices, taximeters,
rental car speedometers, cordage and fabric measuring devices, gas
and oil meters, pumps and trucks.
A.
B. Inspects prepackaged goods and their labels for correctness.
C. Reweighs commodities in transit to determine short weight.
D. Collects fees for sealing, weighing and measuring devices.
Investigates complaints of short weight and gathers evidence of such
for courts.
E.
Checks hawkers, transient vendors and peddlers for their licenses and
inspects their measuring and weighing devices.
F.
Reports in writing and orally to the Sealer or Inspector of Weights and
Measures of inspections made, conditions found, devices sealed and
fees collected.
G.
The Deputy Sealer shall also be responsible for the duties required
under either Subsection H(1) or (2) below, but not both:
The Deputy Sealer inspects buildings under the provisions of the
Building Code and local zoning laws; examines or approves plans
for new buildings and the repair, alteration and safety conditions
of existing buildings; inspects egress facilities of buildings; may
see that elevators are inspected; performs supervision over lowergrade
personnel and related administrative duties; maintains
records of permits granted and inspections; and coordinates all
activities in the area with the Building Commissioner.
(1)
The Deputy Sealer inspects and tests new and existing plumbing
systems and water-heating systems for conformance with laws;
inspects and tests water-circulation, piping, fixtures, equipment,
air-conditioning and water-storage systems; examines plans for
plumbing systems and advises plumbers and builders; issues
permits for installation, alteration, repair and connecting plumbing
to sewers; investigates complaints of violations, issues orders for
corrections and keeps necessary records; and coordinates all
activities in the area with the Plumbing Inspector.
(2)
H.
§ 89-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 89-5
1:170
§ 89-5. Qualifications.
Chapter 95
VEHICLES, CITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Maintenance garage — See Ch. 53. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
For those duties relating to the inspection of buildings, the Inspector
shall have at least five years of experience in the supervision of building
construction or design or, in the alternative, a four-year undergraduate
degree in a field related to building construction or design. In addition,
such persons shall have had general knowledge of the accepted
requirements for building construction, fire prevention, light,
ventilation and safe egress; as well as a general knowledge of other
equipment and materials essential for safety, comfort and convenience
of the occupants of a building or structures; plus whatever other
requirements of experience and knowledge that are deemed necessary
by the City of Chicopee.
A.
For those duties relating to plumbing, the Inspector shall have at
least five years of experience in the inspection of plumbing or be a
licensed plumber; plus whatever other requirements of experience and
knowledge that are deemed necessary by the City of Chicopee.
B.
§ 89-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-5
1:171

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Ch. 8 of the 1976 Code]
§ 95-1. Marking of vehicles.
§ 95-2. Purchasing specifications.
The Purchasing Agent shall not advertise for bids any motor vehicle whose
specifications do not conform to § 95-1 of this article.
§ 95-3. Duty of Central Maintenance Garage.
The Central Maintenance Garage shall ensure that all motor vehicles of the
City of Chicopee conform to § 95-1 of this article.
All motor vehicles owned and operated by the City of Chicopee shall be
painted and marked as follows:
Color: federal highway safety yellow or chrome yellow or equal,
except that the Superintendent of Schools, the Superintendent
of the Water Department, the Superintendent of Parks and
Recreation, the Supervisor of Motor Equipment, the City Engineer,
the Assessor, the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works, the Building Commissioner, the City Treasurer, Sealer of
Weights and Measures, three recycling vehicles, all used recycled
City vehicles which are not currently federal highway safety yellow
or equal that are accepted into the general fleet, one flatbed truck
(recycling fleet), recycling vehicle received from the Department
of Environmental Protection, municipal home vehicle, the library
vehicle, Council on Aging vehicles and the central maintenance
service truck shall be exempt from this requirement. [Amended
6-17-1986; 6-21-1988; 10-18-1988; 12-20-1988; 4-4-1989;
9-5-1989; 5-15-1990; 2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-7; 9-1-1992
by Ord. No. 92-61; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-9; 8-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-45; 9-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-47; 10-17-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-77; 2-6-1996 by Ord. No. 96-4; 8-6-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-71; 9-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-85; 9-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-86; 11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-96]
(1)
(2) The City Seal shall be placed on the front doors of each vehicle.
The words "City of Chicopee" in three-inch-high block letters shall
be placed above the City Seal.
(3)
The department name in two-inch-high block letters shall be placed
below the City Seal.
(4)
The words "For Official Use Only" in one-inch-high block letters
shall be placed below the department name.
(5)
A.
B. The color of all markings shall contrast with the vehicle color.
§ 95-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:173
§ 95-4. Exemptions from uniform marking requirements.
The following departments or department motor vehicles are exempt from
the provisions of this article:
§ 95-5. Use restrictions. [Added 9-21-1976]
City vehicles are to be used only for or in connection with the conduct of
City business.
§ 95-6. Twenty-four-hour assignments. [Added 9-21-1976; amended
6-29-1977]
§ 95-7. Garaging requirements. [Added 9-21-1976; amended
4-19-1977]
All City sedans and station wagons not assigned in § 95-6 shall be parked
on a regular basis at the Central Maintenance Garage, and Highway
Department vehicles shall be parked and not available for use between 5:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, nor shall they be available for use on
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
§ 95-8. Assignment of vehicles. [Added 9-21-1976; amended
4-19-19779-1-2009]
City vehicles assigned to a department shall be assigned only to designated
departments. Persons seeking to use a vehicle on a weekend, holiday or
evening shall first receive approval from the City Council. The Central
Maintenance Garage shall keep accurate records of vehicles by department,
operator, mileage and destination.
A. Fire Department.
B. Police Department.
C. School Department attendance officers.
Any vehicle assigned by the Mayor for use by the Mayor. [Added
3-4-1986]
D.
The Fire Chief, Police Chief, Highway Superintendent, City Engineer
and Forestry, Water Superintendent, the Parks and Recreation
Superintendent and the Parks and Recreation Assistant Superintendent
and the Deputy Superintendent, Water Engineer, Executive
Department, Mayor, Superintendent of Public Works and Water System
Foreman shall be assigned each a City vehicle on a seven-day-a-week,
twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. [Amended 7-2-1985; 3-4-1986;
10-8-1986]
A.
The Purchasing Agent and Assessors shall have a City vehicle Monday
through Friday, 24 hours a day. [Amended 10-18-1977]
B.
§ 95-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 95-8
1:174
ARTICLE II
Fuel and Expenses
[Adopted as Ch. 51, Secs. 51/I/1 and 51/I/2, of the 1976 Code]
§ 95-9. Fuel requirements.
All City-owned vehicles shall be supplied with gasoline and oil from City
pumps.
§ 95-10. Monthly expense allowance.
The allowance to City employees for the use of their personal motor vehicles
for the City shall be established at a maximum of $30 per month.
§ 95-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-10
1:175
Chapter 97
VETERANS' SERVICES, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 97-1. Establishment; definitions; statutory authority; title.
§ 97-2. Composition.
The Department of Veterans' Services shall consist of a Director of Veterans'
Services ("Director") as provided by MGL c. 115, § 10 who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the City Council for
a one-year appointment period each April. The Director shall employ such
other employees as shall be required and appropriated for.
§ 97-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-35]
The Director of Veterans' Services shall be responsible for developing policy
and directing and coordinating veteran services, such as furnishing
information, advice and assistance to veterans and their dependants as may
be necessary to enable them to procure the benefits to which they are or
may be entitled relative to employment, vocational or other educational
opportunities, hospitalization, medical care, pensions and other veteran's
benefits. The Director shall attend veteran's services and work closely with
veterans' organizations and carry out other duties as may be assigned by
the Mayor that relate to veterans' affairs. The Director shall also attend
meetings of the City Council as requested.
§ 97-4. Qualifications.
There is hereby established a chapter establishing a Department of
Veterans' Services, creating the position of Director of Veterans'
Services, setting forth the powers and duties of the Director of
Veterans' Services and establishing personnel procedures.
A.
Unless a different construction is clearly required by the context, the
words and phrases appearing in this chapter shall be construed in
conformity with meanings established by MGL c. 115, § 1.
B.
This chapter is established under MGL c. 115 and shall be known and
may be cited as the "Department of Veterans' Services of the City of
Chicopee."
C.
The Director of Veterans' Services shall be a veteran as defined in MGL
c. 115, § 1.
A.
The Director of Veterans' Services shall be certified by the state
Department of Veterans' Services as required by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. Failure to be certified will prevent the veteran from
continuing to serve as Director.
B.
§ 95-10 CHICOPEE CODE § 97-4
1:176
§ 97-5. Veteran Advisory Board.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 109
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco vending machines — See Ch. 256.
The Director of Veterans' Services shall have an associate's degree or
equivalent from a two-year college or technical school, or equivalent
experience. The following abilities shall be preferred when examining
equivalent experience: financial, computer, administrative,
interpersonal communication skills, and social service training or
experience.
C.
An unpaid Veteran Advisory Board ("Board") is hereby created. The
Board shall consist of seven members, four of whom shall be veterans
as defined in MGL c. 115, § 1. Each member of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the City Council
for a three-year term. The Board shall meet at least quarterly with the
Director of Veterans' Services.
A.
This Board shall render such assistance to the Director of Veterans'
Services as the Director may request. This advisory board shall be
subject to the published rules and regulations as established by the
Massachusetts Commissioner of Veterans' Services.
B.
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-5
1:177

ARTICLE I
Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted as Sec. 51/I/9 of the 1976 Code]
§ 109-1. Possession restricted. [Amended 9-23-1980]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume from and/or
transport an open container of alcoholic beverages on any public street,
public sidewalk or public way or on any grounds owned by the City or any
place to which the public has right of access as invitees within the limits of
the City; except that this section shall not apply at the events or festivals
duly licensed by the License Commission of the City and approved in writing
by the board, commission, department or official of the City having the care
and custody of the premises so licensed, to the extent of such license and
approval.19
§ 109-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-20-1984; 2-15-2000
by Ord. No. 00-16]
The fine is established at $50 for the first offense; $100 for the second
offense; and possible suspension or revocation for a third or subsequent
offense. Violators are subject to arrest under MGL c. 272, § 59.
19.Editor's Note: Former § 109-1.1, Kegs, added 3-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-12; § 109-1.2, Sale
of liquor, added 3-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-12; and § 109-1.3, Sale of additional beverages
upon approval, added 6-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-36, which sections immediately followed
this section, were repealed 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-32.
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-2
1:179

ARTICLE II
Automatic Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-115]
§ 109-3. Stickers. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-115]
§ 109-4. Licenses. [Added 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11A]
§ 109-5. Annual license required; licenses for gaming devices
prohibited. [Added 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11A]
Any person, firm or corporation or any other entity which has an
automatic amusement device must display an automatic amusement
device sticker as issued by the Board of Alcoholic Beverages License
Commission. Failure to so display shall result in the imposition of a fine
of $50 per offense.20
A.
By virtue of MGL c. 140, § 177A, the License Commission may grant a
license to operate an automatic amusement device, as defined therein,
for hire, gain or reward, and, after written notice to a licensee, may
suspend or revoke such a license. It is the purpose and intent of this
section to prohibit the License Commission from issuing a license for
any automatic device that is intended to be used as a gaming device
or which, although meeting the definition of an automatic amusement
device, may reasonably be considered to present a risk of misuse as a
gaming device.
A.
This article is adopted in accordance with the authority, inter alia, by
Amendment Article 89 to Article II of the Massachusetts Constitution,
Chapter 294 of the Acts of Massachusetts 1920, as amended, and the
powers granted, and reserved, to cities in the Massachusetts General
Laws.
B.
In accordance with MGL c. 140, § 177A, as amended from time to
time, hereafter, any individual or business desiring to keep and operate
an automatic amusement device for hire, gain or reward shall secure
an annual license from the License Commission, which shall design a
license application to be completed by the applicant for each device and
each location where such device is to be kept and operated. The fee for
each device licensed pursuant to this article shall be $100. [Amended
11-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-62; 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-20]
A.
The License Commission shall not grant a license for any device that is
intended for use as a gaming device nor for any automatic amusement
device which may reasonably be considered to present a risk of misuse
as a gaming device. Automatic amusement devices which may
reasonably be considered to present a risk as gaming devices are
those devices which simulate actual gaming devices, including so-called
B.
20.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which immediately followed, regarding replacement
cost for each sticker, was repealed 9-1-2015 by Ord. No. 15-46.
§ 109-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-5
1:181
§ 109-6. Restriction on number of devices; conditions. [Added
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11A]
§ 109-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Added 10-17-2006
by Ord. No. 06-11A]
"video poker" and games which involve matching forms, shapes or
random number combinations.
The maximum number of automatic amusement devices allowed on any
single business premises shall be six unless the License Commission,
after duly noticed public hearing, has issued its written authorization
for a greater number of such devices.
A.
Automatic amusement devices shall be so installed on the premises
described in the license as to be in open view at all times while in
operation, and shall at all times be available for inspection. Unlicensed
automatic amusement devices are prohibited.
B.
The Chicopee Police Department shall serve as agent to the License
Commission for the enforcement of §§ 109-4 through 109-6 of this
article.
A.
All licenses for automatic amusement devices granted by the License
Commission shall be subject to inspection by the Chicopee Police
Department to ensure conformance with submitted application
information and the requirements of §§ 109-4 through 109-6 of this
article and MGL c. 140, § 177A.
B.
Any unlicensed automatic amusement device or any licensed automatic
amusement device used in violation of §§ 109-4 through 109-6 of this
article and MGL c. 140, § 177A, shall be subject to immediate seizure by
the Chicopee Police Department. In the event of such seizure, the Police
Department shall promptly provide a written report to the License
Commission. Upon receipt of the report, the License Commission shall
schedule a hearing at its next following regular meeting to which the
owner, if known, of the automatic amusement device and the licensee
at whose premises said device was seized shall be summoned to appear.
Failure to appear after receipt of notice shall be deemed a waiver of the
right to challenge the seizure of the automatic amusement device.
C.
A violation of §§ 109-4 through 109-6 of this article or MGL c. 140,
§ 177A, shall be grounds for revocation of any license issued by the City
of Chicopee and held by the violator, including a license to sell alcoholic
beverages, and may otherwise be punished as allowed by law or a fine
or $500 per machine, or both.
D.
§ 109-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 109-7
1:182
Chapter 110
MARIJUANA OR TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, PUBLIC
CONSUMPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 77.
Alcoholic beverages and amusement
devices — See Ch. 109.
Noncriminal disposition of certain
violations — See Ch. 132, Art. I.
§ 110-1. Prohibited acts.
§ 110-2. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced through lawful means in law or in equity
by noncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by the Chicopee
Police Chief, his/her agents or any police officer.
§ 110-3. Violations and penalties.
The fine for the first violation of this chapter shall be $300. Any penalty
imposed under this chapter shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed
under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
Chapter 122
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Commissions — See Ch. 16, Art. XI.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 132.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 151.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 122-1. Adoption of standards; modifications.
Application. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or
consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, as amended) while in or upon any street, sidewalk, public
way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach,
recreation area, boat landing, public building, schoolhouse, school
grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area owned by or under the
control of the City; or in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance
operated by a common carrier; or in any place accessible to the public.
A.
§ 109-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-1
1:183
Codes and standards adopted. [Amended 9-1-2009; 4-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-14]
The State Building Code, set forth at 780 CMR 100.00 et seq.,
including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions, is
hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of governing public
health, safety, and welfare as they are affected by building
construction, and in general to secure safety to life and property, a
copy of which code shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office.
The State Building Code is hereby adopted and incorporated, as
fully as if set out at length herein, and provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City.
(1)
The State Sanitary Code, set forth at 105 CMR 410 et seq.,
including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions, is
hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of governing minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation, a copy of which code
shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office. The State Sanitary
Code is hereby adopted and incorporated, as fully as if set out at
length herein, and provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
limits of the City.
(2)
The State Minimum Sanitation Standards for Food Establishments,
set forth at 105 CMR 590.00 et seq., including subsequent
modifications, amendments, or deletions, is hereby adopted by the
City for the purpose of governing sanitation in food establishments,
a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office.
The Minimum Standards are hereby adopted and incorporated, as
fully as if set out at length herein, and provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City.
(3)
The State Plumbers and Gas Fitters Code, set forth at 248 CMR
et seq., including subsequent modifications, amendments, or
deletions, is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of
governing public health, safety, and welfare as they are affected by
all construction, alteration, repairs and maintenance of plumbing
and gas fittings, and to secure safety to life and property, a copy
of which code shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's office. The
State Plumbers and Gas Fitters Code is hereby adopted and
incorporated, as fully as if set out at length herein, and provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City.
(4)
The State Electrical Code, set forth at 527 CMR 12.00 et seq.,
including subsequent modifications, amendments, or deletions, is
hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of governing public
health, safety, and welfare as they are affected by wire and
electrical installation, repairs, and maintenance, and in general to
secure safety to life and property, a copy of which code shall be
kept on file in the City Clerk's office. The State Electrical Code is
hereby adopted and incorporated, as fully as if set out at length
(5)
A.
§ 122-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 122-1
1:184
herein, and provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the City.
The State Fire Safety Code, set forth at 527 CMR 1.00 et seq.,
except for the Electrical Code (527 CMR 12.00) which was adopted
separately, including subsequent modifications, amendments, or
deletions, is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of
governing minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life,
property and public welfare from the hazards of fire and explosion
created by the storage, handling or use of substances, materials
or devices or from conditions hazardous to life, property and the
public welfare, and in general to secure safety to life and property,
a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the Office of the City
Clerk.
(6)
The State Sanitary Standards for Swimming Pools, set forth at
105 CMR 435.00 et seq., including subsequent modifications,
amendments, or deletions, is hereby adopted by the City for the
purpose of governing minimum sanitation standards for swimming
pools, a copy of which code shall be kept on file in the City Clerk's
office. The minimum standards are hereby adopted and
incorporated, as fully as if set out at length herein, and provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City.
(7)
Any person who fails to comply with any order of the Building Inspector
or other authorized City employee shall be liable for a criminal fine of
not more than $300, and shall in all other respects be subject to the
provisions of the Ordinance of the City of Chicopee, including, but not
limited to, Chapter 132. Each day or part of a day that the violation
continues or exists shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended
4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-14]
B.
Disposition of debris. The Building Commissioner shall not issue any
permits for demolition of buildings or other structures unless the
applicant states, in writing, the specific location at which the demolition
debris will be disposed of, nor unless said location is a dump site
approved under the provisions of MGL c. 111, § 150A, and the Zoning
Ordinances of the City of Chicopee.21 Disposal of such demolition debris
at a site other than named in the application or other than at an
approved dump site as set forth above shall render the disposer liable
to a fine of not less than $200 each day until the material disposed of is
removed by the disposer from the unauthorized site.
C.
Fees, account and refunds.
General. A permit shall not be issued to begin work for new
construction, alteration, removal, demolition or other building
operation until the fees prescribed by municipal ordinance or bylaw
(1)
D.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Zoning.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-1
1:185
§ 122-2. Fees. [Amended 6-26-2003 by Ord. No. 03-28; 1-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-22]
shall have been paid to the City or town collector or other
municipal agency authorized to collect such fees.
Other fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition and for all work done in connection with or
concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit shall
not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment
of other fees that may be prescribed by law or ordinance for water
taps, sewer connections, electrical and plumbing permits, erection
of signs and display structures, marquees or other appurtenant
structures or fees for inspections, certificates of use and occupancy
or other privileges or requirements, both within and without the
jurisdiction of the Building Department.
(2)
Filing fees. Filing fees shall be waived for agencies of the City of
Chicopee, including Chicopee Housing Authority and private
elementary schools. Filing fees shall also be waived for any handicap
ramp built to a residential unit, which is used strictly for residential
purposes. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19]
A.
Special fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration,
removal or demolition and for all work done in connection with or
concurrent with the work contemplated by a building permit shall not
relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other
fees that may be prescribed by law or ordinance for water taps, sewer
connections, electrical permits, erection of sign or display structures,
marquees or other appurtenant privileges or requirements, both within
and without the jurisdiction of the department of building inspection.
Permit fees not covered by this section shall be set as determined by
the Building Commissioner or his designee. [Amended 6-9-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-19]
B.
New construction and alterations. The fees for a building permit shall
be based on the volume of the structure unless prescribed as otherwise
in this section. The Building Commissioner, or his designee, is
authorized to establish (by approved rules) a schedule of unit rates for
buildings and structures of all use groups and types of construction
as classified and defined in the Massachusetts State Building Code.
[Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19]
C.
Moving of buildings. The fee for a building permit for the removal of a
building or structure from one lot to another or to a new location on the
same lot shall be $150.
D.
Demolitions. The fee for a permit for demolition of a residential building
or structure shall be $50 each floor of the building or structure, and for
all others $150 each floor of the building or structure.
E.
§ 122-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 122-2
1:186
Signs. The fee for signs, billboards and other display structures for
which permits are required under the provisions of the State Building
Code shall be in accordance with this chapter.
F.
Accounting. The Building Official shall keep an accurate account of all
fees collected for building permits, and such collected fees shall be
deposited monthly in the municipal treasury or otherwise disposed of
as required by law. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19]
G.
Refunds. In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment
or discontinuance of a building project, the volume of work actually
completed shall be computed, and any excess fee for incomplete work
shall be returned to the permit holder, except that all penalties that may
have been imposed on the permit holder under the requirements of the
Basic Code shall first be collected. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No.
12-19]
H.
Fees for work started prior to obtaining permits. Excepting
emergencies as determined by the Building Commissioner or his
designee, the fee for the work will be double the normal fee. [Amended
6-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19]
I.
Schedule of building fees. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19;
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-85]
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Residential (one- and twofamily)
New construction (total square
footage of all floors, excluding
basement if not used for habitable
rooms)
Up to 1,000 square feet $320 *
1,001 to 2,000 square feet $420 *
2,001 square feet and over $520 *
Additions, alterations and repairs
Up to $999** $45 *
$1,000 to $4,999** $70 *
$5,000 to $9,999** $120 *
$10,000 to $24,999** $170 *
$25,000 and over** $220 *
Demolitions $70 per floor *
Reinspection $30 $30
J.
§ 122-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:187
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Multifamily construction
(residential other than oneand
two-family)
New construction $20 plus $0.40/
square feet
*
Minimum fee $520 *
Maximum fee $20,020 *
Additions, alterations and repairs $20 plus $0.30/
square feet
*
Minimum fee $320 *
Maximum fee $15,020 *
Roofing (per building) $170 *
Siding (per building) $170 *
Windows (per building) $170 *
Demolitions $120 per floor *
Fire system $80 *
Solar system $145 *
Fire sprinkler system $120 *
Commercial construction
(business, assembly,
institutional, mercantile or
schools)
New construction $20 plus $0.50/
square feet
*
Minimum fee $520 *
Maximum fee $20,020 *
Additions, alterations and repairs $20 plus $0.40/
square feet
*
Minimum fee $320 *
Maximum fee $15,020 *
Roofing (nonstructural) $20 plus $0.05/
square feet
*
Minimum fee $170 *
Demolition $170 per floor *
Sheet metal/HVAC $120 *
Solar $250 *
§ 122-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 122-2
1:188
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Alarm system $170 *
Fire sprinkler system $170 *
Kitchen hood $170 *
Work of a minor nature $120 *
Reinsertion $30 $30
Miscellaneous
Temporary construction trailer/
temporary housing
$120 *
Tents $60
Certificate of occupancy $55 *
Moving of buildings $170 *
Signs
Ground signs*** $170 plus $0.50/
square feet over 40
square feet
*
Wall signs*** $95 plus $0.50/
square feet over 25
square feet
*
Roof signs*** $120 plus $0.50/
square feet over 25
square feet
*
Projecting signs *** $95 plus $0.50/
square feet over 25
square feet
*
Reface sign*** $70 plus $0.50/
square feet over 40
square feet
*
NOTES:
* Online permit fees discounted by $20.
** Based on project as though performed by contractor. Labor and
materials.
*** Up to two sides.
Schedule of electrical fees. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-19;
2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 13-7; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-85]
K.
§ 122-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:189
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Residential
Single family $120 plus service *
Two family $170 plus service *
Additions or alterations $95 *
Garages (attached or detached) $95 *
Service change or alteration (per
unit)
$20 plus $0.25 per
amp
*
Temporary construction service $70 *
Aboveground swimming pools or
hot tubs
$70 *
Inground swimming pools $120 *
Air conditioners, water heaters, oil
burners, smoke detectors
$50 *
Central air, central heating $50 *
Generators $50 *
Security systems $45 *
Solar fees $100 *
Minor work with one inspection $50 *
Reinspection $30 $30
Commercial (business,
institutions, multifamily and
industrial)
Additions or alterations $20 plus $0.10/
square feet
Minimum fee $70 *
Accessory building $20 plus $0.10/
square feet
Minimum fee $50 *
Signs (wall or ground) $70 each *
Service change $20 plus $0.25 per
amp
Parking lots illuminated up to 3 kw $70 *
Parking lots illuminated over 3 kw $90 *
Paint spray booths $70 *
Temporary structures $50 *
§ 122-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 122-2
1:190
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Major equipment (motors,
machines, air conditioners)
1 to 5** $50 *
6 to 10** $70 *
11 and over** $120 *
Central heating/air conditioning
(new or replacement)**
$50 each *
Tent wiring $50 *
Fire alarms, security systems, data
systems (under 3,000 square
feet)**
$70 *
Fire alarms, security systems, data
systems (over 3,000 square feet)**
$95 *
Retrofits (change ballasts, etc.)
1 to 20 units** $50 *
21 to 50 units** $60 *
51 to 100 units** $70 *
101 to 500 units** $95 *
Over 500 units** $170 *
Repair fire damage** $50 *
Exit signs, emergency lights (per
building)**
$50 *
Institutional permit $420 per year *
Solar fees $0.03 per watt;
$150 minimum;
not to exceed
$2,500
Installation of individual units
Transformers
Over 50 KVA** $55 each *
Remote panel boards
100 amp and under** $55 each *
Over 100 amp ** $65 each *
Feeders/branch circuits
50 to 200 amp ** $60 each *
201 to 400 amp ** $70 each *
§ 122-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:191
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Over 400 amp ** $80 each *
Motors (individual)
1 to 10 HP** $60 each *
11 to 50 HP** $70 each *
51 to 500 HP ** $80 each *
Reinspection $30 $30
NOTES:
* Online permit fees discounted by $20.
** With single inspection.
Schedule of plumbing and gas fees. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord. No.
12-19; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-85]
Type Fee
Paper Permit
Online
Permit
Residential (plumbing)
New and renovations $60 plus $5 per
fixture
*
Water heater and replacement
fixtures
$40 plus $5 per
fixture
*
Residential (gas)
New and renovations $60 plus $5 per
appliance
*
Water heater and replacement
appliance
$40 plus $5 per
appliance
*
Commercial (plumbing)
New and renovations $90 plus $10 per
fixture
*
Water heater and replacement
fixtures
$45 plus $5 per
fixture
*
Commercial (gas)
New and renovations $90 plus $10 per
appliance
*
Water heater and replacement
appliance
$45 plus $5 per
appliance
*
Reinspection $30 $30
L.
§ 122-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 122-2
1:192
NOTES:
* Online permit fees discounted by $20.
Schedule of weights and measures fees. [Amended 6-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-19; 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-85]
Type Fee
Scales (by weight)
0 to 10 pounds $10
11 to 100 pounds $15
101 to 1,000 pounds $25
1,001 to 5,000 pounds $45
5,001 to 10,000 pounds $50
Over 10,000 pounds $110
Weights: metric, apothecary, avoirdupois
and troy
$2
Vehicle tank pumps $40
Gasoline pumps $20
Taxi meters $25
Fabric measure $10
Yardsticks $5
Reverse vending $5
Scanners
1 to 3 $75
4 to 11 $150
12 or more $250
M.
Schedule for periodic inspection of existing buildings. [Added
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-21; amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-85]
N.
§ 122-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:193
Use
Group Use Group
Use Group
Description
Maximum
Certification
Period
Fee for
Maximum
Certification
Period
A-1 Movie theaters
or theaters for
performing acts
(stage and
scenery)*
>400 occupant
load
<400 occupant
load
One year
One year
$100
$75
A-2 Restaurants,
night clubs or
similar uses*
>400 occupant
load
<400 occupant
load
One year
One year
$100
$75
A-3 Lecture halls,
dance halls,
churches, and
places of
religious
worship,
recreational
centers,
terminals, etc.*
>400 occupant
load
<400 occupant
load
One year $50
One year $40
A-4 Low-density
recreation and
similar uses*
Five years $40
A-5 Special
amusement
buildings or
portions thereof
One year $50
E Educational, day
care
One year $40
I-1 Group home One year $40
I-2 Residents
incapable of selfpresentation:
hospitals,
nursing homes,
mental hospitals,
certain day-care
facilities
Two years $75
§ 122-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 122-2
1:194
Use
Group Use Group
Use Group
Description
Maximum
Certification
Period
Fee for
Maximum
Certification
Period
I-3 Residents
retrained:
prisons, jails,
detention
centers, etc.
Two years $75
I-4 Adult and/or
child day care
facilities
One year $75
R-1 Hotels, motels,
boarding houses,
etc.
One year $75
R-1 Detoxification
facilities
Two years $75
R-2 Multifamily Five years $75
R-2 Dormitories and
R-2 congregate
living
One year $75
R-2 Summer camps
for children
One year $75
R-3 Residential
facilities licensed
by DDS or DMH
One year $40
R-4 Residential care/
assisted living
facilities (< 16)
One year $40
Any Facilities
licensed by the
Alcoholic
Beverages
Control
>400 occupant
load
<400 occupant
load
One year as
per M.G.L.
c. 10, § 74
$100
Commission
where alcoholic
beverages are
served and
consumed
$75
Any House museums
(see Chapter 34,
Existing
Structures,22 for
definition)
One year $40
§ 122-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-2
1:195
Chapter 129
CEMETERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 169.
§ 129-1. Designation of public cemeteries. [Amended 3-17-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-15]
The public cemeteries owned by the City shall be known as "Fairview
Cemetery," "Maple Grove Cemetery" and "East Street Cemetery" and shall
be under the charge and control of the Commissioners of Fairview
Cemetery.
§ 129-2. General duties of Fairview Cemetery Commissioners.
The Commissioners of Fairview Cemetery shall have general charge and
control over all public cemeteries owned by the City and may make such
regulations relative to the care and use thereof as they may deem necessary.
§ 129-3. Assignment and sale of lots in City-owned cemeteries.
Burial lots in cemeteries owned by the City may be laid out by the
Commissioners and may be sold to purchasers at such prices and on such
terms as to payment as said Commissioners may determine. Any person
desiring to purchase a lot shall apply to the Superintendent of Cemeteries,
who shall have authority to assign lots to purchasers. Immediately after
the assignment of any lot to a purchaser, the Superintendent shall notify
Use
Group Use Group
Use Group
Description
Maximum
Certification
Period
Fee for
Maximum
Certification
Period
Any Fire escapes, etc.
per Chapter 10,
Means of
Egress23
Five years $40
NOTES:
See 780 CMR 110, Periodic Inspections, for details.
* A use group with violations found during the prior year inspection
may be subject to semiannual inspections the following year.
22.Editor's Note: See 781 CMR 3400.0 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 780 CMR 1001.0 et seq.
§ 122-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 129-3
1:196
the City Treasurer, who shall cause a deed for such lot to be prepared
and executed as provided in Chapter 9 of this Code, which deed shall be
delivered to the purchaser by the Treasurer upon receiving payment in
full therefor. The Commissioners may make such further and additional
regulations relative to the payment for any lot sold as they may deem
proper, and, unless otherwise provided or agreed upon, all deeds of lots
shall be taken and paid for within three months from the time of the
assignment of the respective lots, and if not so taken, any such lot may be
assigned to another purchaser.
§ 129-4. Deeds subject to conditions.
All deeds of lots in any public cemetery owned by the City shall be made
subject to the following conditions:
§ 129-5. Deposit of money for perpetual care of lots.
All sums of money which have been or may be deposited with the City
Treasurer by any person under the provisions of the statutes of this
commonwealth for the preservation, care, improvement or embellishment
of any public or private burial place situated in the City or of burial lots
located in the same and all sums which have been or may be bequeathed by
any person for said purpose shall be received and held by the Treasurer as
special trust funds, and he shall be responsible for such trust funds in like
manner as for other money received by him as Treasurer.
§ 129-6. Administration of perpetual care funds. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Such funds shall be deposited by him in some suitable savings bank or
institution for savings, and the income arising from such deposit or
investment may be collected by said Treasurer and expended by him in
accordance with the terms of the trust under which the several principal
sums were received. It shall be competent for the City Council to direct,
if it so desires, that the Treasurer pay over the entire income or any part
thereof to the authorities having charge of the cemetery or burial place in
which the lots are located for the care of which cemetery burial place or
lots the funds are held. No greater income shall be paid or allowed on any
such funds than is received by the Treasurer herefrom, and in the case of
noninvestment of said funds, the rate of interest that may be allowed shall
not exceed the current rate of dividends as allowed in savings banks.
That the lot hereby conveyed shall be used only as a burial place for the
dead, and that, if the same shall ever be used for any other purpose,
it shall thereupon be forfeited and revert to the City and its successors
and assigns.
A.
That the possession and use of said land shall be subject to all such
general regulations for the care, management and control of the
cemetery as may from time to time be adopted by the Commissioners of
Fairview Cemetery.
B.
§ 129-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-7
1:197
§ 129-7. Identification of lots under perpetual care.
No money shall be received by the Treasurer, either on deposit or by
bequest, for the perpetual care of cemetery lots, unless the terms of the
donation or bequest are sufficiently specific to enable him to identify the
particular lot or lots intended to be cared for by the income of said funds.
All lots for the care or preservation of which any money may be deposited or
bequeathed shall be designated by such suitable and appropriate marks as
may be prescribed by the Commissioners of Fairview Cemetery. Such mark
shall be provided by the person making the deposit or by the executor of the
will containing the bequest, and in case it is not so provided, the Treasurer
shall be authorized to procure the same and charge the expense thereof
against the income which may be received from such fund.
§ 129-8. Conveyance of lots under perpetual care.
The City Treasurer is authorized to receive any conveyance to the City of
any lot in any burial place in the City for the perpetual care of which any
sum has been deposited with him, and any lot so conveyed shall not be again
sold or conveyed to any person, and no permission shall be granted for the
burial of any bodies therein after said deed shall have been so received,
but said lot shall be forever held and kept in repair by said Commissioners
according to the terms of the trust under which deposit of money has been
made.
§ 129-9. Use of funds from Maple Grove Cemetery.
The City of Chicopee shall use the sums of money transferred and turned
over to it by the proprietors of the Maple Grove Cemetery only for the
preservation, care, improvement and embellishment of the Maple Grove
Cemetery, and the income from all trust funds transferred and turned over
to it by the proprietors of the Maple Grove Cemetery shall be expended by
the City of Chicopee in accordance with the terms of the trust under which
the principal sums were given.
Chapter 132
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 169.
Noise — See Ch. 200.
Spray paint and indelible markers — See Ch.
239.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
§ 129-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 129-9
1:198
ARTICLE I
Noncriminal Disposition of Certain Violations
[Adopted 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-37]
§ 132-1. Enforcement of certain provisions. [Amended 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-33]
The provisions of Chapters 109, 144, 160, 169, 172, 188, 200, 206, 223, 239,
243, 256, 262 and 269 of the Code of the City of Chicopee for the year 1991,
as amended, shall be enforced under the procedures governed by MGL c.
40, § 21D as herein set forth below:
§ 21D. Noncriminal disposition of ordinance, by-law, rule or regulation
violations.
"Any city or town may by ordinance or by-law not inconsistent with this
section provide for non-criminal disposition of violations of any ordinance
or by-law or any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or
department the violation which is subject to a specific penalty.
"Any such ordinance or by-law shall provide that any person taking
cognizance of a violation of a specific ordinance, by-law, rule or regulation
which he is empowered to enforce, hereinafter referred to as the enforcing
person, as an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings shall, or, if
so provided in such ordinance or by-law, may, give to the other offender
a written notice to appear before the clerk of the district court having
jurisdiction thereof at any time during office hours, not later than twentyone
days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in triplicate and
shall contain the name and address, if known, of the offender, the specific
offense charged, and the time and place for his required appearance. Such
notice shall be signed by the enforcing person, and shall be signed by the
offender whenever practicable in acknowledgment that such notice has
been received.
"The enforcing person shall, if possible, deliver to the offender a copy of
said notice at the time and place of the violation. If it is not possible to
deliver a copy of said notice to the offender at the time and place of the
violation, said copy shall be mailed or delivered by the enforcing person,
or by his commanding officer or the head of his department or by any
person authorized by such commanding officer, department or head to the
offender's last known address, within fifteen days after said violation. Such
notice as so mailed shall be deemed a sufficient notice, and a certificate
of the person so mailing such notice that it has been mailed in accordance
with this section shall be prima facie evidence thereof.
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-1
1:199
"At or before the completion of each tour of duty, or at the beginning of
the first subsequent tour of duty, the enforcing person shall give to his
commanding officer or department head those copies of each notice of such
a violation he has taken cognizance of during such tour which have not
already been delivered or mailed by him as aforesaid. Said commanding
officer or department head shall retain and safely preserve one copy and
shall, at a time not later than the next court day after such delivery or
mailing, deliver the other copy to the clerk of the court before which the
offender has been notified to appear. The clerk of each district court and of
the Boston municipal court shall maintain a separate docket of such notices
to appear.
"Any person notified to appear before the clerk of a district court as
hereinbefore provided may so appear and confess the offense charged,
either personally or through a duly authorized agent or by mailing to the
city or town clerk of the municipality within which the violation occurred
together with the notice such specific sum of money not exceeding three
hundred dollars as the town shall fix a penalty for violation of the
ordinance, by-law, rule or regulation. Such payment shall if mailed be made
only by postal note, money order or check. Upon receipt of such notice,
the city or town clerk shall forthwith notify the district court clerk of such
payment and the receipt by the district court clerk of such notification
shall operate as a final disposition of the case. An appearance under this
paragraph shall not be deemed to be a criminal proceeding. No person so
notified to appear before the clerk of a district court shall be required to
report to any probation officer, and no record of the case shall be entered
in any probation records.
"If any person so notified to appear desires to contest the violation alleged
in the notice to appear and also to avail himself of the procedure
established pursuant to this section, he may, within twenty-one days after
the date of the notice, request a hearing in writing. Such hearing shall be
held before a district court judge, clerk, or assistant clerk, as the court
shall direct, and if the judge, clerk, or assistant clerk shall, after hearing,
find that the violation occurred and that it was committed by the person
so notified to appear, the person so notified shall be permitted to dispose
of the case by paying the specific sum of money fixed as a penalty as
aforesaid, or such lesser amount as the judge, clerk, or assistant clerk,
shall order, which payment shall operate as a final disposition of the case.
If the judge, clerk, or assistant clerk shall, after hearing, find that violation
alleged did not occur or was committed by the person notified to appear,
that finding shall be entered in the docket, which shall operate as a final
disposition of the case. Proceedings held pursuant to this paragraph shall
not be deemed to be criminal proceedings. No person disposing of a case
by payment of such a penalty shall be required to report to any probation
office as a result of such violation, nor shall any record of the case be
entered in the probation records.
§ 132-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 132-1
1:200
"If any person so notified to appear before the clerk of a district court fails
to pay the fine provided hereunder within the time specified or, having
appeared, does not confess the offense before the clerk or pay the sum
of money fixed as a penalty after a hearing and finding as provided in
the proceeding paragraph, the clerk shall notify the enforcing person who
issued the original notice, who shall determine whether to apply for the
issuance of a complaint for the violation of the appropriate ordinance, bylaw,
rule or regulation.
"As used in this section the term 'district court' shall include, within the
limits of their jurisdiction, the municipal court of the City of Boston and the
divisions of the housing court department of the trial court.
"The notice to appear provided for herein shall be printed in such form as
the chief justice of the municipal court of the City of Boston shall prescribe
for said court, and as the chief justice of the district courts shall prescribe
for the district courts. Said notice may also include notice of violations
pursuant to section eleven C of chapter eighty-five, section eighteen A
of chapter ninety, section one hundred and seventy-three A of chapter
one hundred and forty and section sixteen A of chapter two hundred
and seventy. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this section shall
enure to the city or town for such use as said city or town may direct.
This procedure shall not be used for the enforcement of municipal traffic
rules and regulations. Chapter ninety C shall be the exclusive method of
enforcement of municipal traffic rules and regulations."
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-1
1:201

ARTICLE II
Municipal Fines and Appeals
[Adopted 8-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-28; amended in its entirety
6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-29]
§ 132-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a schedule and procedure within
City government for the payment and appeal of municipal fines and the
disposition of violations of any ordinance, rule, or regulation of any
municipal officer, board or department, the violation of which is subject to
a specific penalty. Chapter 40U authorizes the City to adopt this article.
The provisions of Chapters 109, 144, 160, 169, 172, 188, 200, 206, 223,
239, 243, 256, 262, and 269 of the City Code and any violations of Section
21D of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws enforceable by the
City with a specific fine shall be enforced through the process and fine
schedule set out below unless the City chooses to seek any other available
remedy from the Housing Court or any court of similar jurisdiction of
the commonwealth should such a remedy be determined more appropriate
under the circumstances.
§ 132-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — Any employee or department authorized to make violation
determinations and issue tickets.
ENFORCING PERSON — Police officers, inspectors, department heads or
any employees charged with reviewing violations of any City ordinance or
relevant state statute and issuing tickets for those violations.
MUNICIPAL HEARING OFFICER — A person appointed by the appointing
authority of a municipality to conduct hearings of alleged code violations
pursuant to this article of the City code.
UNPAID CHARGE — An unpaid fine incurred as a result of a violation of
a rule, regulation, order, or ordinance regulating the housing, sanitary, or
municipal snow and ice removal requirements.
§ 132-4. Municipal Hearing Officer.
The Mayor will appoint the City's Hearing Officer every January 2 to hear all
appeals of citations issued under this article. The Hearing Officer will hear
appeals of citations issued under this article.
§ 132-5. Enforcing persons; issuing tickets; notice to offender and
Hearing Officer; administration of tickets.
Any employee or inspector who is tasked by their department with
identifying violations of the chapters listed in § 132-1 or Section 21D
A.
§ 132-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-5
1:203
§ 132-6. Processing citations; response by violator; objections to
validity of citation; penalties for nonpayment.
of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and enforcing those
violations will be identified as the enforcing person for the purposes of
this article. Every enforcing person who takes notice of a violation of
a rule, regulation, order, or ordinance regulating the housing, sanitary
or snow and ice removal requirements shall provide the offender with a
notice forthwith, which shall be in tag or ticket form, to appear before
the Hearing Officer or the Hearing Officer's designee during regular
office hours, not later than 21 days after the date of such violation. All
tickets or tags shall be prepared in triplicate.
The tag or ticket shall be affixed securely to the building or, for a
building with an on-site professionally managed property office,
delivered to the office during normal business hours and shall contain,
but shall not be limited to: the date, time and place of the violation, the
specific violation charged, the name and identification or badge number
of the officer or enforcing person and his department, a schedule of
payment for established fines and instructions for return of the tag.
B.
The City shall utilize an electronic form and system of issuing citations
that assimilates and interfaces with the existing software used by the
City to provide for the uniform and efficient processing of all
documentation from the issuance of electronic tickets, the adjudicatory
process, and ultimate disposition of the fines imposed by the electronic
ticketing process. The City shall be responsible for working with the
Hearing Officer to manage the public docket generated by the
documentation of violations, the recordkeeping process of adjudication,
and the imposition of fines and liens with the cooperation of the
Collector's office if needed or as required by this article or any state
statute.
C.
Within three business days after completion of each shift, the officer
or enforcing person shall give to his department head or supervisor
those copies of each notice of a violation issued during such shift. The
department head or supervisor shall retain and preserve one copy and
shall, not later than the beginning of the next business day after receipt
of the notice, deliver another copy to the Hearing Officer before whom
the violator has been ordered to appear. The Hearing Officer shall
coordinate and maintain a docket of all such notices.
A.
Where a notice of violation is issued for Code violations, the alleged
violator, within 21 days, shall return the notice of violation, by mail,
personally or by an authorized person, to the hearing officer and shall
either: (1) pay in full the scheduled fine by check, postal note, money
order and send said payment to the Collector's office; or (2) request a
hearing before the Hearing Officer, in which case the request for appeal
shall be forwarded to the Hearing Officer for scheduling. Each violation
issued shall contain a statement explaining the procedure to adjudicate
the violation by mail. Any amounts paid shall be payable to the City of
B.
§ 132-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 132-6
1:204
Chicopee and forwarded to the Collector's office for proper posting. If
a fine remains unpaid for 21 days and no hearing has been requested,
a letter shall be sent by the Hearing Officer to the property owner of
record's mailing address and, if appropriate, to the local individual or
property management company responsible for the maintenance of the
property, with a processing fee of $10, notifying him that the fine shall
be paid within 30 days after the receipt of that notice unless, within
14 days of receiving that notice, the property owner requests a hearing
before the Hearing Officer and swears in writing, under the pains and
penalties of perjury, that the property owner did not receive the notice
of violation. If the fine remains unpaid after that thirty-day period,
additional penalties and interest may be attached. Thereafter, any fine
and additional penalties and interest that may be attached and which
remain unpaid shall become an additional assessment on the property
owner's tax bill. Such amount and cost relative thereto may also be a
lien upon such real estate as provided in Section 42B of Chapter 40 of
the Massachusetts General Laws. The City's determination of whether
to place a lien on the property may involve the number of and the dollar
amount of the violations on the property. The property owner of record
shall be notified by certified mail of the lien on the property. No lien
shall be removed without notice from the Tax Collector that all such
matters have been disposed of in accordance with the law. Additional
charges equal to the amount required to file the lien and the amount
required to release the lien shall be assessed against the owner of
record for the purpose of ensuring that all costs associated with filing
the release are recovered.
Any person notified to appear before the Hearing Officer, as provided
herein, may, without waiving the right to a hearing provided by this
article and without waiving judicial review as provided in Section 14
of Chapter 30A of the Massachusetts General Laws, challenge the
validity of the violation notice and receive a review and disposition of
the violation from the Hearing Officer by mail. The alleged violator
may, upon receipt of the notice to appear, send a signed statement of
objections to the violation notice as well as signed statements from
witnesses, police officers, government officials and other relevant
parties. Photographs, diagrams, maps and other documents may also
be sent with the statements. Any statements or materials sent to the
Hearing Officer for review shall have attached the person's name and
complete address as well as the ticket number and the date of the
violation. The Hearing Officer shall, within 21 days after receipt of such
material, review the material and either dismiss or uphold the violation
and notify the alleged violator by mail of the disposition of the hearing.
If the outcome of the hearing is against the alleged violator, the Hearing
Officer shall explain the reasons for the outcome on the notice. Such
review and disposition conducted by mail shall be informal, the rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the decision of the Hearing Officer shall
be final, subject to any hearing provisions provided by this article or to
judicial review as provided in said Section 14 of said Chapter 30A of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
C.
§ 132-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-7
1:205
§ 132-7. Contesting violations.
§ 132-8. Failure to pay; persistent violations.
Notwithstanding Section 21D of Chapter 40, a person who desires
to contest a violation of any City ordinance alleged in a notice to
appear, pursuant to violations issued by the City in accordance with
said Section 21D of said Chapter 40, shall request, in writing, a hearing
before the Hearing Officer. The notice to appear shall be in the format
specified in said Section 21D of said Chapter 40, except that the third
copy of the notice shall be submitted to the Municipal Hearing Officer
unless the ticket was produced by an automated ticketing device. If
the alleged violator requests a hearing before the Municipal Hearing
Officer in a timely manner, the Municipal Hearing Officer shall schedule
a hearing not later than 45 days after receiving the hearing request.
The Municipal Hearing Officer shall duly notify the alleged violator of
the date, time and location of the hearing. When a hearing notice is
sent, the alleged violator shall be given an opportunity to request a
rescheduled hearing date. The Municipal Hearing Officer so designated
shall not be an employee or officer of the department associated with
the issuance of the notice of violation. The Municipal Hearing Officer
shall receive training in the conduct of administrative hearings. The
hearing and disposition shall be informal and shall follow the rules
set forth in Chapter 30A of the Massachusetts General Laws. Rules
for judicial proceedings shall not apply. In conducting the hearing,
the Municipal Hearing Officer shall determine whether there was a
violation.
A.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Municipal Hearing Officer
may appeal to the district court, housing court or other court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the
Massachusetts General Laws, on a form provided by the City, and
shall be entitled to a de novo hearing before a clerk magistrate of the
court. The court shall consider such appeals under a civil standard. The
aggrieved person shall file the appeal within 10 days after receiving
notice of the decision from the Municipal Hearing Officer who
conducted the hearing.
B.
Any person who has received a notice of violation issued in accordance
with this article who, within the prescribed time, fails to pay the same
or fails to request a hearing before the Municipal Hearing Officer, or
who fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing, shall be
deemed responsible for the violation as stated in the notice of violation.
Such finding of responsibility shall be considered prima facie evidence
of the violation in a civil proceeding regarding that violation and shall
be admissible as evidence in a subsequent criminal proceeding. If a
person fails to appear at a scheduled hearing without good cause, the
appeal shall be dismissed and the violator shall waive any further right
of appeal.
A.
§ 132-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 132-8
1:206
§ 132-9. Schedule of fines.
If the condition which caused the notice of violation to issue continues
to exist, the finding of responsibility may also be used by the City as
prima facie evidence of the existence of a violation in any proceeding to
suspend or revoke any license, permit or certificate issued by the City
relative to that building, structure or premises pending the correction
of the condition, and the City may pursue any remedy at law through
the pursuit of injunctive relief in the courts of the commonwealth.
B.
There shall be a fine of $25 for each incident of improper removal
or failure to remove accumulated snow and ice and for each day the
condition is not remediated.
A.
Dogs. There shall be a fine of $50 for any incident resulting in a
violation of Chapter 144 of the City Code regarding the keeping of
and existence of dogs or other animals in the City. The owner of any
dangerous or vicious dog, if said animal is found on property not owned
or controlled by its owner or not restrained in a secure area per
Subsection C of § 144-23, shall be subject to a fine of $250.
B.
Any person, firm or corporation committing fire prevention violations
of any provisions of Chapter 160 of the City Code shall be fined $100
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or on which a violation
continues.
C.
Any misuse or unauthorized use of the Chicopee Municipal Golf Course
as defined by Chapter 172 of the City Code shall be fined $250.
D.
Whoever commits a parks and recreation violation of a provision of
Chapter 206 or any regulation established by the Parks Commission
or the Cemetery Commission, whether included herein or hereafter
enacted, shall, unless other provision is expressly made, be liable to a
penalty of not more than $20 for each offense.
E.
Any person violating any provision of Chapter 223 regarding recycling
regulations shall be fined $100 for each violation.
F.
Any person who violates any provision of Chapter 239 of the City Code
regarding spray paint and indelible markers shall be fined $200 for the
first offense and $300 for each subsequent offense within a year of the
first offense.
G.
Whoever shall refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of Article
I of Chapter 243 of the City Code regarding street numbering within
30 days after a notice, in writing, delivered to the owner or occupant
of such tenement or building, of the number or numbers so assigned
by the City Engineer shall, for each and every offense, be liable to a
penalty of $100.
H.
§ 132-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-9
1:207
§ 132-10. Deposit of fines.
All fines, penalties or assessments in actions under this article shall be paid
to the general fund of the City.
§ 132-11. Effect on other provisions.
This article shall supersede any local ordinances, rules or regulations to the
contrary, and any conflict in the City Code shall be resolved in favor of this
article.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
Chapter 257 of the City Code by removing any wood, trees, bushes or
other flora from any City property without the express written consent
of the Tree Warden and Superintendent of Public Works shall be subject
to a fine of $300. Each day's continuance of a violation and each tree
removed shall be considered a separate offense.
I.
Any person who violates Chapter 262 of the City Code by illegally
storing unregistered or abandoned vehicles or otherwise violates the
State Sanitary Code in their possession of vehicles shall be fined $100
for the first offense or incident and $100 for each subsequent day the
condition persists.
J.
Any person committing a violation of Chapter 111 of the Massachusetts
General Laws or regulations derived from the State Sanitary Code
and enforceable by the City Health Department shall be fined $50 per
violation and $50 per day of a persisting violation.
K.
Any person violating any provision of the State Building Code shall be
fined $100 per violation per day that the condition or illicit activity
persists.
L.
Any person who violates any other provision of the City Code not
enumerated above shall be fined $20 per incident per every day the
condition or illicit activity persists.
M.
§ 132-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 132-11
1:208
Chapter 136
COMMUNITY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109. Pornography — See Ch. 211.
§ 132-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:209

ARTICLE I
Alcohol Establishments
[Adopted 1-21-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
§ 136-1. Employee and customer attire.
It is forbidden to permit or employ any person in or on the licensed premises
of any establishment licensed for alcoholic beverages in the City of
Chicopee while such person is unclothed or in such attire as to expose to
view any portion of the areola of the female breast or any portion of the
pubic hair, cleft of buttocks or genitals.
§ 136-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-1
1:211
Chapter 139
CURFEWS
§ 139-1. Curfew established; definitions.
§ 139-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
Persons under 17 years of age shall not loiter or remain in a public
place or establishment or on a public way from 11:00 p.m. until 6:00
a.m. on weeknights and from 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m. on
weekends. [Amended 7-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-48]
A.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated
for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to
any place of amusement or entertainment.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial
group of the public has access and includes streets, highways and the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
B.
Persons under the age of 17 who are married or who have had the
status of minority removed by law.
A.
Persons under the age of 17 accompanied by a parent or guardian or
who are on an errand for a parent or guardian or under a controlled
supervised activity with prenotification to the Police Department of the
activity.
B.
Persons under the age of 17 if they are in a motor vehicle traveling to
or from a place of employment or if they are involved in employmentrelated
activities.
C.
Persons under the age of 17 who are attending or going to or from
school, religious or civic organizational functions or who are exercising
their First Amendment speech and associational rights in a peaceful
manner.
D.
Persons under the age of 17 who are engaged in interstate or intercity
travel.
E.
Persons under the age of 17 who are on a sidewalk in front of the
minor's home or the home of a neighbor wherein the neighbor knows of
and has no concerns with said persons remaining in front of the house
involved.
F.
§ 136-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 139-2
1:212
§ 139-3. Parent defined.
Parent includes a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or
stepparent of another person, as well as those persons who are at least 18
years of age and who are authorized by a parent or guardian to have care
and custody of a minor.
§ 139-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 139-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to increase juvenile safety and to decrease
juvenile crime.
Chapter 142
DIKE SYSTEM
§ 142-1. Motor vehicle prohibitions.
On the entire dike system of the Connecticut River basin area and the
service road of the toe of the Dike Road, from this day forward, all motor
vehicles, including snowmobiles, motorbikes, etc., shall be prohibited.
§ 142-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-4-1985; 5-5-1987;
7-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-36]
A fine of $500 shall be levied for infraction of this chapter, plus, if a minor,
the parents of said violator shall be fined an additional $500.
Persons under the age of 17 who are moving about during curfew hours
due to an emergency that can be verified.
G.
Police officers are to ask and verify, where possible, the age of any
apparent offender and are to inquire into the reasons for being in a
public place during curfew hours. A police officer may issue a citation
only if the officer reasonably believes that the person has violated this
chapter and that none of the exceptions listed herein are applicable.
If a person violates this chapter, he/she shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $500 for each separate offense. [Amended 10-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-28]
A.
A parent or guardian of a minor or an owner, operator or employee of
a business establishment is also subject to a fine not to exceed $500 if
he or she knowingly permits or, by insufficient control, allows a minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
during curfew hours.
B.
§ 139-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:213
§ 142-3. Exceptions.
This chapter does not include the Fire Department, Police Department and
Flood Control Department.
Chapter 144
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 144-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean:
ANIMAL — Any live, vertebrate or nonvertebrate creature, domestic or
wild, excluding Homo sapiens.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person or persons designated to
enforce this chapter.
ANIMAL EXHIBITION — Any spectacle, display, act or event, other than
circuses, in which animals are used.
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any facility operated by a humane society, a county
or municipal agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding
or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or any law of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
CIRCUS — A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any pet shop, auction, riding
school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition or
kennel.
DANGEROUS DOG — A "dangerous or vicious dog," as the term is used in
this chapter, shall mean any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; or any dog which attacks a human being or a
domestic animal on two or more occasions without provocation.
GUARD DOGS — Dogs which meet the provisions of MGL c. 129, § 39B.
HUMANE OFFICER — Any person designated by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, a municipal government or a humane society as a law
enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties under MGL c.
147, § 10.
KENNEL — Any premises wherein any person, partnership or corporation
engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire,
training for a fee or selling dogs, or engages in training dogs for guard or
sentry purposes or every pack or collection of more than three dogs three
months old or over owned or kept on a single premises, irrespective of the
purpose for which they are maintained.
§ 142-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 144-1
1:214
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The City Clerk, as provided by the General
Laws of the commonwealth.
OWNER — Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored
if it is fed or sheltered for 48 hours.
PET — Any nonfarm animal kept for pleasure.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any animal which:
RESTRAINT — Dogs must be on a leash not more than six feet long, except
when the dog is confined in a fenced-in area or pen.
SERVICE ANIMALS — Dogs that are individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for people with disabilities.
SNAKE — Any limbless reptile having a scaly body, whether poisonous or
not.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL OR CLINIC — Any establishment maintained and
operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of
diseases and inquiries of animals.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal or animals that constitute a physical threat
to human beings or other animals.
ZOOLOGICAL PARK — Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of domesticated or
nondomesticated animals, operated by a person, partnership, corporation
or government agency.
§ 144-2. Permit required for commercial animal establishments and
animal shelters.
A. Molests passersby or passing vehicles.
B. Attacks other animals.
Trespasses on school grounds, except for a school mascot or service
animal.
C.
D. Is at large in violation of this chapter.
E. Damages private or public property.
Barks, whines or howls and disturbs the peace and tranquility of an
area.
F.
G. Bites or attacks any persons.
No person, partnership or corporation shall operate a commercial
animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a permit
in compliance with this chapter.
A.
The City shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits and
shall include requirements for humane care of all animals and for
B.
§ 144-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-2
1:215
§ 144-3. License and permit issuance.
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
laws. The City may amend such regulations from time to time as is
deemed desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection
of animals.
Upon showing by an applicant for a permit that he is willing and able to
comply with the regulations promulgated by the City, a permit shall be
issued upon payment of the applicable fee.
C.
The permit period shall begin April 1 and shall run for one year.
Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and
up to 30 days after April 1. Application for a permit to establish a new
commercial animal establishment under the provisions of this chapter
may be made at any time.
D.
If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment,
the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his name
upon payment of a transfer fee of $25; provided, however, that the new
owner must comply with Subsection C of this section.
E.
Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee after
inspection by the proper authority:
(1) For each kennel authorized to house four dogs or fewer: $50.
(2) For each kennel authorized to house 10 dogs or fewer: $75.
(3) For each kennel authorized to house more than 10 dogs: $100.
(4) For each zoological park: $100.
(5) For each circus: $125.
(6) For each performing animal exhibition: $50.
(7) For each grooming shop: $50.
F.
Every facility at a different address regulated by this chapter shall be
considered a separate enterprise and requires an individual permit.
G.
Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered in this
chapter or failure to obtain said license by April 1 of each year shall
result in a fine of up to $200.
H.
Any person or facility which has a change in the category under which
a permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification, and appropriate
adjustment of the permit fee shall be made.
I.
No fee may be required of any veterinary hospital, clinic, animal shelter
or government-operated facility.
J.
§ 144-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 144-3
1:216
§ 144-4. Restraint.
§ 144-5. Impoundment; citations.
It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or license that
the City or designated agents or any special police officer appointed
under MGL c. 147, § 10 (c. 147, § 10, since repealed), or the inspector
of animals appointed under MGL c. 129, §§ 15 and 16 be permitted to
inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any
time, and, if permission for such inspections is refused, the agent shall
seek a search warrant to enter and inspect the property.
A.
If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the
application, the City may notify the licensing authority who may refuse
to issue, suspend or revoke a permit or license.
B.
Any person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals may not
be issued a permit or license to operate a commercial animal
establishment for a period of five years.
C.
Any person having been denied a license or permit may reapply after
conditions have been corrected upon which denial was based. Each
reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.
D.
Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within 10 days
thereafter, be responsible for the placement or humane disposal of all
animals, kept or harbored, and no part of the permit or license fee shall
be refunded. Failure to place or humanely dispose of any animal kept or
harbored shall result in a fine of up to $200.
E.
A. All dogs shall be kept under restraint, as defined in this chapter.
Every owner shall exercise proper care and control of his/her animals
to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
B.
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secure
enclosure in such a manner that such female dog cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding.
C.
Every vicious animal, as determined by the City after a hearing, shall be
confined by the owner within a building or secure enclosure and shall
be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of its owner.
D.
Every owner shall exercise proper care and control of his/her animals.
The fine for any animal that barks, whines, howls and disturbs the
peace and tranquility of an area shall be: first offense, $25; second
offense, $50; third and subsequent offenses, $100.
E.
Unrestrained dogs and nuisance animals shall be taken by the animal
control officers, police, humane officers or Board of Health officials and
impounded or quarantined in an animal shelter and there confined in a
humane manner.
A.
§ 144-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-5
1:217
§ 144-6. Enforcement.
Impounded or quarantined dogs shall be kept for not fewer than seven
days or any lesser minimum period permitted by the Massachusetts
General Laws of the commonwealth, unless claimed by the owner
within that period.
B.
If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal
can be identified, the animal control officer shall return the animal to
the owner and issue a citation or impound the dog and immediately
notify the owner by telephone or mail.
C.
An owner reclaiming an impounded or quarantined dog shall pay an
administrative fee of $40, plus $15 for each day the animal has been
impounded.
D.
Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within seven days, or any lesser
minimum period permitted by the Massachusetts General Laws of the
commonwealth, shall become the property of the local government
authority and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or
humanely euthanized. If a licensed veterinarian states, in writing, that
the animal is in significant pain and has no reasonable chance of
recovering or having a good quality of life, the animal may be
euthanized at any time. The City shall not be liable for any disposition
of animals in accordance with this section.
E.
Animal control officers, humane officers, police officers and Board of
Health officials of the City shall be empowered to issue citations to
the owners of animals for violations of this chapter and to otherwise
enforce this chapter.
F.
If a citation is issued, a penalty of $25 for the first offense and $50 for
the second and subsequent offenses within the licensing period must be
paid within 21 days in full satisfaction of the assessed penalty. In the
event that such penalty is not paid within the time period prescribed,
a criminal warrant shall be initiated before a magistrate, and, upon
conviction of a violation of this chapter, the owner shall be punished as
provided in § 144-7.
G.
The City shall review automatically all licenses issued to animal owners
against whom three or more violations of this chapter have been
assessed in a twelve-month period.
H.
An animal control center or veterinarian may, in its sole discretion,
administer veterinary care to sick or injured animals impounded under
this chapter. If the owner of the animal can be identified, the owner
shall be responsible for the payment of such veterinary expenses.
I.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with a humane officer,
animal control officer or other person(s) designated by the City to
enforce this chapter in the performance of their duties.
A.
§ 144-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 144-6
1:218
§ 144-7. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter:
§ 144-8. Animal care.
The minimum standards of animal care must meet all requirements of state
and federal laws.
§ 144-9. Keeping of wild animals.
The keeping of wild animals must meet all requirements of state and federal
laws and fish and wildlife laws.
§ 144-10. Assignment of duties of Board of Health Commissioners.
The Mayor may designate the Board of Health Commissioners or their
appointees as the authority to fulfill such responsibilities of the City as he
deems proper, which are set out in this chapter. Notice of such designation
shall be filed with the City Clerk no less than 15 days before the effective
date of any such designation or appointment.
§ 144-11. Keeping of swine.
No swine shall be kept or maintained within the limits of the City, except for
the purpose of immediate slaughtering.
§ 144-12. Keeping of fowl.
No fowl shall be kept or maintained within the limits of the City except
where allowed by rules and regulations promulgated by the Board of
Health.
Animal control officers, humane officers, police officers, Board of
Health officials or their designee, including, but not limited to, a
compliance officer of the City, shall be empowered to issue citations to
the owners of animals for violations of this chapter and to otherwise
enforce this chapter.
B.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not less than $10 and not more than $300.
A.
If any violation is continuing, each day's violation shall be deemed a
separate violation.
B.
Any person found in violation of any part of this chapter by the Board
of Health or a court shall have his/her permit to own, keep, harbor or
have custody of animals revoked, and no new permit will be issued.
C.
§ 144-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-13
1:219
§ 144-13. Animals at-large or depasturing in streets.
No person shall permit any sheep, goat, swine, mule, ass, horse or meat
cattle belonging to him or under his control to go at-large or depasture in
any street, lane or alley or on any common in the City.
§ 144-14. Animals on sidewalks.
No person shall permit any goat, sheep, swine, horse, mule, ox or cow under
his care to go upon any sidewalk in the City, except for the purpose of
crossing such sidewalk to go to or from some adjourning enclosure.
§ 144-15. Grazing animals in streets.
No person shall permit any horse, cow, swine or goat or other grazing
animal to go at-large in any street.
§ 144-16. Protection of trees, lampposts and hydrants.
No person shall tie a horse or other animal to a tree, lamppost or hydrant
which is on City property.
§ 144-17. through § 144-19. (Reserved)
§ 144-20. Licensing of dogs.
Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of any dog
over three months of age within this City must obtain a license as
provided in this chapter.
A.
Application for licenses shall be made to the licensing authority, which
shall include the name and address of the applicant, a description of
the animal, proof of rabies vaccination, or proof of exception, and the
appropriate fee.
B.
If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs shall be for a period of
one year. The licensing period shall begin April 1 and shall run for one
year. Reapplication for a license may be made 30 days prior to and up
to 30 days after April 1.
C.
Application for a license must be made within 30 days after obtaining
a dog over three months of age. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a dog within the City for less than 60 days.
D.
License fees shall not be required for service animals or governmental
police dogs. Application shall be made, however, to the licensing
authority, and tags issued by the authority must be worn.
E.
Upon acceptance of the application and license fee, the licensing
authority shall issue a durable tag or identification collar stamped with
an identifying number and year of issuance. Tags should be designed so
F.
§ 144-13 CHICOPEE CODE § 144-20
1:220
§ 144-21. Animal waste.
that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar
or harness.
G. Dogs must wear identification tags at all times.
The licensing authority shall maintain records of the identifying
numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the
public.
H.
Failure to obtain license.
Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time
period specified in this chapter shall be fined $5 for each month
or part of a month they are late in obtaining such license, up to a
maximum fine of $50 per dog.
(1)
I.
A license shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee:
(1) For each dog under the age of one year old: $5.
(2) For each unneutered male dog one year old or older: $25.
(3) For each neutered male dog one year old or older: $5.
(4) For each unspayed female dog one year old or older: $25.
(5) For each spayed female dog one year of older: $5.
J.
A duplicate license may be obtained upon payment of a replacement fee
of $2.
K.
No person may use any license for any dog other than for the dog for
which it was issued.
L.
No person shall keep or control more than three dogs on a single
premises or a single structure.
M.
All licensed dogs shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian.
N.
All permitted sources of dogs, including shelters, rescue organizations,
pet shops, professional breeders and veterinarians, operating within
the City of Chicopee shall notify the licensing authority upon transfer
of ownership of any dog. The City Clerk may authorize these permitted
sources to register dogs and remit the fees to the City Clerk's office
within five days thereafter.
O.
The owner of every dog shall be responsible for the removal of any fecal
matter deposited by the owner's animal(s) on his or her property, public
walks, recreation areas or private property. "Owner" includes person(s)
who possess or control the dog.
A.
§ 144-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-21
1:221
§ 144-22. Sterilization of dogs released for adoption.
No unclaimed dog shall be released for adoption without being sterilized or
without written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that such animal
will be sterilized, and a deposit of at least $35 must be paid at the time of
adoption, $25 to be refunded after proof of sterilization.
§ 144-23. Dangerous and vicious dogs.
The owner or person(s) who possess or control the dog when appearing
with the dog on any public walk, street, recreation area or private
property shall possess the means of removal of any fecal matter left by
such dog.
B.
For purposes of this regulation, the means of removal shall include
any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking
up and containing such fecal matter. Disposal shall be accomplished
by transporting such fecal matter to a place suitable and regularly
reserved for the disposal of human fecal matter, specifically reserved
for disposal of dog fecal matter or otherwise designated as appropriate
by the Director of Public Health.
C.
Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine of $50
for the first offense, $100 for a second offense and $300 for any third or
subsequent violation.
D.
Any person may file a complaint, in writing, to the Board of Health
or its designee that a dog owned or kept in the City is a nuisance
or dangerous dog. To consider declaring a dog a nuisance dog or a
dangerous dog, an animal control officer of the City may initiate a
special hearing before the Board of Health to consider any evidence
collected and take charge of and impound the animal. The Animal
Control Center shall notify the owner of the dog by certified letter, or
Sheriff's Department delivery of such special hearing, and the owner
may attend and have an opportunity to be heard. Special hearings
under this section shall be public meetings under the Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. At this special hearing, the Board of
Health will determine whether to declare such dog a nuisance dog or
dangerous dog based upon the facts presented. If the dog is declared
a nuisance dog or dangerous dog, the City Clerk shall notify the
abutter(s) next door and across the street by regular mail and in the
classified section of the local newspaper of such findings at the owner's
sole expense.
A.
No dog shall be declared a nuisance or dangerous dog:
(1) Solely based upon growling or barking;
(2) Based upon the breed of the dog;
B.
§ 144-21 CHICOPEE CODE § 144-23
1:222
If the dog was reacting to another animal or to a person and
the dog's reaction was not grossly disproportionate to any of the
following circumstances:
The dog was protecting or defending itself, its offspring,
another domestic animal or a person from assault or attack.
(a)
The person who was attacked or threatened by the dog was
committing a crime upon the person or property of the owner
of the dog.
(b)
The person who was attacked or threatened by the dog was
engaging in teasing, tormenting, battering, assaulting, injuring
or otherwise provoking the dog.
(c)
At the time of the attack or threat, the person or animal that
was attacked or threatened by the dog had breached an
enclosure or structure in which the dog was kept apart from
the public and such person was not authorized by the owner
of the premises to be within such enclosure, including but
not limited to a gated, fenced-in area if the gate was closed,
whether locked or unlocked; provided, however, that if a
person is under the age of seven, it shall be a rebuttable
presumption that such person was not committing a crime,
provoking the dog or trespassing.
(d)
(3)
Dogs declared to be nuisance or dangerous dogs. If the Board of Health
for the City of Chicopee deems a dog to be a nuisance dog or dangerous
dog, the Board of Health may order one or more of the following:
(1) That the dog be humanely restrained.
That the dog be confined to the premises of the owner of the dog;
provided, however, that "confined" shall mean securely confined
indoors or confined outdoors in a securely enclosed and locked pen
or dog run upon the premises of the owner.
(2)
That, whenever, the dog is removed from the premises of the
owner, the dog shall be securely and humanely muzzled and
restrained with a chain or other tethering device having a minimum
tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in
length.
(3)
That the animal shall be surgically sterilized and microchipped with
the microchip registered to the City, with all costs associated with
these services to be borne by the owner.
(4)
That the owner construct, within two weeks from the date of
decision, a secure enclosure to house the dog when it is in the
owner's yard. The Board of Health may order that, during
construction period, the dog be publicly impounded at an animal
shelter or a private veterinary hospital until the secure enclosure is
(5)
C.
§ 144-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-23
1:223
constructed. If the owner chooses not to build a secure enclosure
in accordance with the Board's order or if the dog is found on a
property not owned or controlled by the owner or not restrained
in the secure enclosure, an order that the dog be euthanized may
be issued by the Board of Health. The effectiveness of the secure
enclosure shall be subject to periodic inspections by an animal
control officer, as deemed necessary. The fee for said inspection
shall be $75. If the owner is found violating the secure enclosure
requirement, immediate public impoundment of the dog shall be
done by the Animal Control Center during the time the violation
continues to exist, and the owner shall bear all cost(s) for such
public impoundment. The fine for such violation shall be $200 per
day.
That ownership of the dog may not be transferred unless the
transfer of ownership is to an adult residing within the same
residence and said dog shall remain housed solely at the residence.
(6)
That, if the owner of the dog fails to appear at a hearing in front of
the Board of Health and the dog is declared a dangerous dog, the
dog shall be impounded and/or euthanized.
(7)
That the dog be humanely euthanized, immediately, or summarily
upon the owner's failure to comply with conditions imposed by the
Board of Health.
(8)
(9) Ban the dog from the City of Chicopee.
With regard to dangerous dogs and nuisance dogs, if there are no
additional instances of the dangerous or nuisance behavior within a
thirty-six-month period from the date of designation, the dog shall be
removed from the list of dangerous dogs and/or nuisance dogs. The dog
may, but is not required to, be removed from the list of dangerous dogs
and/or nuisance dogs prior to the expiration of the thirty-six-month
period if the owner of the dog demonstrates to the Board of Health at
a special hearing that changes in circumstances or measures taken by
the owner, such as training, have mitigated the risk to the public safety.
Any and all costs for the impounding of a dangerous dog will be borne
by the owner unless determined otherwise by the Board of Health or
court of final appeal. An owner reclaiming a dangerous or nuisance dog
shall pay an administrative fee of $40, plus the following costs, where
applicable:
(1) A boarding fee of $22 per dog, per day;
All outstanding fines, except for any fine for which a timely appeal
is pending;
(2)
(3) All veterinary charges, drug and other medical expenses;
(4) The cost of sterilization;
D.
§ 144-23 CHICOPEE CODE § 144-23
1:224
§ 144-24. Dogs on school premises.
§ 144-25. Performing animal exhibitions.
The provisions of § 144-23 shall not apply to so-called "dangerous and
vicious dogs" or so-called "pit bulls" when said dogs are part of a performing
dog show, circus or animal exhibition that meets all of the requirements of
state and federal laws regarding such performances or exhibitions.
§ 144-26. through § 144-29. (Reserved)
§ 144-30. Dead animals; responsibility for unrestrained animals.
Chapter 146
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS
§ 146-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases used
herein shall have the following meanings:
DEBRIS — Includes all forms of paper products, used or unused, commonly
associated with the sale of food products, such as napkins, straws, cups and
containers of all types.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any facility for the sale and distribution of food
and drinks under a common victualer's license which dispenses any such
food and drink to vehicles for the purpose of consumption in said vehicles.
GROUNDS — Any portion of real estate upon which such drive-in
restaurants are located, and includes shrubs, lawn and plants, but shall
exclude any buildings, permanent or temporary, used for the consumption
of food and drink within.
(5) The cost of rabies vaccinations;
(6) The cost of license and registration; and
(7) The cost of microchip implementation and registration.
The owner or keeper of any dog shall not allow his dog to be upon any
school grounds between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any
day that such schools are in session.
A.
Any owner or keeper of a dog who fails to comply with the provisions of
this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.
B.
The responsibility for the removal of any dead animal shall be with the
Board of Health, unless otherwise provided by law.
A.
Any live animal whose restraint or removal is not herein provided for
shall be the responsibility of the Board of Health.
B.
§ 144-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-1
1:225
PARKING AREA — That part of the premises used by said vehicles for
parking and stopping, for purposes of purchasing such food and drink or for
the purpose of consuming the same.
PREMISES — Shall be all inclusive and shall include the parking area,
grounds and permanent buildings for the sale and consumption of food
therein.
§ 146-2. Operation standards.
§ 146-3. Building permits for new restaurants.
Whoever applies to the Building Inspector for a permit to construct a drivein
restaurant shall satisfy said Building Inspector that he has complied with
the following conditions:
Lighting. The entire parking area of every drive-in restaurant shall be
adequately lighted. Said lighting, however, shall be so arranged and
distributed that no lamp or spotlight shall directly face any residence.
Where it becomes necessary to employ deflectors to accomplish the
purposes of this section, deflectors or other means shall be so
employed. The Building Inspector of the City of Chicopee shall have
the power and authority to inspect drive-in restaurants and require
compliance with this section.
A.
Sound transmission. No jukebox or other record or music-playing
device shall be operated or permitted to be operated on any part
of the grounds, nor shall any loudspeakers or other devices for the
transmission of sound be used or be permitted to be used to reproduce
or transmit music or sound from any permanent or temporary structure
to any part of the grounds at any time.
B.
Debris. Containers for debris shall be kept in easily accessible areas for
the purpose of emptying trays after use. The grounds shall be free of
debris at all times and shall be cleared of any debris before closing. No
such debris shall be permitted to be scattered to adjoining properties
and ways used for travel. The Board of Health of the City of Chicopee
shall have authority to require compliance with this section.
C.
Conduct. The person or persons in charge or control of said drivein
restaurants shall keep orderly conduct and prevent disorder and
nuisance on the parking area.
D.
Closing. No sale or delivery of any food or drink to any vehicle for
consumption therein shall be made after 1:00 a.m. This section shall not
apply to food or drink consumed in a building for said purpose.
E.
That the premises upon which said construction is contemplated is a
minimum of two acres in area.
A.
That said premises shall be a minimum of 200 feet distant from the
nearest church, school or residence.
B.
§ 146-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 146-3
1:226
§ 146-4. Conditions for common victualers license.
A common victualer's license shall not be issued to any drive-in restaurant
until the Board of Health issues an approval to the License Commissioners,
in writing, stating that, upon inspection, said drive-in restaurant was found
qualified to sell food.
§ 146-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $15 nor more than $20 for each offense.
Chapter 151
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 122.
§ 151-1. Supervision designated.
An Inspector of Wires shall be appointed to supervise electric lines to carry
electric light or power current in accordance with the provisions of MGL c.
166, § 32.
§ 151-2. Licensing of utility lines.
That the permanent or temporary building used for dispensing food
products shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the street line.
Said minimum distance from said building to the street line shall be
measured at right angles to such line.
C.
That he has received written evidence from the Chief of Police that
the location of said premises will not create a traffic hazard or hamper
traffic flow in heavy traffic areas.
D.
Whenever the City Council is applied to for a location of such lines, it
shall, if it grants the same, first determine the streets through which
the lines shall run and shall then require the company or persons so
applying to furnish a plan of the streets so designated therefor upon a
scale of not less than 150 or more than 200 feet to the inch; and the
City Council shall then determine and specify on said plan where each
pole may be located and shall cause to be issued to the party applying
therefor a certificate specifically enumerating the streets where the
lines may run and the location of each pole thereon, as exhibited on said
plan, the kind of poles, the height at which all wires must be placed and
the dimensions and location of the underground conduit, if said lines
or any part thereof shall be laid underground. Said plan and a copy
A.
§ 146-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-2
1:227
§ 151-3. Agreement of City's nonliability.
§ 151-4. Installation of electric wires.
Every such line of wire along or across streets, ways or other public places
shall be placed underground or at a height not less than 20 feet from
the ground, except under bridges upon suitable poles or from building to
building, except that such electrical conductors and fixtures as may be
required in the construction and operation of electrical railways may not
be less than 18 feet from the ground. Every such line of wire shall be so
constructed, placed and maintained as not to interfere with any other line
nor with the operation of the fire alarm telegraph, and all unused lines
of wire shall forthwith be removed. Except for street railway purposes, no
more than one line of poles or one conduit shall be maintained in any street,
and no tree upon any street or other public place shall be cut or trimmed
to make room for such wires without the consent of the Superintendent of
Streets.
§ 151-5. Certificate of authority required.
Every employee, official or agent of any telegraph, telephone or electric
company who desires access to any premises within the City upon business
of the company appertaining to the repairing or laying of lines over, through
or along said premises shall be furnished by the company with a certificate
of said certificate shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, and the
construction of the line shall conform thereto in every particular, and
any pole placed otherwise than as therein designated shall forthwith be
removed. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to the right of the City,
free of charge, to place its fire alarm, telegraph or other electric wires
upon the poles or through the conduit so licensed to be maintained
and to the right of the City to license the location of lines by any
other person or corporation upon said poles and through said conduit
upon payment to the owner thereof of a reasonable compensation to be
determined by the parties or, if they fail to agree, to be determined by
the Mayor. Whenever a location is granted upon poles already erected,
a plan of the streets so traversed need not be required.
B.
All corporations, companies and individuals licensed to erect poles and
fixtures and to maintain electric wires shall, before proceeding to act
under the license, give to the City an agreement, in writing, satisfactory
to the City Solicitor, that they will save the City harmless from any and
all claims for damages, costs, expenses, charges or compensation for or
on account of or in any way growing out of the erection, maintenance
or use of said poles, fixtures or wires.
A.
Said agreement, after its approval by the City Solicitor, shall be filed
with the City Clerk, and no certificate of such license shall be issued
until said agreement is so filed.
B.
§ 151-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 151-5
1:228
of his authority to act therefor and shall not enter said premises without
first exhibiting such certificate to the owner or occupant thereof and
receiving permission so to enter.
§ 151-6. Condition of poles. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The poles shall be kept well painted, of a uniform color and in good
condition to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets and of the
Mayor; and the location of any poles, when once erected, shall not be
changed without the consent of the City Council. The City shall have the
exclusive use of the one crossbar and the top of each pole free of cost for the
purpose of placing wires thereon, and said crossbar shall be well-braced,
not less than five feet long and shall be placed not less than three feet from
the crossbar next to it.
Chapter 157
FEES
§ 151-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-6
1:229

ARTICLE I
Late or Penalty Fee
[Adopted 12-18-199024]
§ 157-1. Assessment of fee.
A late or penalty fee of $100 and any resulting costs incurred due to any
required hearings or any corrective action that becomes necessary due to
any failure to comply with any ordinance requirements, such as license
renewals or the like, shall be assessed against the defaulting party involved.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall become effective 2-1-1991.
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-1
1:231
Chapter 160
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 34. Building construction — See Ch. 122.
§ 157-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 157-1
1:232
ARTICLE I
Smoke and Heat Detectors
[Adopted 10-4-1983]
§ 160-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a basic minimum standard for
the installation and maintenance of automatic smoke and heat detectors in
buildings. The installation of said devices is intended for the protection of
life.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building containing six or more dwelling units
with independent cooking and bathroom facilities.
APPROVED — Equipment or materials listed or labeled or included on a
list published by an organization acceptable to the Board of Fire Prevention
Regulations or the State Fire Marshal, which organization is concerned with
product evaluation, maintains periodic inspections or production of listed
equipment or materials and whose listing states whether the equipment
or materials meet appropriate standards or have been tested and found
suitable for use in a specific manner.
AUTOMATIC HEAT DETECTOR — A device which automatically detects
abnormally high temperature or acts of temperature rise and automatically
indicates an audible alarm that can be effectively heard above the maximum
noise level obtained under normal conditions of occupancy.
AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which automatically detects
the visible or invisible particles of combustion and automatically indicates
an audible alarm that can be effectively heard above the maximum noise
level obtained under normal conditions of occupancy.
BOARDING- OR LODGING HOUSE — A building in which separate sleeping
rooms are rented providing sleeping accommodations for persons on either
a transient or a permanent basis, with or without meals, but which may have
separate cooking facilities for individual occupants.
DORMITORY — A building or space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family
group, in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint
occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories, fraternity
houses, military barracks and ski lodges, with or without meals, but without
individual cooking facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — A single living unit consisting of one or more rooms and
providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and sanitation.
§ 160-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-2
1:233
HOTEL — A building or a group of buildings under the same management in
which there are more than 15 sleeping accommodations for hire, primarily,
but not solely, used by transients who are lodged with or without meals,
whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel or by any other name.
§ 160-3. Requirements.
§ 160-4. Newly constructed buildings.
Newly constructed or substantially rehabilitated buildings shall be
governed by the State Building Code for the installation of automatic heat
or smoke detectors.
§ 160-5. Inspections. [Amended 1-17-1984]
The Fire Department may inspect all residential buildings and may issue
orders as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 160-6. Responsibility of owner.
The owner of the premises is responsible to ensure compliance with this
article.
§ 160-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
00-19]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall
be fined $100 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or on which a
violation continues.
Each dwelling unit used for residential purposes shall be equipped with
an approved automatic smoke or heat detector located on the highest
habitable level on each floor.
A.
Each hotel, boarding- or lodging house shall be equipped with an
approved automatic smoke or heat detector for each sleeping
accommodation, unless said hotel, boarding- or lodging house is
equipped with a sprinkler system.
B.
Each dormitory shall be equipped with an approved automatic smoke
or heat detector for each sleeping accommodation.
C.
§ 160-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 160-7
1:234
ARTICLE II
Permit Fees
[Adopted 3-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-30]
§ 160-8. Fees.
Permit fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Sprinkler system installation/plan review $50
Aboveground tank installation/removal $25 per tank
Oil burner equipment $25
Gun powder $25
Fire alarm systems $50
Fire suppression systems $50
FP290 renewal $25
Flammable fluid/waste oil storage $25
Fireworks display $25
Propane $25 per tank
Vent-free gas appliances $25
Print review business/residential remodel/new
construction
$50
Underground storage tank installation/removal $50 per tank
Research of underground/aboveground tank
records
$25
Commercial fire alarm test/install $25 (reinspection
$20)
Miscellaneous fire department permits (cutting/
welding, dumpster, etc.
$25
§ 160-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-8
1:235
Chapter 169
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 132.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Storage or disposal of radioactive
waste — See Ch. 217.
Recycling — See Ch. 223.
§ 160-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 160-8
1:236
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-225]
§ 169-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall be applicable:
ABANDONED VEHICLES — A class of waste which includes passenger
automobiles, trucks and trailers which are useless, unwanted and/or
discarded by their owners and have been left on City streets, other public
places and on private premises.
ANIMAL WASTE — All wastes from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken
coops, veterinary establishments and the like.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials.
BULKY WASTES — All large items of refuse that do not fit into the standard
legal container or overflow bag, including, but not limited to, appliances,
furniture, mattresses, floor coverings large auto parts, boilers/furnaces,
water heaters, large electronics, propane tanks, items containing mercury,
fluorescent bulbs, televisions and tires.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTES — All wastes that are the
result of construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on
houses, commercial buildings, pavements and other structures.
CONTAINER — See definition of "standard legal container" in this section.
DEAD ANIMALS — Those that die naturally or from diseases or are
accidentally killed or are intentionally killed. Condemned animals or parts
of animals from slaughterhouses, dog hospitals or similar places are not
included in this term, but are regarded as industrial refuse. It is the intent
of this section to describe only small animals, such as dogs, cats, rabbits,
squirrels, chickens and rats that find their homes within the wooded areas
of the City or often serve as household pets.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All waste of a pathological, explosive, radioactive
or toxic nature.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Consists of the solid waste materials from factories,
processing plants and other manufacturing enterprises.
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Miscellaneous Provisions,
adopted as Ch. 33, Art. 33/I, of the 1976 Code, as amended.
§ 169-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-1
1:237
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined in this article, and
all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in
this article, tends to create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or
appearance.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized by regulations and ordinance of the Waste Disposal
Division of the Public Works Department.
MARKET WASTE — That waste which generates from the wholesale and
retail markets as a result of handling, storage and selling of poultry, fish,
meat, vegetables and fruit. Included are large quantities of putrescible
garbage along with some rubbish, such as wooden crates and cardboard.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law; any newspaper duly entered with the Postal Service Department of
the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation; any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per
year, and sold to the public.
OVERFLOW BAG — A plastic bag of proper size, color and City markings.
The cost of said plastic bags shall be set by the City of Chicopee and
distributed by only City-approved outlets. Overflow bags are to be used to
contain weekly garbage and rubbish that will not fit into the standard legal
container for automated curbside trash collection.
PAPER — All paper products, including, but not limited to, envelopes, books,
magazines, newspapers, inserts, junk mail, catalogs, white and colored
paper, shredded paper, corrugated cardboard, paperboard, paperback
books, phonebooks, construction paper, gift wrap, gift bags, gift tissue
paper and cards.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the City, owned or used by the City and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person or his servant, agent, employee or representative,
as well as firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continually uninhabited or vacant,
and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, tree belts, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or public ways and any and all grounds and buildings under City
ownership and/or control.
REFUSE — The total solid waste of the community.
§ 169-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-1
1:238
RUBBISH — All waste consisting of a variety of both combustible and
noncombustible solid waste materials of households, stores and institutions.
Combustible rubbish consists of miscellaneous burnable materials; and,
in general, it is the organic component of rubbish, such as paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, bedding, rubber, leather, grass, leaves and
other yard trimmings, as well as combustible inorganic materials such as
plastics. Noncombustible rubbish, for the most part, consists of the organic
components of rubbish, such as tin cans, metals, dirt, ceramics, glass and
similar or like substances. Further, those portions of rubbish banned from
landfill disposal, including recyclables, yard waste, and any waste ban
material designated by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection shall be separated in accordance with Chapter 223 (Recycling)
and any other rules and regulations promulgated by the Superintendent of
Public Works, under the direction of the Mayor and City Council.
STANDARD LEGAL CONTAINER — A set out container ("toter") as provided
by the City, overflow bag as defined above, or other yard waste bag or
container as specifically approved by the City.
TOTER — A wheeled cart/container, distributed by the City, used for the
collection of garbage, rubbish and/or recyclables. Said toter shall be of
a size and design approved by the City to ensure mechanical lifting and
loading by City collection vehicles.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YARD RUBBISH and YARD WASTE — Consists of prunings, grass clippings,
weeds, leaves, tree branches up to and including three inches in diameter,
and general yard and garden wastes.
§ 169-2. Appointment of Superintendent.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor and
subject to City Council confirmation. The Superintendent of Public Works
shall supervise, direct, and control City sanitation operations.
§ 169-3. Duties of Superintendent of Public Works.
The Superintendent, under the direction of the Mayor and the City Council,
shall make rules and regulations in reference to the collection, temporary
accumulation and packaging of garbage, ashes and rubbish. With the
approval of the Mayor, the Superintendent may also make contracts for the
collection of garbage, ashes and rubbish. This, however, shall not prevent
the owner or occupant of the premises from removing his own garbage,
ashes and rubbish.
§ 169-4. Limitations of sanitation service.
Sanitation services shall not extend to the following:
A. Manufacturing industries.
§ 169-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-4
1:239
§ 169-5. Disposal of refuse; general restrictions.
B. Nonaccessible properties.
Multifamily residences greater that four family units. Exception:
Residences greater than four family units receiving City curbside
sanitation services as of July 1, 2016, shall be "grandfathered" and shall
continue to receive sanitation services consistent with City rules and
regulations unless opted out by the property owner.
C.
Commercial, industrial and business properties. Exception: Those
commercial/business properties being provided curbside service as of
July 1, 2016, shall be "grandfathered" and shall continue to receive
sanitation services consistent with City rules and regulations unless
opted out by the property owner.
D.
The removal of any material which has accumulated as a result of
building, remodeling, demolition or other construction activities.
E.
No person shall dump, throw or place any garbage, paper, ashes or
rubbish on any public or private property, whether owned by such a
person or not, within the City, except if it is in a standard legal container
for collection or it is expressly approved by the Board of Health and the
City Council.
A.
Garbage or mixed garbage and rubbish shall be stored in watertight
receptacles with tight-fitting covers. Said receptacles and covers shall
be of metal or other durable, rodentproof material. Garbage and
rubbish shall be put out for collection no earlier than 12 hours prior
to the day of collection and emptied containers shall be returned to
storage areas on the same day as collections.
B.
Rules for use of plastic bags:
Any type of plastic bag may be used to store garbage or mixed
rubbish for placement inside a standard legal container.
(1)
Plastic bags set out for curbside collection of garbage and rubbish
outside the legal container shall be overflow bags as defined above.
(2)
The Board of Health may require that regular plastic bags or
overflow bags be properly contained if it determines that a health
problem exists on public or private property. In making its
determination, the Board of Health shall consider, among other
things, evidence of strewn garbage/rubbish, torn garbage bags or
evidence of rodents.
(3)
C.
Dumpsters.
Semipermanent garbage and rubbish receptacles (e.g., dumpsters)
shall not be located between the principal building and the street
line or closer that six feet to any building used as a dwelling
unit. Only dwellings that contain five or more dwelling units are
(1)
D.
§ 169-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-5
1:240
permitted to have semipermanent garbage and rubbish
receptacles, this receptacle being any container that is used for
normal household garbage and rubbish. Such receptacles shall be
kept closed at all times when not in use and shall be constructed
in such a manner as to stand secure from entry by children and
animals.
All dwellings with four dwelling units or fewer shall be included in
the mandatory recycling program in accordance with Chapter 223.
(2)
Temporary dumpsters located on residential properties shall only
be allowed for a total of eight weeks and shall only be used for
household demolition and/or construction debris. Prior to setting a
temporary dumpster on said properties, the property owner shall
secure approval from the Health Department. If a temporary
dumpster is to be located on City property, a permit must be
obtained from the Department of Public Works. Any such dumpster
shall have working flashing lights on both sides at night.
(3)
The owner of any dwelling that contains three or more dwelling units,
the owner of any rooming house and the occupant of any other dwelling
place shall be responsible for providing at least three receptacles or
one receptacle per occupant, when there are more than three
occupants involved, for the storage of garbage and rubbish as are
sufficient to contain the accumulation before final collection or ultimate
disposal and shall so locate them to be convenient to the tenants and
that no objectionable odors enter any dwelling.
E.
The occupants of each dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit shall
be responsible for the proper placement of their garbage and rubbish
in the receptacles required in Subsection E above or at the point of
collection provided by the owner.
F.
Owners of multifamily dwellings. The owner of any dwelling that
contains three or more dwelling units, the owner of any rooming house
and the occupant of any other dwelling place shall be responsible for
the final collection or ultimate disposal or incineration of garbage and
rubbish by means of:
(1) The regular municipal collection system.
(2) Any other collection system approved by the Board of Health.
When otherwise lawful, a garbage grinder which grinds garbage
into the kitchen sink drain finely enough to ensure its free passage
and is otherwise maintained in a sanitary condition.
(3)
When otherwise lawful, a garbage or rubbish incinerator located
within the dwelling which is properly installed and which is
maintained so as not to create a safety or health hazard.
(4)
G.
§ 169-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-5
1:241
§ 169-6. Disposal of refuse in bodies of water prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of
water.
§ 169-7. Transportation of refuse restricted.
No person or firm or other city or town shall transport or deliver or cause
to be transported or delivered any rubbish, trash, demolition by-products,
garbage or other waste materials to any location within this City from
any location outside this City unless a permit for such transportation or
delivery has been procured from the City Council and certified by the
Board of Health that no health hazard or nuisance may be created by the
introduction of such materials within this City.
§ 169-8. Dumping on City property prohibited.
The dumping of rubbish or trash on City property is forbidden. Violators will
be liable to a penalty of $150 for each offense.
§ 169-9. Responsibilities outlined.
Any other method of disposal which does not endanger any person
and which is approved, in writing, by the Board of Health.
(5)
Owners of land. The owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise,
shall be responsible for maintaining such parcel of land in a clean and
sanitary condition and free from garbage, rubbish or other refuse. The
owner of such parcel of land shall correct any condition caused by or
on such parcel or its appurtenance which affects the health or safety
and well-being of the occupants of any dwelling or of the general public.
The owner of land and/or dwelling shall be responsible for compliance
with the City's curbside overflow bag refuse collection program. The
property owner shall also be ultimately responsible for compliance of
the occupants of any dwelling with the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Occupants of dwelling units. The occupant of any dwelling unit shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition and
free of garbage, rubbish and other filth or causes of sickness that part
of the dwelling which they exclusively occupy or control. In addition,
occupants of dwelling units shall be responsible for cooperating with
the property owner in complying with this chapter.
B.
Occupants of dwellings containing fewer than three dwelling units. In
a dwelling that contains fewer than three dwelling units, the occupant
shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition,
free of garbage, rubbish and other filth or causes of sickness, the stairs
or stairways leading to his dwelling unit and the landing adjacent to his
dwelling unit if the stairs, stairways or landing are not used by another
occupant.
C.
§ 169-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-9
1:242
§ 169-10. Storage in tree belts.
There shall be no storage of garbage, rubbish or refuse or recyclables of
any kind on any tree belt, curb or public property except when contained
with an approved standard legal container or overflow bag as defined
above. Furthermore, those standard legal containers and overflow bags
shall comply with the following:
Common areas.
In any dwelling, the owner shall be responsible for maintaining in
a clean and sanitary condition, free of garbage, rubbish and other
filth or causes of sickness, that part of the dwelling which is used in
common by the occupants and which is not occupied or controlled
by one occupant exclusively.
(1)
The owner of any dwelling abutting a private passageway or rightof-
way owned or used in common with other dwellings or which
the owner or occupants under his control have the right to use or
are in fact using shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean
and sanitary condition, free of garbage, rubbish and other filth
or causes of sickness, that part of the passageway or right-of-way
which abuts his property and which he or the occupants under his
control have the right to use or are in fact using or which he owns.
(2)
D.
Approved garbage/rubbish/refuse/recyclable containers may only be
put out for collection no earlier than 12 hours prior to the scheduled
collection day.
A.
Approved garbage/rubbish/refuse/recyclable containers must be put
out for collection no later than 7:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection
day.
B.
Approved garbage/rubbish/refuse/recyclable containers must be placed
on public property in a location accessible by City collection vehicles.
C.
Emptied garbage/rubbish/refuse/recyclable containers must be
removed from public property on the same day of collection.
D.
§ 169-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-10
1:243

ARTICLE II
Collection and Storage of Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-226]
§ 169-11. Refuse, rubbish and garbage to become City property;
prohibited acts; exceptions; violations and penalties.
All refuse, rubbish and garbage which are placed on public property for
collection purposes shall become the property of the City of Chicopee.
A.
No person, except an individual acting within the course and scope of
his or her agency or employment with the City of Chicopee, or private
collector licensed by the City of Chicopee, shall remove from any place
or premises in the City, or transport over public streets, any refuse,
rubbish and garbage placed within a barrel, bag or other container.
B.
No person shall enter onto private property for the purpose of
collecting or inspecting rubbish, garbage, or recyclables, except the
owner, occupant, manager, person in control of the premises, or a
person employed to do so by the City of Chicopee or private collector
licensed by the City of Chicopee who is then acting within the course
and scope of his or her agency or employment.
C.
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit:
Any person from gathering and removing refuse or cuttings
generated by construction, landscaping or gardening on the
property when the refuse and cuttings have not been set out for
collection by the City of Chicopee or a private collector licensed by
the City of Chicopee.
(1)
Any person from removing rubbish or garbage generated on
property owned or controlled by that person.
(2)
The immediate removal by any person of rubbish or garbage which
the Health Department, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building
Commissioner or their agents have determined to constitute a
nuisance or an immediate threat to the public health, safety and
welfare.
(3)
Any nonprofit organization from collecting recyclables in any
manner which does not conflict with this section or any other
provision of this Code.
(4)
Any person from gathering or removing refuse not contained within
a barrel, bag or other container. Any such person shall file with the
Superintendent of Public Works his or her name, address, contact
telephone number, vehicle description and vehicle registration
number.
(5)
D.
26.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Collection and Storage of
Rubbish and Refuse, adopted as Ch. 33, Art. 33/II, of the 1976 Code, as amended.
§ 169-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-11
1:245
§ 169-12. Rules for collection.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the municipal collection of
garbage, ashes and rubbish. When collection has been refused because of
noncompliance with these regulations, no obligation shall remain with the
City of furnish collection again until the next regular period. Furthermore,
any fire hazard which becomes evident from such a refusal shall be reported
to the proper authorities by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Notwithstanding other specific provisions of Chapter 169, violations
of Article I and Article II are enforceable by the Chicopee Police
Department, Chicopee Building Department, Chicopee Health
Department or the Superintendent of Public Works or any of their
designee(s). Any person or entity who fails to comply with any portion
of this article shall be fined $25 per day. A person or entity commits a
separate offense for each and every day a violation continues.
E.
Municipal collection schedule.
The collection of garbage, ashes and rubbish is to be made at
least once a week from each structure, building, dwelling or trailer
where housing accommodations exist except as noted in § 169-4,
Limitations of sanitation service. For the purpose of this
subsection, a week shall be interpreted as starting in the a.m. on
Sunday and ending on the following Saturday in the p.m.
(1)
Every structure, building, dwelling or trailer where housing
accommodations exist as noted in Subsection A(1) shall be made
part of a zone and shall be assigned a regular day of the week (Zone
1 — Monday, Zone 2 — Tuesday, Zone 3 — Wednesday, Zone 4 —
Thursday or Zone 5 — Friday) for pickup. Collection of garbage,
ashes or rubbish shall be on the regular day except in weeks where
holidays prohibit such collection and in those instances shall be
on the next following day. If a holiday falls on a Monday, Zone 1
shall be picked up on the next day (Tuesday), and each other zone
shall be moved forward one day (Zone 2 — Wednesday, Zone 3
— Thursday, Zone 4 — Friday, Zone 5 — Saturday). If a holiday
falls on a collection day other than Monday, the zone for that day
shall be picked up on the next day, and each subsequent zone
shall be moved forward one day. For instance, if a holiday occurs
on Wednesday, Zone 1 shall be picked up on Monday, Zone 2 on
Tuesday, Zone 3 on Thursday, Zone 4 on Friday and Zone 5 on
Saturday.
(2)
Each holiday is to be corrected for within the week in which it
occurs, and every week in which there is not a holiday shall have
collection on the regularly assigned day. During the course of the
year, garbage, ashes and rubbish shall be collected from every
structure where housing accommodations exist as noted in
Subsection A(1) at least once a week.
(3)
A.
§ 169-11 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-12
1:246
§ 169-13. Rules for preparation of refuse and waste.
The following rules and regulations shall govern the preparation of all
refuse and household waste for collection. The Department of Public Works
will not pick up any refuse or household waste which fails to comply with
these rules and regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works may petition the City Council
for specific exemptions from daily trash and/or recycling pickup.
A positive vote of 2/3 of the City Council shall be required to
grant such petition. Upon being granted such petition, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall publish notice of such
exemption at least one week before the date of the proposed
canceled pickup.
(4)
In an emergency situation caused by weather or other unforeseen
circumstance, the Mayor or his/her designee, who may be the
Superintendent of Public Works, may exempt daily trash and/or
recycling pickup. Upon such emergency exemption, the
Superintendent of Public Works or his/her designee shall announce
the exemption through local media outlets.
(5)
All ashes, garbage, paper or rubbish shall be delivered to the curb for
pickup per § 169-10.
B.
Sidewalks shall be kept free from obstruction and cleared of snow to
the curbline.
C.
City collection employees will not enter onto private property to make
collections.
D.
No one shall obstruct any contractor or employee of the Department of
Public Works in the performance of his duties.
E.
Approved standard legal container for garbage and rubbish shall be the
thirty-five-gallon City-provided toter and shall not weigh more than 75
pounds when filled. The cover on the toter must be reasonably closed
for pickup to occur. "Snow-coning" of garbage and rubbish in a toter
is prohibited. The City shall empty one thirty-five-gallon City-provided
toter per pickup location per week. Weekly garbage and rubbish which
will not fit into the City-provided thirty-five-gallon toter must be placed
in approved overflow bags and set out next to the toter. Any and all
garbage and/or rubbish not contained within a City-provided toter or
approved overflow bag will not be picked up by the City and shall be
removed by the property owner.
A.
Garbage and rubbish shall be prepared for collection by being drained
of all water and liquids.
B.
Cardboard boxes and cartons shall be knocked down, flattened or
collapsed. If the accumulation of cardboard is such that it cannot be
C.
§ 169-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-13
1:247
§ 169-14. Curtailment of service.
No owner or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility
to be removed from or shut off from any occupied dwelling, except for such
temporary period as may be necessary during actual repairs or alterations
and where reasonable notice of curtailment of service is given to the
occupant or during temporary emergencies when curtailment of service is
approved by the Board of Health. If any such service or facility becomes
curtailed, that person shall take immediate steps to cause its restoration.
§ 169-15. Authority to issue citations.
The Superintendent of Public Works, Chicopee Police Department, Chicopee
Building Department, Chicopee Health Department or any of their
designee(s) shall enforce the provisions of Chapter 169 and have the
placed inside the recycling toter, it shall be securely tied in bundles of
not over 50 pounds and stacked next to the recycling toter.
All paper shall be protected from the weather and placed in the
recycling toter.
D.
Bulky waste, such as discarded furniture, mattresses, large electronics,
tires, floor coverings, large appliances, and similar items will not be
picked up by the City. Disposal of said bulky waste shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
E.
Yard waste must be placed at the curb in an accessible location
separate from garbage, rubbish, and recyclables in accordance with the
City's yard waste pickup schedule. Grass, leaves, garden clippings and
small twigs must be placed in a standard legal container for yard waste:
paper lawn/leaf bags, small cardboard boxes or a thirty-two-gallon legal
container. Small branches three-inch diameter or less) should be tied
in bundles of four feet or less. All yard waste should be kept dry and
protected from the weather prior to collection. The weight of any bag,
box, barrel or bundle shall not exceed 75 pounds.
F.
Restricted materials; hazardous wastes.
Hazardous waste, as determined in conjunction with state and
federal regulations, will not be collected by the City of Chicopee at
curbside. Such material must be disposed of as required by federal,
state and local law.
(1)
No person shall place any material at curbside which is listed
as a restricted material in the state regulations on waste control
(310 CMR 19.017) or is inconsistent with the City's disposal policy
and contract provisions. Materials banned from curbside collection
include, but are not limited to, batteries, tires, white goods (i.e.,
stoves, refrigerators, hot-water heaters), televisions and computers
(i.e., monitors, hardware, keyboards), video games, fluorescent
lamps, electronic ballasts and medical waste.
(2)
G.
§ 169-13 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-15
1:248
authority to issue citations wherein violations of this chapter will be subject
to fines that will be determined and approved from time to time by the
Mayor and the City Council. Any person or entity who fails to comply with
any portion of this article shall be fined $25 per day. A person or entity
commits a separate offense for each and every day a violation continues.
§ 169-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-15
1:249

ARTICLE III
Sanitary Landfills
[Adopted as Ch. 34 of the 1976 Code]
§ 169-16. Approval of permits. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Temporary permits for the disposal of the debris resulting from demolition
of buildings or structures or similar materials may be granted by the Board
of Health, after a public hearing on the proposed site by the Waste Disposal
Subcommittee of the City Council and after approval of such granting
by a two-thirds vote of all of the members of the City Council, for the
limited purpose of filling depressions, low-lying land, ravines or the like,
and any such permits may be granted in any of the zoning districts of
the City. Application for such permits shall be made by the owner of such
property, setting forth the locations for disposal and the purposes and
reasons therefor.
§ 169-17. Requirements for approval of permits.
No permit shall be approved or granted as aforesaid unless the City
Engineer shall have certified that, in his opinion, no artificial or natural
drainage system will be obstructed or hindered by the filling operations
proposed, except that if such a problem is deemed by the City Engineer
to exist, permits may be approved and granted if the applicant installs
drainage pipes or conduits in a manner and of a quality satisfactory to said
City Engineer. In all cases, the applicant shall bear the cost of any rodentor
pest-control measures deemed necessary by the Board of Health.
§ 169-18. Duration of permits.
Such permits shall, if granted, be issued for periods not in excess of 30 days
and may be renewed by the Board of Health for a single period of 30 days
beyond the original time granted.
§ 169-19. Revocation or cancellation of permits.
Such permits shall be issued subject to any applicable general or special
law and subject to any regulations or conditions established by the Board of
Health and may be revoked, amended or canceled by the Board of Health
for cause.
§ 169-20. Completed fills.
Completed fills shall have a top cover of at least three feet of clean earth
or gravel above the last layer of disposed material and shall be seeded or
covered in a manner satisfactory to said Board of Health.
§ 169-21. Special permits for Fairview Cemetery site.
Special demolition permits may be granted for delegated periods, not
to exceed 30 days, to local owners of land and structures to dump at the
A.
§ 169-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-21
1:251
Fairview Cemetery site. Before such permits are granted, the petitioner
must have:
(1) Permission in writing from the Fairview Cemetery Commission.
Permission by City Council by a two-thirds vote. [Amended
9-1-2009]
(2)
(3) A dumping permit from the Board of Health.
(4) A demolition permit from the Building Inspector.
(5) Approval in writing from the City Engineer.
Under no circumstances will any person dump on this property any
debris or demolition material that comes from outside the City of
Chicopee.
B.
Applicability of local ordinances. The petitioner will also abide by all
local ordinances concerning dumping and all general laws pertaining to
the same.
C.
Deposit required. The petitioner will also deposit a certified check
at the time of initial request of $500 with the City Treasurer. The
petitioner's deposit will be returned after termination of dumping and
after the site has been inspected and found to the satisfaction of the
ordinance requirements by the Board of Health.
D.
Dumping regulations.
Rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of a sanitary
landfill dump shall be as follows:
Dumping hours shall be confined to the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. There shall be no dumping on Sunday.
(a)
All refuse shall be deposited under the direction of the man in
charge and thoroughly compacted in shallow layers.
(b)
All refuse shall be covered at the close of each day to a depth
of six inches.
(c)
(d) Burning shall not be allowed.
(e) Salvaging of material shall not be allowed except by permit.
Two feet of compact earth cover shall be placed over the
completed portions of the fill.
(f)
Spraying of the exposed refuse and adjacent surfaces should
be employed when necessary to allay dust.
(g)
Effective insecticides and rodenticides shall be used as
necessary.
(h)
(1)
E.
§ 169-21 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-21
1:252
§ 169-22. Special permits for the Benevolent and Protective Order
of Elks Lodge 1849.
Fences shall be erected and maintained as necessary to
prevent the blowing of paper from the site.
(i)
A breach of any one of the above-listed conditions will, of itself, void
said permit and cancel the same.
(2)
The Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks Lodge 1849, located at
431 Granby Road, in the City of Chicopee, shall be allowed a special
landfill permit. The permit shall commence with the passage of this
section, and such permit shall be issued for periods not in excess
of 30 days. Thirty-day extensions may be granted by the Board of
Health monthly beyond the original time granted after proper written
application by the above petitioner to the Board of Health.
A.
Permit subject to cancellation by Board of Health or City Council. Such
special permit may be revoked immediately by the Board of Health
or the City Council (majority vote) whenever any special regulations
listed herein are either broken or not lived up to. A permit may also be
revoked immediately if the petitioner does not abide by any applicable
general or special laws not mentioned herein. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
Special dumping regulations.
Dumping hours will be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, Monday
through Friday. There shall be no dumping Saturdays or Sundays.
(1)
Dump material shall be covered daily as prescribed in all
regulations governing landfill dumps. See General Laws.
(2)
The type of dumping shall be step dumping only; any other type will
mean immediate revocation of the permit.
(3)
The petitioner will assume all responsibility to spray the site for
insect and rodent control on a weekly basis.
(4)
The petitioner will not allow dumping of any animal or vegetable
matter or chemicals or food, candy, meats, garbage, caustic
materials, etc., into the dump site.
(5)
The petitioner may dump rock, sand, gravel, loam, wood, glass,
masonry, metal, asphalt, paper and cardboard only.
(6)
The petitioner will keep free of debris all roadways entering the
site or location.
(7)
The petitioner will police the area, i.e., keep any and all
unauthorized children or adults from playing on or scavenging the
site for salvageable materials.
(8)
C.
§ 169-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-22
1:253
The petitioner will work in conjunction with and cooperate with
the Ward 8C Improvement Committee to ensure that all regulations
written herein are abided by.
(9)
The restrictions in this article shall be waived for the duration of
this special permit only.
(10)
§ 169-22 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-22
1:254
ARTICLE IV
Littering
[Adopted 5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 96-34]
§ 169-23. Deposit in public places. [Amended 11-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-102]
No person shall throw, sweep, rake, blow, or deposit litter or rubbish
in or upon any street, sidewalk, tree belt or other public place within
the City, except in public receptacles for that purpose, authorized private
receptacles for collection or in an official City disposal area.
§ 169-24. Placement in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles shall do so in such a manner so
as to prevent such litter from being carried or deposited by the elements on
any streets, sidewalks or other public place or upon private property.
§ 169-25. Sweeping into gutters. [Amended 11-16-2004 by Ord. No.
04-102]
No person shall sweep, rake, throw, or blow into or deposit into any gutter,
street or other public place within the City the accumulation of litter or
rubbish from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk,
driveway or property. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk and/or tree belt abutting their premises free of litter or rubbish.
§ 169-26. Merchants to keep sidewalks clean.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk, driveway or property. Persons owning or occupying a place of
business within the City shall keep the sidewalk and/or treebelt abutting
their business free of litter.
§ 169-27. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or any other public place within the City or upon
private premises.
§ 169-28. Truck loads to be covered; wheels to be clean.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded so as to prevent any
such load, contents or litter thereof from being blown or deposited upon
any street, alley or other public place or upon any private premises.
A.
Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within said City,
the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley
B.
§ 169-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-28
1:255
§ 169-29. Parks and property under control of parks department.
§ 169-30. Lakes, rivers, streams and fountains.
No person shall throw or deposit, abandon or leave or cause to have thrown
or deposited, abandoned or left along the shoreline or abutting property of
any lake, river, stream or like body of water situated within or bounding on
the limits of the City or in any fountain or like structure situated within said
City any automobiles or parts thereof building materials, litter, garbage,
rubbish or material of any kind.
§ 169-31. Mail and newspapers.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the distribution of mail in the
United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any sidewalk, street, alley or other public
place or upon any private property.
§ 169-32. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit or cause to have
thrown out, dropped or deposited within the City any litter, handbills or any
other materials.
or other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to have thrown or deposited
litter of any kind within any park or on a terrace, triangle, traffic island,
circle or dingle under control of the Park Department of the City except
in public receptacles provided for the purpose thereof, and it shall be
deposited in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried and/or deposited by the elements upon any part of said parks or
the aforementioned public properties.
A.
No leaves, tree branches, grass or evergreen clippings, winter sand
and/or sand and salt mixture, rocks, litter, rubbish, garbage or any
other material shall be brought to and deposited in any manner on any
park property.
B.
No person, herein designated as a firm, individual, corporation,
organization, employee, agent or servant of any kind, shall deposit or
cause to have deposited on public property or in public receptacles
within the confines of any parks or public property by any such person
any litter, other than that obtained as a result of use in said park or said
public property.
C.
§ 169-28 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-33
1:256
§ 169-33. Posting notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, handbill or other paper
or device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any traffic
or lamppost, public utility pole or public shade tree or upon any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.
§ 169-34. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to have thrown or deposited any
litter on any occupied private property within the City, whether owned by
such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private
property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such
a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or upon
any private property. The owner or person in control of any private property
shall, at all times, maintain the premises free from litter.
§ 169-35. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause to have thrown or deposited
any litter on any open or vacant property within the City, whether owned
by such person or not. The owner or person in control of any such vacant
property shall at all times maintain the premises free from litter.
§ 169-36. Clearing open private property by City.
Notice to remove. The Building Inspector shall have, as provided by
Chapter 139 and Chapter 111 of the Massachusetts General Laws, the
power to abate a nuisance or health hazard caused by any such litter
and shall have the powers by virtue of said General Laws and any
ordinance relative thereto or an amendment hereof as heretofore or
hereinafter ordained. Further, nothing contained in this article shall
be construed to be in conflict with any provisions of said laws or
ordinances but in addition to and in compliance with the provisions
therein set forth. The Building Inspector is authorized to notify the
owner, his agent or any person in control of said property, vacant or
otherwise, within the City to remove and dispose of litter located on
the property. Such notice shall be by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the owner, agent or person in control of
the property by any person authorized to serve civil process or posted
on said property for a period of not less than seven days.
A.
Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of
any owner, agent or person in control of said property, so notified, to
properly dispose of said litter within five days after receipt of written
notice, as provided in this article, or within seven days after the date
of such notice, in the event the same is returned to the Post Office
Department because of the inability to make delivery thereof, provided
that the same was properly addressed to the last known address of
such owner, agent or person in control of said property, or within
B.
§ 169-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-36
1:257
seven days after the end of the period for posting said property, the
Building Inspector is authorized and empowered to pay any and all
costs incidental to the removal and disposition of the litter or to order
the removal of the litter by the City.
Charge for removal. When the City has effected by itself or its duly
authorized agent the removal of the litter or has paid for the removal
of the litter, a bill for the actual cost thereof, if not paid by such owner
prior thereto, shall be forwarded to such owner by the City and such
charge shall be due and payable within 30 days.
C.
Charge included in tax bill; recordation constitutes lien.
In the event that the full amount due the City is not paid by such
owner within said 30 days from the date of billing, as provided in
this article, the Building Inspector shall cause to be recorded in
the office of the City Clerk a sworn statement showing the cost and
the expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done
and the date of the billing as provided in Subsection C. The City
Clerk shall forthwith cause said statement to be recorded in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds in the manner required.
(1)
Upon such recordation of the statement by the City Clerk in the
Hampden County Registry of Deeds, the actual cost for the removal
of the litter shall be charged to the owner of such property on
the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the City, and
the charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of
payment of such bill.
(2)
The recordation of said statement shall constitute a lien and
privilege on the property and shall remain in full force and effect
for the amount due in principal and interest, plus cost of the court,
if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Said cost
and expense shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the
collection of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at
the same rate as that on unpaid tax bills in the event the same is
not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said
charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statement recorded in
accordance with the provision as set forth in this article shall be
prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied
with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily,
and shall be sufficient notice to every person concerned that the
amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against
the property designated or described in the statement and that the
same is due and collectible as provided by law.
(3)
D.
§ 169-36 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-37
1:258
§ 169-37. Shopping carts.27 [Added 5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 14-5]
All supermarkets, retail and discount stores and any other businesses which
provide shopping carts for the use and convenience of their customers shall
comply with the following requirements in order to prevent the disposal of
the carts as waste or litter interfering with the use of public and private
property, including bodies of water.
Every shopping cart owned or used within the City of Chicopee shall
have a permanently affixed and clearly visible cart identification sign.
Every cart owner shall continuously maintain or cause to be maintained
the cart identification sign so that the owner's name is accurate and
clearly legible.
A.
Shopping carts so identified shall be used only on the business
premises. Signs informing the public of this requirement shall be
prominently located at the entrance and exit of the store or business.
B.
All stores and businesses providing such carts for the convenience
of their customers shall be responsible for installing, operating and
maintaining a cart retrieval program which shall include, at a minimum,
a contract or agreement with a cart retrieval service that is sufficient to
respond to complaints from the public or the City of Chicopee regarding
abandoned shopping carts in a manner that results in the retrieval of
the carts on an ongoing basis.
C.
All stores and businesses providing shopping carts to its customers
shall lock or otherwise secure all shopping carts during hours when the
business or store is closed.
D.
No person shall be authorized or deemed authorized to remove a
shopping cart from the business premises unless they are in possession
of written permission from the cart owner.
E.
Any shopping cart found on public property or private property other
than that of the business utilizing the same shall be removed from said
property by the owners of said shopping cart. Failure of the owner to
remove the shopping cart shall be a violation of this section and shall
result in the City of Chicopee or its designee retrieving said cart(s).
F.
In the event that the City of Chicopee retrieves a shopping cart, the
City shall hold the cart at a location that is reasonably convenient to the
owner of the shopping cart and open for business at least six hours on
business days.
When the City has retrieved a shopping cart, the City shall so notify
the owner that the City has impounded its shopping cart. This
notice shall include the following:
(1)
G.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 169-37, Violations and penalties, was repealed 6-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-42. For current enforcement provisions, see Ch. 132, Code Enforcement, Art. I,
Noncriminal Disposition of Certain Violations.
§ 169-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-37
1:259
§ 169-38. (Reserved)28
§ 169-39. (Reserved)29
(a) Information as to the cart's location.
(b) How the shopping cart may be retrieved.
That failure to retrieve the shopping cart within 15 days from
the date of the letter may result in the cart's sale or
destruction.
(c)
That the owner will be responsible for the City's costs of
retrieval, totaling $25 per cart.
(d)
(e) That a fine totaling $75 per cart shall be imposed.
In the case of a cart that does not provide adequate identification
or markings to determine its owner, the City shall only be required
to notify the cart owner if the City obtains actual knowledge of the
owner's identity.
(2)
The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee shall
issue a seventy-five-dollar fine upon an owner for any cart in
violation of any section of this chapter.
(3)
No cart shall be released to its owner under the procedures in this
section unless the owner pays a fee for the City's cost of retrieval
and storage, in addition to the seventy-five-dollar fine, for a total of
$100 per cart.
(4)
28.Editor's Note: Former § 169-38, Enforcement, was repealed 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-42.
For current enforcement provisions, see Ch. 132, Code Enforcement, Art. I, Noncriminal
Disposition of Certain Violations.
29.Editor's Note: Former § 169-39, Appeals, was repealed 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-42. For
current enforcement provisions, see Ch. 132, Code Enforcement, Art. I, Noncriminal
Disposition of Certain Violations.
§ 169-37 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-39
1:260
ARTICLE V
Receptacles for Used Clothing or Furnishings
[Adopted 11-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-83D; amended in its entirety
9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-35]
§ 169-40. Maintenance; violations and penalties; enforcement.
Every person, organization, corporation or partnership or other entity
who places a receptacle for the purpose of collecting articles of used
clothing, furnishings or other goods within the City of Chicopee shall
obtain a permit to maintain such a receptacle on an annual basis. The
annual permit shall be issued by the Chicopee Office of the Clerk. The
annual fee shall total $100 and shall be waived for nonprofit entities.
A.
All items so collected shall be completely contained within said
receptacle.
B.
Every person, organization, corporation or partnership or other entity
owning the land upon which said receptacle is maintained in addition
to the owner of the receptacle shall be responsible to maintain the
receptacle in a neat, clean and orderly fashion.
C.
All such receptacles shall conspicuously display the name, address,
website and telephone number of the permit holder and the person(s)
responsible for maintaining the receptacle.
D.
A violation of this section shall result in a penalty of $50 for the
first offense, $100 for the second offense and $150 for the third and
subsequent offenses.
E.
F. The Board of Health shall have jurisdiction to enforce said section.
§ 169-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-40
1:261

ARTICLE VI
Mercury Thermometers
[Adopted 6-18-2002 by Ord. No. 02-30]
§ 169-41. Findings.
Mercury is a persistent and toxic pollutant that bioaccumulates in the
environment and the food chain.
A.
Incineration of medical and municipal waste which contains whole or
broken thermometers is a major source of atmospheric deposition of
mercury in the Northeast resulting in mercury contamination of air and
water.
B.
Mercury from mercury thermometers can also directly enter the
environment through vaporization and/or spillage when a thermometer
breaks during use, transportation or disposal. The United States
Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) estimated that for the year
2000, 17 tons of elemental mercury from thermometers will be
disposed of as municipal solid waste. This does not include additional
mercury that finds its way into the medical waste stream.
C.
Accidental mercury spills, breakages, and releases have occurred at
schools throughout the Northeast. In addition to the threat of health
risks to students and staff and potential for adverse environment
impact, these discharges are costly. Harvard University has cited that
it costs $110 to properly clean up a single thermometer breakage in
a laboratory. If the mercury is accidentally spread through tracking,
HVAC or cleaning, costs rapidly escalate. This does not reflect the cost
to replace contaminated items, and in some cases it can reach into
multiple thousands of dollars. These incidences have proven costly to
clean up and have exposed students, teachers and/or administrators to
mercury emissions.
D.
Due to the bioaccumulation of mercury in fish, the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health has issued a state-wide native freshwater
fish advisory, warning pregnant women, women of childbearing age and
children not to consume any fish.
E.
Pharmacy chains of Rite-Aid, K-Mart, Brooks, Target, Wal-Mart,
Albertson, Kinney, Toys `R' Us, Safety First, The First Years and
Meijers, amongst others, have joined a mercury-free thermometer
campaign, pledging to discontinue the sale of mercury basal and fever
thermometers.
F.
There are accurate and safe alternatives to mercury thermometers that
are readily available and comparable in cost.
G.
Local take-back programs have already demonstrated the ease and
effectiveness of removing mercury products. The Town of Burlington,
Massachusetts, successfully collected more than 1,425 mercury
H.
§ 169-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-41
1:263
§ 169-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
thermometers. Unexpectedly, Burlington's program also received over
60 pounds of raw elemental mercury. Oakland County in Michigan is
also rounding up mercury thermometers to get the toxic metal out of
medicine cabinets. Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New England
Medical Center, and Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Newton-
Wellesley Medical Center are among many hospitals and clinics that
have participated in mercury thermometer round-ups and have taken a
pledge to virtually eliminate mercury waste from the health care waste
stream by 2003.
In 1998 the American Poison Control Center received 18,000 phone
calls regarding broken mercury thermometers. The average cost of
handling each call was $30, plus the added cost to the caller of cleaning
up the mercury spill.
I.
In the State of New Hampshire, a person shall not sell or supply
mercury fever thermometers to consumers and patients, except by
prescription. The City of San Francisco, the City of Duluth, Minnesota,
the City of Ann Arbor, Michigan and Dane County, Wisconsin are among
many government bodies that have already passed legislation to ban
the sale of mercury thermometers.
J.
The New England states and Eastern Canadian provinces are
implementing a binational mercury plan, which was unanimously
adopted in June of 1998 by the Conference of New England Governors
and Eastern Canadian Premiers (and signed by Governor Cellucci in
June 1998). The mercury action plan is an ambitious program to
virtually eliminate the emissions of mercury in the region. The regional
goal of this action plan supports the virtual elimination of
anthropogenic mercury. The plan is consistent with the prohibition of
mercury thermometers sales.
K.
The Massachusetts Zero Mercury Strategy, formed by Environmental
Affairs Secretary, Robert Durand, adopted in the summer of 2000, is
an ambitious strategy that calls for virtual elimination of the use of
discharge of mercury, including mercury thermometers.
L.
The American Hospital Association (AHA) - US Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Memorandum of Understanding calls for
virtual elimination of mercury from health-care facilities. Over 500
hospitals and clinics across the country have already taken a pledge to
remove mercury thermometers and replace them with safe alternatives.
M.
The New England states are in the process of individually introducing
model mercury legislation that would severely restrict the sale of
mercury fever thermometers.
N.
§ 169-41 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-42
1:264
CITY — The City of Chicopee.
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — Any hospital, nursing home, extended-care
facility, long-term care facility, clinic, or medical laboratory, state or private
health or mental institution, clinic, physician's office or health maintenance
organization.
MANUFACTURER — Any person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, governmental entity, organization, combination or joint
venture that produces a mercury fever thermometer. If the mercury
thermometer is produced in a foreign country, the manufacturer is the
importer of domestic distributor.
MERCURY THERMOMETER — Mercury-containing product that is used
to measure body temperature. A mercury-containing product is a product,
device, instrument or equipment into which elemental mercury or mercury
compounds are intentionally added during its formulation or manufacture
and in which the continued presence of mercury is desired to provide a
specific characteristic or to permit a specific function.
§ 169-43. Retail sale prohibited.
A person shall not sell or supply (including online retail) mercury fever
thermometers to consumers and patients, except by prescription. The
manufacturers of mercury fever thermometers shall supply clear
instructions on the careful handling of the thermometer to avoid breakage
and proper cleanup should a breakage occur with all mercury fever
thermometers sold through prescriptions.
§ 169-44. Manufacturing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture a mercury thermometer
in the City.
§ 169-45. Importation, purchase or distribution prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any facility to import, purchase, or distribute a
mercury thermometer in the City, except in the case of medical necessity as
determined by a licensed physician.
§ 169-46. Time limit on sales.
Six months after the adoption of this article, a person may not sell or supply
mercury fever thermometers to consumers and patients.
§ 169-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by not more than $500 per unit sold.
§ 169-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169-48
1:265
§ 169-48. Enforcing agent.
The enforcing agent is the Health Department.
§ 169-48 CHICOPEE CODE § 169-48
1:266
Chapter 172
GOLF COURSE, MUNICIPAL
§ 172-1. Prohibited activities; penalties. [Amended 9-18-1979;
2-7-1989]
§ 172-2. Fees. [Amended 6-19-1990]
A set fee for green fees and carts has been established by the Golf Course
Commission, and that fee must be paid by all persons using the Municipal
Golf Course.
§ 172-3. Parking. [Added 6-19-1990]
There will be no special parking except for handicapped persons.
§ 172-4. Director of Golf. [Added 6-30-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No person shall use any of the Municipal Golf Course premises for any
purpose other than golf, except as allowed by the Golf Commission;
meaning and intending hereby to prohibit the use of any unauthorized
vehicle, whether manual or motor operated, except those vehicles
specifically used for those engaged in the playing of golf, including
but not limited to bicycles, motorcycles, motorbikes, snowmobiles, allterrain
vehicles and cars on the golf course property.
A.
Any violation of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of $200
for the first offense, $250 for the second offense and $300 for the third
offense. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-21; 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-31]
B.
Use of sleds, toboggans or skis will be determined by the Golf
Commission or its designee.
C.
Any activity which results in damage to the Municipal Golf Course
property shall be prohibited and nothing in this section shall preclude
the offenders from being assessed the cost of repair(s).
D.
There is hereby established within municipal government the position
of Director of Golf. The Director of Golf shall be responsible for, in
addition to other duties, the quality of play at Chicopee Country Club,
promotion of the Country Club and all services and programs for all
patrons.
A.
Appointment: The Director of Golf shall be appointed by the Golf
Commission, subject to approval of the Mayor, and any permanent
appointment to the position of Director of Golf and temporary
appointment which exceeds 60 days shall require the confirmation of
the City Council.
B.
§ 169-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-4
1:267
Chapter 185
LASER DEVICES
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LASER — A device which produces an intense, coherent, directional beam
of light by stimulated electronic or molecular transitions to lower energy
levels. The word "laser" is an acronym for light amplication by stimulated
emission of radiation.
§ 185-2. Sales and gifts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, exchange, give or otherwise
dispense to a person under the age of 18 a laser pen or laser device.
§ 185-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity who or
which sells a laser device to a minor shall be fined a minimum of $100.
§ 185-4. Enforcement.
This will be enforced by Police Department.
§ 185-5. Possession prohibited; confiscation. [Added 3-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-21]
Term of office: The Director of Golf will be appointed to a term of three
years with the term of office beginning the first day of March of each
year.
C.
Experience requirements: The Director of Golf shall be a Class A PGA
professional with a minimum of three years' experience as a staff pro
and five years' experience as a manager or assistant manager with
a public or private golf course; a bachelor's degree in business or a
related field is preferred; or such other requirements as determined by
the Golf Commission.
D.
In the event of the absence, inability to serve, removal, resignation or
death of the Director of Golf, the Mayor shall designate a temporary
person, for not to exceed 60 days, to carry out the duties of the Director
of Golf until a successor has been appointed as written in Subsection B,
Appointment.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to posses a laser
pen or device, as defined in this chapter, upon any public street, public
sidewalk or public way or on any grounds owned by the City or any
A.
§ 172-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 185-5
1:268
Chapter 186
DRONES; REGULATION OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
§ 186-1. Purpose.
The City of Chicopee recognizes that unmanned aircraft and unmanned
aircraft systems, commonly referred to as "drones," are increasingly being
flown by citizens for a variety of both recreational and business purposes.
United States airspace is the busiest in the world with up to 87,000 flights
per day, including commercial airliners, flight haulers, air taxis and private
and military aircraft. Further, the City of Chicopee is the home of the
Westover Air Reserve Base, which conducts flights critical for the protection
of all United States citizens. Consequently, the City of Chicopee hereby
adopts this chapter to protect the privacy and property interests of the
residents of the City of Chicopee as well as to comply with all federal and
state laws, including the safe operation of the Westover Air Reserve Base.
§ 186-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRCRAFT — Any object designed or used to navigate or fly in the air.
DRONE — Any unmanned aircraft, amateur rocket, model aircraft (Section
336 of Public Law 112-95), rotorcraft (702 CMR 2.01), or similar device or
aircraft.
VISUAL LINE OF SIGHT — An operator having constant and personal visual
contact with the aircraft and/or drone at all times. This visual contact shall
be natural and personal to the operator and shall not allow the operator
to use visual enhancements, screens or other devices to maintain constant
visual contact with the aircraft and/or drone.
§ 186-3. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to all drones and aircraft, as defined herein, to
the extent allowed pursuant to state and federal law. This chapter shall be
limited to those drones/aircraft that weigh less than 55 pounds and which
are flown by a private citizen below 400 feet.
§ 186-4. Regulations.
place to which the public has a right of assess as invited within the
limits of the City.
The Chicopee Police Department shall confiscate any such device
found, as outlined above. Upon the confiscation, said Department shall
notify the parent or guardian of the minor of said confiscation.
B.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-4
1:269
§ 186-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
All aircraft and drones shall comply with all regulations as established
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
A.
A drone and/or aircraft shall only take off and land on private property
owned by the operator or where written permission is granted by
the landowner. Said written permission shall include the name and
signature of the landowner, the address of the property and the
permissible dates and hours of operation and shall be in the possession
of the drone operator during operation of the drone.
B.
All operators who use an aircraft and/or drone for nonbusiness or
noncommercial purposes shall also comply with the following
regulations:
Register with the Federal Aviation Administration and maintain
proper documentation of the same.
(1)
(2) As required by federal law, fly below 400 feet at all times.
Maintain at all times a visual line of sight of the aircraft and/or
drone, as defined above.
(3)
No operator shall operate an aircraft and/or drone over a crowd or
person(s) not directly participating in its operation.
(4)
No operator shall operate an aircraft and/or drone prior to sunrise
or subsequent to sunset.
(5)
(6) No aircraft and/or drone shall be weaponized.
No aircraft or drone shall photograph or videotape any person
without the prior written permission of that person. All operators
shall maintain this written permission while operating the aircraft
and/or drone and for a period of seven years thereafter.
(7)
No aircraft or drone shall operate over private property without the
prior written permission from the landowner, which shall be in the
possession of the operator during operation.
(8)
No aircraft or drone shall operate over any property owned or
controlled by the City of Chicopee unless prior written
authorization is secured by the operator.
(9)
No drone shall be flown within five miles of a civilian or military
airport without first contacting the control tower before flying.
(10)
No operator shall operate an aircraft and/or drone in close
proximity or near another aircraft.
(11)
(12)No operator shall operate an aircraft and/or drone in bad weather.
C.
§ 186-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 186-5
1:270
Chapter 188
LICENSES
§ 188-1. License period; notice of expiration.
Unless otherwise specified, licenses granted under this chapter shall expire
on April 30 of each year, unless revoked, but they may be granted during
April to take effect on the first day of May next ensuing. The City Clerk
shall give at least 30 days' written notice to any licensee of the upcoming
expiration of his license.
§ 188-2. Reconsideration of denied licenses. [Added 11-20-1984;
amended 9-1-2009]
No proposed licenses or amendments or restrictions which have been
unfavorably acted upon by the City Council shall be considered by the City
Council within one year of the date of unfavorable action.
§ 188-3. Denial of right to withdraw proposed license. [Added
11-20-1984; amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to deny the
petitioner the right to withdraw his proposed license or amendment
application after he begins his application for such proposed license or
amendments.
§ 188-4. Applications to City Clerk. [Amended 5-18-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-26]
Applications for licenses under this chapter shall be filed with the City
Clerk, who shall collect the fees as specified and make returns to the City
treasury as soon as possible after the first of the month. All fees are to be
paid at time of applying for licenses and are not refundable.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the following fine schedule:
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: fine of $100.
(3) Third offense: fine of $250.
(4) Fourth or subsequent offense: fine of $300.
A.
The City of Chicopee Police Department or their designee shall enforce
this chapter.
B.
§ 186-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-4.1
1:271
§ 188-4.1. Filing of lease agreement required for nonowner
applicants. [Added 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-06]
All applicants who do not own the property upon which the license shall be
used must file with the City Clerk at the time of the filing of the application
a copy of the lease agreement or its equivalent.
§ 188-5. Auctioneers' licenses. [Amended 9-1-2009]
§ 188-6. Pool, bowling alley and shuffleboard establishment
licenses.
§ 188-7. Junk collectors' and pawnshop licenses. [Amended
12-2-1980; 5-7-1985]
An auctioneer's license may be granted to any suitable inhabitant of the
City who has resided therein during the six months next preceding the
application for such license to be an auctioneer therein for one year.
The license fee shall be as set from time to time by the City Council.30
A.
A special auctioneer's license may be granted to any person not such
an inhabitant of the City for days specified in the license. The license
fee shall be as set from time to time by the City Council.31 (See MGL c.
100.)
B.
Licenses may be granted to keep for hire billiard tables, pool tables,
shuffleboards or bowling alleys. All places where pool, bowling alleys or
billiards are used for hire shall be closed from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.,
except on Saturday nights, when they shall close at 12:00 midnight. The
license fee shall be as set from time to time by the City Council.32 (See
MGL c. 140, §§ 177, 178, 179 and 180.) [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Bowling is permitted on Sundays between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and
11:00 p.m. (See MGL c. 136, § 4B.)
B.
Any keeper of such shops shall place in a suitable and conspicuous area
in his shop a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed
thereon in large letters.
A.
No keeper of a junk or pawnshop and no junk collector shall, directly or
indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any
junk, precious metal, old metal or secondhand articles from a minor,
knowingly or having reason to believe him/her to be such.
B.
No article purchased or received by such shopkeeper shall be sold until
at least 30 days from the date of its purchase or from the date the
receipt has lapsed.
C.
30.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
31.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
32.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-4.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-7
1:272
§ 188-7.1. Junkyards. [Added 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-86]
No keeper of a pawnshop and no keeper of a shop for the purchase,
sale or barter of junk, precious metal, old metal or secondhand articles
shall purchase or take in pawn any item if it appears that such item
has had any serial number or identifying marks removed or apparently
removed. For the purpose of this section, identifying marks shall
include but not be limited to engravings, initials or similar inscriptions
on rings, watches or other jewelry or similar inscriptions on other
items.
D.
Junk shops and pawnshops shall be closed except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of each weekday, and no keeper thereof and
no junk collector shall purchase any junk, precious metal, old metal or
secondhand articles except during such hours.
E.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, precious
metal, old metal or secondhand articles and every pawnbroker within
the limits of the City shall keep a permanent bound book in which shall
be written at the time of every purchase of any article a description
thereof; the name, age and residence of the person from whom and the
day and hour when such purchase was made; and such book shall at
all times be open to the inspection of officers of the Police Department
and of any person authorized by the Police Department to make such
inspections.
F.
Every such licensed dealer shall record every transaction on an index
card supplied by the Police Department to such dealer. This card must
be filled out completely with one article described on each card. These
cards will be picked up daily by a police officer.
G.
No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall maintain
or operate a junkyard without first having obtained a license from the
City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
JUNKYARD — Any lot or place which is exposed to the weather
whereupon are kept for salvage purposes any motor vehicle or motor
vehicle parts, iron, steel, brass, copper or any types of metals for the
principal purpose of salvaging the same for their value.
B.
Fencing required. A junkyard shall be entirely enclosed by a fence eight
feet in height, which shall be neatly kept in good repair at all times
and constructed of such material so as to exclude such area from public
view. The City Council may, in its discretion, grant a waiver of the eightfoot
requirement, upon a showing that the area to be maintained is
neat and that the surrounding neighborhood is of a similar character
and businesses. No advertising except to identify the business shall be
placed on the fencing. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
§ 188-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-7.1
1:273
§ 188-8. Public dance license. [Amended 9-1-2009]
No person shall permit or allow any building or property to be used for
public dances without first obtaining a license. The license fee shall be as
set from time to time by the City Council.33
§ 188-9. Dealers and keepers of shops for secondhand articles.
[Amended 12-2-1980; 5-7-1985; 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-55;
9-1-2009; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-03]
Site plans. All applications for a junkyard license shall be accompanied
by eight copies of a site plan, drawn to one to 20 scale, showing the
following: [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-29]
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and public
areas.
(1)
(2) Lot lines, with dimensions.
(3) Ownership, zoning and use of abutting land.
Location of proposed and existing buildings, vehicle storage areas,
other storage areas, outdoor work areas, parking areas and refuse
disposal areas, if applicable.
(4)
(5) Location of existing and proposed lighting, signs and fences.
D.
The City Council may impose reasonable restrictions which may include
the following, but shall not be limited to the following: [Amended
9-1-2009]
(1) Fire lanes.
(2) Hours of operation.
(3) Disposal of oils, gasoline or other flammable materials or liquids.
(4) Buffer zone.
(5) Height of deposited materials.
(6) Maintenance of premises.
E.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of operating
a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of secondhand articles without
obtaining a license therefor and complying with the terms of this
section. Licenses may be granted to suitable persons to be dealers in
and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of secondhand
articles.
A.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of secondhand
articles, precious metal, old metal or secondhand articles who operates
B.
33.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-7.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-9
1:274
§ 188-10. Licenses for the sale or rental of firearms. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Licenses may be granted to persons to sell, rent or lease firearms at a
specified location. The license fee shall be as set from time to time by the
City Council.35 (See MGL c. 140 §§ 121 to 131, inclusive.)36
within the City of Chicopee shall keep a permanent bound book in
which shall be written at the time of every purchase of any article a
description thereof, the names, age and residence of the person from
whom and the day and the hour when such purchase was made; and
such book shall at all times be open to the inspection by officers of the
Police Department and by any person authorized by them to make such
inspection.
A dealer or keeper of secondhand articles is one who keeps a shop,
store or place of business for the primary or secondary purpose of
purchasing or sale of used merchandise (e.g., furniture, appliances,
furnishings, tools, clothing, jewelry, books, glass, DVDs, tapes, compact
discs, electronic devices, etc.).
C.
Those shops, stores and places of business which lease new
merchandise and thereafter sell the same as used merchandise after
its useful lease life expires shall not for purposes of this section be
considered a dealer or keeper of secondhand articles and shall not be
subject to the requirements of this section.
D.
E. The license fee shall be set from time to time by the City Council.34
No secondhand article purchased or received by such dealer or keeper
shall be sold or otherwise disposed of until at least 30 days after the
date of its purchase.
F.
A dealer or keeper of secondhand articles who fails to comply with any
of the above described requirements shall be subject to the following
penalties:
Revocation or suspension of the dealer or keeper license to do
business within the City of Chicopee;
(1)
(2) A fine up to $500 per offense; or
(3) Any combination of Subsection G(1) and (2).
G.
34.Editor’s Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
35.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
36.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 6/II/7, Lodging houses, which originally followed this section,
was repealed 4-7-1987.
§ 188-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-11
1:275
§ 188-11. Open-air parking licenses. [Amended 9-1-2009]
No person shall engage in the business of conducting or maintaining an
open-air parking space without first obtaining a license. License fees are as
set by the City Council.37 (See MGL c. 1 40, §§ 70 to 84, inclusive.)
§ 188-12. Pawnbroker licenses.
No person shall carry on the business of pawnbroker without first
obtaining a license. The license fee shall be as set by the City Council.38
Such licenses must be approved by the Chief of Police prior to the
issuance. (See MGL c. 140, §§ 70 to 84, inclusive.) [Amended
9-1-2009]
A.
No pawn broker in the City of Chicopee shall charge interest on loaned
moneys, as a result of a pawning agreement or otherwise, in excess of
18% per annum. All loan or pawning agreements shall be in writing and
shall clearly state the annual percentage rate for loaned moneys which
result from a pawning agreement or otherwise.
B.
Any keeper of such shops shall place in a suitable and conspicuous area
in his shop a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed
thereon in large letters. [Added 5-7-1985]
C.
No keeper of a junk or pawn shop and no junk collector shall, directly or
indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any
junk, precious metal, old metal or secondhand articles from a minor,
knowingly or having reason to believe him/her to be such. [Added
5-7-1985]
D.
No article purchased or received by such shopkeeper shall be sold until
at least 30 days from the date of its purchase or from the date the
receipt has lapsed. [Added 5-7-1985]
E.
No keeper of a pawnshop and no keeper of a shop for the purchase,
sale or barter of junk, precious metal, old metal or secondhand articles
shall purchase or take in pawn any item if it appears that such item
has had any serial number or identifying marks removed or apparently
removed. For the purpose of this section, identifying marks shall
include but not be limited to engravings, initials or similar inscriptions
on rings, watches or other jewelry or similar inscriptions on other
items. [Added 5-7-1985]
F.
Junk shops and pawnshops shall be closed except between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of each weekday, and no keeper thereof and
no junk collector shall purchase any junk, precious metal, old metal or
secondhand articles except during such hours. [Added 5-7-1985]
G.
37.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
38.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-11 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-12
1:276
§ 188-13. Slaughtering licenses. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A license may be granted to carry on the business of slaughtering of meat,
cattle, horses, mules, sheep or swine. The license fee shall be as set by the
City Council.39 (See MGL c. 94, §§ 118, 119, 120, 120A, 135 and 137.)
§ 188-14. Storage of petroleum licenses.
§ 188-15. Licenses for the sale of motor vehicles.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, precious
metal, old metal or secondhand articles and every pawn broker within
the limits of the City shall keep a permanent bound book in which shall
be written at the time of every purchase of any article a description
thereof; the name, age and residence of the person from whom and the
day and hour when such purchase was made; and such book shall at
all times be open to the inspection by officers of the Police Department
and by any person authorized by the Police Department to make such
inspections. [Added 5-7-1985]
H.
Every such licensed dealer shall record every transaction on an index
card supplied to them by the Police Department. This card must be
filled out completely with one article described on each card. These
cards will be picked up daily by a police officer. [Added 5-7-1985]
I.
Licenses may be granted for the storage of crude petroleum or any
of its products. The license fees shall be as set by the City Council.40
[Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
All licenses granted under this section shall be granted with the
restriction that said license be used within one year from the date of
granting.
B.
A certificate of registration shall be filed annually with the City Clerk
on or before April 30. The fee for such registration shall be 1/5 of the
amount of the fee for such licenses. (See MGL c. 148, §§ 9 and 13.) The
Chicopee Housing Authority shall be exempt. [Amended 11-8-1979]
C.
No certificate of registration shall be granted until the Fire Department
has forwarded to the License Committee all recommendations on
applications before public hearing. [Added 4-15-1980]
D.
Persons may be licensed to buy, sell and exchange automobiles on
specified premises. The license fee shall be as set by the City Council.41
(See MGL c. 140 §§ 57, 58 and 59.) [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
B. Residency requirement. [Amended 2-1-2000 by Ord. No. 00-2]
39.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
40.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
41.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-15
1:277
No applicant for a second-class motor vehicle license under this
section shall be granted a license unless said applicant has been
a resident of the City for the entire year immediately prior to the
date of application of the license.
(1)
Any and all renewals shall be contingent upon continued residency
or by obtaining and maintaining state incorporation status.
(2)
Application information; conditions. [Added 1-16-1980; amended
11-7-1985]
All applications for new licenses or alterations to existing licenses
made in accordance with this section shall be accompanied by eight
copies of a site plan drawn to a scale of one to 20, showing the
following: [Amended 4-16-1991 by Ord. No. 91-22; 3-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-21E; amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-30]
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and
public areas.
(a)
(b) Lot lines with dimensions.
(c) Ownership, zoning and use of abutting land.
Location of proposed and existing buildings, vehicle storage
areas, other storage areas, outdoor work areas, parking areas
and refuse disposal areas.
(d)
Location of existing and proposed lighting, signs and fences or
hedges.
(e)
(1)
Additional information may be required by the City Council prior to
the issuance of a license under this section. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(2)
Copies of the application shall be submitted to and reviewed by
the Department of Planning and Development, the Board of Health,
the City Engineer, the Building Commission, the Commission for
the Disabled and the Fire Department at least 21 days prior to
the hearing. Recommendations from said departments or officer
or boards shall be sent to the City Council; provided, however,
that failure of any such board, officer or agency to make
recommendations within 21 days from receipt shall be deemed lack
of opposition thereto. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-32;
11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 04-104; 9-1-2009]
(3)
Upon granting of a license, the Council may impose restrictions and
conditions as to the operation of the business concerning hours of
operation, fencing and screening, parking, vehicle storage, location
of other outdoor storage, outdoor work area and/or other
restrictions and conditions which the Council decides are
necessary to protect the surrounding neighborhood from adverse
impacts of the proposed activity. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(4)
C.
§ 188-15 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-15
1:278
It shall be the responsibility of the Building Commission or its
designee to assure compliance with the various license provisions
by the licensee.
(5)
Failure on the part of the licensee to comply with the submitted
plan or other conditions of the license shall be sufficient cause
for suspension or revocation of the license by the Council, after a
duly held hearing, with at least seven days' written notice being
provided to the licensee and direct abutters. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(6)
All applications for Class 1, 2 and 3, motor vehicle repair/auto body
shop licenses shall be submitted to the Administrative Assistant and
Part-Time Clerk concerning such application for background
information on applicants in conjunction with the Registry of Motor
Vehicles. No applicant shall be granted a license if he/she has been
convicted of a felony within the last seven years. [Added 10-15-1985;
10-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-52]
D.
Anyone granted a new Class 1 license shall automatically be granted a
motor vehicle repair/auto body shop license. The combination fee shall
be as set by the City Council.42 [Amended 9-1-2009]
E.
All applicants of a Class 1, 2 or 3 license shall be supplied a copy of
this section either by the City Clerk's office or Council Secretary, and by
signing their name in acknowledgment of having received application
and a copy of this section, §§ 188-15 and 188-15.1; said
acknowledgment to be kept with license in the City Clerk's office and
a copy submitted to the License Committee Chairman. [Added
11-7-1985; amended 2-1-2000 by Ord. No. 00-1; 9-1-2009]
F.
A manufacturer, as defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, shall be required to obtain
a Class 1 or Class 2 license in order to sell vehicles. [Added 4-1-1986]
G.
Class 1 license. Any person who is a recognized agent of a motor vehicle
manufacturer or a seller of motor vehicles made by such manufacturer
whose authority to sell the same is created by a written contract with
such manufacturer or with some person authorized, in writing, by such
manufacturer or with some person authorized, in writing, by such
manufacturer to enter into such contract and whose principal business
is to enter into such contract and whose principal business is the sale of
new motor vehicles, the purpose and sale of secondhand motor vehicles
being incidental or secondary thereto, may be granted an agent's or
a seller's license, provided that, with respect to secondhand motor
vehicles purchased for the purpose of sale or exchange and not taken
in trade for new motor vehicles, such dealer shall be subject to all
provisions of this chapter and of rules, restrictions and regulations
made in accordance therewith applicable to holders of a license of Class
2. [Added 2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15]
H.
42.Editor's Note: The current license fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-15
1:279
§ 188-15.1. (Reserved)43
§ 188-16. Motor vehicle repair/auto body shop license. [Added
10-4-1983; amended 10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 93-48; 10-19-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-49]
Class 2 license. Any person whose principal business is the buying
or selling of secondhand motor vehicles may be granted a used car
dealer's license; provided, however, that such person maintains or
demonstrates access to repair facilities sufficient to enable him to
satisfy the warranty repair obligations imposed by MGL c. 90 § 7N 1/
4. A used car dealer shall remain liable for all warranty repairs made
and other obligations imposed by said MGL c. 90 § 7N 1/4. [Added
2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15]
I.
Class 3 license. Any person whose principal business is the buying of
secondhand motor vehicles for the purpose of remodeling, taking apart
or rebuilding the same or the buying or selling of parts of secondhand
motor vehicles or tires or the assembling of secondhand motor vehicle
parts may be granted a motor vehicle junk license. [Added 2-18-1992
by Ord. No. 92-15]
J.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AUTO BODY SHOP LICENSE — Premises primarily used for body
work of motor vehicles, including but not limited to auto body, muffler
and exhaust systems and transmission repair and auto body painting.
It includes towing service for automotive truck repair services and
other repair services normally contracted for by individuals.[Amended
1-16-2007 by Ord. No. 07-23]
MINOR REPAIRS — For the purposes of this section, "minor repair"
of automobiles shall include only the type of work exemplified or so
noted on the license as granted. The term "minor repairs" specifically
excludes any type of repair that requires heavy or special equipment
to perform the repair and specifically excludes repairs such as brake
jobs, engine repair or replacement, parts repair or replacement and the
like. The City Council may add to, modify or change this definition by
specific reference on any license approved by the Council.[Amended
9-1-2009]
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR LICENSE — Premises primarily used for
repair work on motor vehicles, including but not limited to brake jobs,
engine repair and replacement, electrical work, including, but not
limited to, installation of audio/video equipment and/or remote vehicle
starters, muffler and exhaust system and transmission repairs, as well
as other repairs of any major or minor nature needed on automobiles
or motor vehicles, exclusive of auto body work. It includes towing
A.
43.Editor’s Note: Former § 188-15.1, Class II licenses, added 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-15, as
amended, was repealed 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-07.
§ 188-15 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-16
1:280
service for automotive, truck repair and other repair services normally
contracted for by individuals.[Amended 1-16-2007 by Ord. No.
07-23; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-3]
Anyone operating a motor vehicle repair business or auto body shop
business shall be licensed by the City Council, who may impose
restrictions and conditions as to the operation of the business as
deemed necessary and reasonable by the City Council concerning hours
of operation, fencing and screening, parking, vehicle storage, number
of vehicles, location of outdoor storage, outdoor work area and/or other
restrictions and conditions which the Council decides are necessary
to protect the surrounding neighborhood from adverse impacts of the
proposed activity. [Amended 5-17-2005 by Ord. No. 05-129;
9-1-2009]
B.
Licenses required. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the
business of operating an auto repair and/or auto body shop without
obtaining a license therefor and complying with the terms of this
section.
C.
Each license shall comply with all City zoning ordinances. No auto
repair license or auto body license shall be operated in such a way as
to cause a nuisance.
D.
Enforcement. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Department
to assure compliance with this section.
E.
Application, fee, license year.
Applications for licenses hereunder shall be made to the City Clerk,
on forms to be provided by the Clerk. Each application shall be
accompanied by an annual fee as on file at the City Clerk's office,
such fee to be approved by the City Council. Persons operating
an auto repair and/or auto body shop shall provide and post an
address in the City where such persons may be contacted during
business hours and where notices and legal process may be served
on such persons. If such address changes, the licensee shall notify
the City Clerk immediately. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
All applications for licenses for motor vehicle repair and auto body
made in accordance within this section shall be accompanied by
seven copies of a site plan, drawn to scale of one to 20, showing
the following: [Added 9-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-58; amended
4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 05-120]
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and
public areas.
(a)
(b) Lot lines, with dimensions.
(c) Ownership, zoning and use of abutting land.
(2)
F.
§ 188-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-16
1:281
§ 188-16.1. Vehicle detailing license. [Added 9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-38]
§ 188-17. Licenses for hawkers, peddlers and transient vendors.
[Amended 6-30-1981; 9-20-1983; 5-15-1984; 9-20-1984]
Location of proposed and existing buildings, vehicle storage
areas, other storage areas, outdoor work areas, parking areas
and refuse disposal areas.
(d)
(e) Location of existing and proposed lighting, signs and fences.
Expiration of motor vehicle repair/auto body licenses.44
All licenses granted in accordance with §§ 188-15 and 188-16 of the
Code of the City of Chicopee shall expire December 31 of each year.
(1)
(2) Notifications shall be sent of expiring licenses.
The City Clerk shall be authorized for the first full year of
enactment to prorate costs 1/12 per month.
(3)
G.
Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
VEHICLE DETAILING — The washing, cleaning, polishing and/or
buffing of motorized vehicles as a primary business.
A.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity engaged in the
business of vehicle detailing shall possess a license issued by the City
Council.
B.
Vehicle detailing licenses shall be subject to all of the provisions of
§ 188-16.
C.
Any person, partnership, corporation or entity who possesses a Class
I, II, III, or auto body license issued by the City Council shall be
exempt from this section with respect to those vehicles which they have
repaired or which are for sale.
D.
E. This section shall take effect on January 2, 2009.
F. This section includes car washing facilities that do manual detailing.
Fee. The annual fee shall be set by the City Council and shall be on
file with the Office of the City Clerk. [Added 10-20-2009 by Ord. No.
09-26]
G.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A.
44.Editor's Note: This subsection supersedes former § 188-16.1, Expiration of motor vehicle
related licenses, added 2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 92-15.
§ 188-16 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-17
1:282
FLEA MARKET — Includes a market, indoor or out of doors, where
new or used items are sold from individual locations, with each location
being operated independently from another location. Items sold include
but are not limited to household items, antiques, rare items,
decorations and used articles.[Added 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-6]
HAWKER and PEDDLER — Includes any person, either principal or
agent, who goes from town to town or from place to place in the same
town selling or bartering or carrying for sale or barter or exposing
any goods, wares or merchandise, either on foot or from any animal or
vehicle. (See MGL c. 101, § 13.)
TRANSIENT VENDOR — Includes any person, either principal or agent,
who engages in a temporary or transient business in the commonwealth
selling goods, wares or merchandise, either in one locality or in
traveling from place to place. (See MGL c. 101, § 2.)
Transient vendors.
A transient vendor, before selling goods, wares or merchandise in
Chicopee, must apply to the City Council for a license and must
file a true statement of the average quantity and value of the stock
kept or intended to be kept or exposed by him for sale. The City
Council may, however, waive the filing of such list and fix a license
fee in its discretion. (See MGL c. 101, §§ 1 through 12.) [Amended
9-1-2009]
(1)
Transient vendor group licenses. [Added 10-20-1992 by Ord. No.
92-72]
A transient vendor group license is a license that may be issued
for a group, wherein one license only shall be required for the
individual sellers involved (e.g., trade shows, dealer shows and
the like).
(a)
All such licenses shall be issued for a fixed period of time only
and, where the time is not specified, shall be limited to a twoday
period only.
(b)
When a transient vendor group license is issued, only one
license shall be issued for all sellers involved. The license
involved must, as the circumstances dictate, either provide
or keep for inspection purposes (and provide to the City for
any future enforcement needs) accurate records of all sellers
participating in any such show. Such records shall at a
minimum provide a name and address wherein any sellers
participating may be reached or served.
(c)
Size of group. Unless otherwise stated on the license, the size
of the group involved shall be limited to 10 or more vendors or
sellers.
(d)
(2)
B.
§ 188-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-17
1:283
License fees. The fee for such a group license shall be as
follows:
[1] One to nine vendors: $25 per day per vendor.
[2] Ten to 25 vendors: $20 per day per vendor.
[3] Twenty-six to 49 vendors: $15 per day per vendor.
[4] Fifty to 100 vendors: $10 per day per vendor.
(e)
One person or designee representing the group must be named
as the agent for compliance with this chapter and be
responsible for the group.
(f)
Hawkers and peddlers may sell without a license newspapers, religious
publications, ice, flowering plants and uncultivated flowers, fruits, nuts
and berries.
C.
A license shall be required by hawkers and peddlers of meats, butters,
cheese, fish and fresh fruits or vegetables. These would also include hot
dogs, hamburgers, meat sandwiches/grinders, ice cream, flavored ice,
and all other food items and snacks. [Amended 11-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-103; 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-10]
Upon the granting of a license, the Council may impose restrictions
and conditions as to the operation of the business concerning hours
of operation and/or other restrictions and conditions which the
Council decides are necessary to protect the citizens of the City of
Chicopee.
(1)
An applicant seeking a license to operate an ice cream truck within
the City of Chicopee shall be required to comply with the
requirements of MGL c. 270, § 25, and 520 CMR 15.00, including,
but not limited to, providing the City with permission to obtain a
CORI information from the Board of Probation as detailed in MGL
c. 6, § 172B 1/2. Failure to comply with the requirements of MGL
c. 270, § 25, and 520 CMR 15.00 may result in a fine of $150 for
a first offense; $250 for a second offense; and $500 for a third or
subsequent offense.
(2)
D.
Hawkers and peddlers may not sell jewelry, fruits, wines or spiritous
liquors or, except under temporary licenses, small artificial flowers or
miniature flags. (See MGL c. 101, § 17.)
E.
This section relating to hawkers and peddlers does not apply to
wholesalers or jobbers selling to dealers only or to persons selling by
sample or otherwise for future delivery or to fuel oil dealers who do not
solicit direct sales from house to house or by outcry, sign or signal or
to persons selling fish or farm products obtained by the labor of himself
or his family or to persons selling for charitable purposes under MGL
c. 101, § 33, or to persons licensed under MGL c. 94, § 40, to sell eggs,
milk and milk products. (See MGL c. 101, § 15.)
F.
§ 188-17 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-17
1:284
§ 188-17.1. Solicitation of charitable organizations. [Added
2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1A]
This section does not apply to costume jewelry with a value of not more
than $10 per piece made by a nonprofit or charitable organization. (See
MGL c. 101, § 16.)
G.
No street or alley shall be blocked by any merchandise offered for sale
hereunder. A two-foot passageway for pedestrians shall be left open,
and merchandise shall be securely and adequately placed so that it
will not endanger passersby or fall or extend into any street or alley.
Such sales shall not be operated in any manner which would cause a
nuisance or create a fire hazard.
H.
The Police Department shall make sufficient inspections to ensure
compliance with this section.
I.
License fee for hawkers and peddlers and transient vendors shall be as
set by the City Council.45 [Amended 9-1-2009]
J.
A license fee for a flea market shall be $500 per year. Each licensee
shall be requested to keep accurate records of the names and addresses
of each flea market seller, together with a brief description of the
type or types of merchandise offered for sale by that seller. [Added
2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-7]
K.
No person or organization shall solicit in the City without obtaining a
license from the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
The application is to be obtained and filed with the City Clerk for public
record and posting.
B.
The application must be approved by the Chief of Police prior to the
public hearing set by the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
The applicant must register the organization, sponsor and benefactor
of charitable event and provide a date and a time when the event is to
take place and where the event is to be held.
D.
Means of identification must be made available and open to the viewing
public with the accompanying license.
E.
Fees to any and all charitable organization(s) are to be waived.
Applications by charitable organizations are to be submitted to the
Safety Committee.
F.
"Charitable organizations" are defined to mean public service or human
service corporations or associations who operate on a not-for-profit
basis.
G.
45.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-17.1
1:285
§ 188-18. Taxi licenses. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The taxi driver's and operator's license fee shall be as set by the City
Council. (See Chapter 250 of this Code.)
§ 188-19. Intelligence office licenses. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Licenses may be granted to suitable persons to establish an intelligence
office for the purpose of obtaining or giving information concerning places
of employment, etc., as provided in MGL c. 140, §§ 41 to 46. The fee for said
license shall be as set by the City Council.46
§ 188-20. Service and self-service station licenses. [Added 8-2-1977;
amended 12-20-1977; 6-21-1983; 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16]
The penalty or fine for any individual, group of individuals, corporation
or association found to be in violation of this chapter shall be $50 for
each and every violation, and each day or portion of a day soliciting
without an authorized license shall be considered a separate violation.
H.
"Soliciting," as used in this chapter, shall be restricted in meaning
to the seeking of money without the providing of anything in return.
"Soliciting," as defined therein, is not intended to cover charitable
organizations who provide some item in return for a fee such as
poppies, badges, etc.
I.
Licenses for solicitation shall be limited by time and general location
and must be displayed on the person or persons so licensed.
J.
The intent and purpose of this section of the Code is to require
reporting procedures for solicitation in neighborhoods or through
approaching people in the street, or on bridges or other public ways.
[Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]
K.
This section of the Code is not intended to apply to school-related
groups or the like who run dances or who sponsor fund raisers on
school or City property for the benefit of the school or any City function
or department. [Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]
L.
This section of the Code is to be strictly construed in relation to
Subsection K and is to be liberally construed in relation to Subsection
L. [Added 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 92-19]
M.
Hours for solicitation in neighborhoods or through approaching people
in the street or bridges or other public ways will be limited to the hours
from 9:00 a.m. until dusk. [Added 4-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-10]
N.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to operate or maintain a motor
fuel service station or a self-service motor fuel station in the City of
Chicopee shall make application therefor. Such application shall specify
A.
46.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 188-17.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-20
1:286
the location and ownership. If a part of the station is to be a full-service
motor fuel station and a part is to be a self-service motor fuel station,
only one permit is required. The plot of land for which the petitioner
is requesting a motor fuel service station or self-service motor fuel
station license must be properly licensed for the storage of petroleum
(§ 188-14) by the Chicopee City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Applications.
All applications for new licenses, transfers and any and all interior
or exterior or alterations to the existing premises or licenses shall
be accompanied by seven copies of a site plan, drawn to a scale of
one to 20, showing the following: [Amended 3-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-21D; 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-31; 6-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-154; 11-15-2005 by Ord. No. 05-175]
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and
public areas.
(a)
(b) Lot lines with dimensions.
(c) Ownership, zoning and use of abutting land.
Location of proposed and existing buildings, vehicle storage
areas and other storage areas.
(d)
Location of existing and proposed lighting, signs and fences or
hedges.
(e)
Location of existing or proposed underground or aboveground
storage tanks and all associated equipment.
(f)
(1)
All such plot plans shall have the approval of the Chief of the
Chicopee Fire Department and the City of Chicopee Building
Commissioner affixed to them.47
(2)
B.
The fee for a license to operate a motor fuel or self-service motor fuel
station shall be $100 for a new license or substantial changes in the
facilities as determined by the Fire Department or Building Inspector.
[Amended 5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-23]
C.
The license is granted to the petitioner only. Any subsequent person,
firm or corporation must make application therefor prior to the
commencement of operations.
D.
The license is granted on the condition it may be summarily revoked or
suspended for cause.
E.
Self-service motor fuel stations must have an attendant at the gasolinedispensing
console at all times. This attendant:
F.
47.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), which immediately followed this subsection and
provided that transfers of existing licenses would not be subject to Subsection B, was
repealed 11-15-2005 by Ord. No. 05-175.
§ 188-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-20
1:287
Must have an unobstructed visual contact with the product
dispensers while motor fuel is being dispensed.
(1)
(2) Must not leave the console while motor fuel is being dispensed.
(3) Will turn off the dispensing console if required to leave the console.
Must have a two-way communications system between the
dispensing console and the product dispensers.
(4)
There shall be no vehicle parking allowed in the area between the
dispensing console and the product dispensers.
G.
Before the fuel tank of any vehicle is serviced, the motor and ignition of
the vehicle must be turned off.
H.
No smoking shall be allowed on the premises of a motor fuel station or
a self-service motor fuel station at any time.
I.
Each self-service motor fuel station and the self-service portion of a
split-island motor fuel station, shall be equipped with a fire suppression
system. The fire suppression system shall be approved by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Fire Marshal and shall be maintained
in accordance to applicable Massachusetts General Laws (MGL) and
Code of Massachusetts Fire Prevention Regulations (CMR).
J.
All motor fuel stations and self-service motor fuel stations shall be
maintained and conducted so that vehicular traffic and pedestrian
traffic is not obstructed. All buildings shall be kept in a neat, clean
condition. All driveways and adjacent streets and sidewalks shall be
kept clean and free of trash.
K.
All new self-service motor fuel stations or any self-service motor fuel
station undergoing a major renovation(s) as determined by the Fire
Department shall have restrooms and provide compressed air.
(New = Post ________)
date
L.
All motor fuel service stations and self-service motor fuel stations shall
be equipped with one portable fire extinguisher, with a minimum
classification of 40-B:C, for every 1,000 square feet of floor area.
M.
The Fire Department shall inspect all motor fuel stations and selfservice
motor fuel stations within the City often enough to assure
compliance with this chapter.
N.
Failure to comply with the restrictions herein will be deemed just cause
for the revocation of the self-service motor fuel permit.
O.
All new motor fuel stations must have adequate on-site drainage
installed. At existing motor fuel service and self-service motor fuel
stations, adequate on-site drainage must be installed upon repaving or
P.
§ 188-20 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-20
1:288
§ 188-21. Denial of license for default. [Added 9-21-1978]
§ 188-22. (Reserved)48
§ 188-23. Operating without a license or in default of any one or
more conditions attached to license. [Added 3-19-1996 by Ord. No.
major renovation of the station. On-site drainage shall be installed with
review and approval of the Department of Public Works.
A self-service motor fuel station shall mean any business selling or
offering for sale any motor fuel such as gasoline or diesel to the public
where the public is permitted and expected to operate the pump to put
fuel into the vehicle's tank and no repairs or other services, excluding
washing of windows and checking of oil, are performed on a fee basis.
[Added 5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-22]
Q.
A motor fuel service station shall mean any business selling or offering
for sale any motor vehicle such as gasoline or diesel fuel to the public
where the public is not permitted and expected to operate the pump to
put fuel into the vehicle's tank and where the public is offered repairs,
and/or other services for a fee. [Added 5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 98-22]
R.
No person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity shall be
granted a license on any property which is in default on the payment
of taxes, license fees, or other fees or money owed to the City by
either the applicant or the property owner without the consent of a twothirds
vote by the full City Council. [Amended 5-20-2003 by Ord. No.
03-16; 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-183; 9-1-2009]
A.
No license or permit granted under this chapter and subject to renewal
shall be renewed in any year by any license holder who is in default
on the payment of taxes, license fees, or other moneys due the City, or
if the owner of said property has not paid taxes, fees or other moneys
owed to the City without the consent of a two-thirds vote by the full
City Council. [Amended 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-16; 2-21-2006
by Ord. No. 06-183; 9-1-2009]
B.
The applicant will attest, in writing, prior to the granting of the license
or renewal that the conditions set forth in Subsections A and B relative
to all payments due are fulfilled on the license premises. [Added
3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-15]
C.
At any time, if it is found that the conditions listed in Subsections A
and B are not fulfilled, the license or its renewal may be revoked by
a majority vote of the City Council. [Added 3-18-1997 by Ord. No.
97-15; amended 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-183; 9-1-2009]
D.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 188-22, Home occupations, added 2-20-1990, was repealed
3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-3. For current provisions, see Ch. 275, Zoning.
§ 188-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-23
1:289
96-12; 5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-29; 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-22;
4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-37]
§ 188-24. Limit on number of licenses. [Added 4-20-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-25; amended 9-1-2009]
The City of Chicopee reserves the right to limit the number of licenses
existing on any one lot. The City Council in making its decision to limit the
number of licenses shall take into account the nature of the licenses, the
impact upon the neighborhood, the difficulties existing in the enforcement
of the licenses and the ability of the property owner to adequately provide
delineation as to the area(s) used by a license.
§ 188-25. Records retention. [Added 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 12-26]
The City Council may include the following record retention requirements
as a restriction on any license granted under this chapter.
Any person, firm or corporation found operating a business without a
license or proper permit shall, by order of the Building Commissioner,
cease said operation immediately and shall be fined $200 for the illegal
operation.
A.
Failure to cease operation as directed will subject the operator to
additional daily fines of $50.
B.
Nonoperation shall continue until such time as a proper license with
restrictions is issued by a vote of the full City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
C.
Anyone granted a license under this chapter shall have 10 working days
from the date of final passage by the full City Council to pick up the
license from the City Clerk's office. Failure to pick up the license after
the expiration of the 10 working days shall cause the license to become
null and void. [Amended 9-1-2009]
D.
If it is found that the license holder has failed to comply with any
one or more of the conditions imposed upon a license granted to the
license holder under this chapter, the City Council may: revoke the
license; suspend the license for a specific period of time; fine the license
holder; or any combination thereof, as determined by the City Council.
The potential fine shall be not less than $50 nor more than $500 per
violation and shall be paid within 30 calendar days from the day the
penalty was imposed and approved by the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
E.
Computerized records. The license holder shall keep a computerized
record of any and all transactions in a format to be determined by the
Chicopee Police Department.
A.
B. Identification of customer.
§ 188-23 CHICOPEE CODE § 188-25
1:290
The license holder shall require positive identification from any
and all persons or entities who sell, pawn, pledge or otherwise
deposit any item with the license holder. The license holder shall
identify the type of identification provided and record the name,
residence, date of birth, and social security/identification number
on a form to be approved by the Chicopee Police Department.
"Positive identification" shall mean any picture identification card
issued by a governmental entity.
(1)
The license holder shall photograph any person pawning, selling,
pledging or otherwise depositing any item with the license holder.
The required photo shall be clear and of such quality that the
person shall be clearly identified. A photo shall be required each
time a person makes a separate transaction. Said photographs shall
be stored in a digitized format, and the image must be retrievable
and a clear copy provided to police upon request. The abovedescribed
photos shall be maintained by the license holder for a
minimum of three years.
(2)
The license holder shall transmit this digitized identification
information to the Chicopee Police Department in a format to be
determined by the Chicopee Police Department and as often as
required by the Chicopee Police Department.
(3)
Transaction records.
The license holder shall accurately describe all items pawned,
sold, pledged, or otherwise deposited with the license holder. This
description shall include, but shall not be limited to, all
distinguishing marks, etchings, engravings, model names, model
numbers and serial numbers. Any jewelry with an affiliation to any
institution or organization shall include the name of said institution
or organization, year and inscribed initials, if any. Any and all
descriptions of items of jewelry shall include the material, ring
size (if applicable), weight, length (if applicable), shape and color.
Descriptions of coins, stamps, collectible cards, autographed items,
figurines or other collectibles of any description shall include any
identifying features such as the name of the item, date,
denomination, color, size, brand name, vintage and image
represented.
(1)
The license holder shall photograph any and all items pawned,
sold, pledged or otherwise deposited with the license holder. The
required photo shall be clear and such quality that the item(s)
shall be clearly identified. The photos shall be stored in a digitized
format and the image must be retrievable and a clear copy
provided to police upon request. The above described photos shall
be maintained by the license holder for a minimum of three years.
(2)
The license holder shall transmit this digitized transaction
information to the Chicopee Police Department in format to be
(3)
C.
§ 188-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 188-25
1:291
Chapter 189
LICENSE AND PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 188.
§ 189-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control the denials of any application for, or
revocation or suspension of, any local license or permit, including renewals
and transfers, issued by any board, officer, or department for any person,
corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any
local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges
or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject
of such license or permit which activity, event or matter is carried out or
exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose
determined by the Chicopee Police Department and as often as
required by the Chicopee Police Department.
Reporting of stolen items.
The license holder shall immediately report to the Chicopee Police
Department all incidents where a person claims that articles stolen
or wrongfully taken from him are in the possession of the license
holder or located within his place of business. In the event that
a person makes such a claim, the license holder shall ask the
complaining party to remain in the licensed premises and
immediately contact the Chicopee Police Department and request
that a police report be taken. The item(s) in question shall be
tendered to the Chicopee Police Department or stored in a safe
place in the licensed premises until such time as otherwise directed
by the Chicopee Police Department. If the complaining party does
not wish to wait for the arrival of the Chicopee Police Department,
the license holder shall secure as much information as possible
from the complaining party and immediately provide the same to
the Chicopee Police Department.
(1)
All unusual or suspicious activity which may involve criminal
behavior that occurs in or near the licensed premises shall
immediately be reported to the Chicopee Police Department.
(2)
D.
Violations. Any person or entity which violates any provision of this
section shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of the license
granted. The City Council may, in addition to or in lieu of a suspension
or revocation, impose a fine of not more than $300 per violation,
enforcement by the Chicopee Police Department.
E.
§ 188-25 CHICOPEE CODE § 189-1
1:292
owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or any other municipal charges.
§ 189-2. Responsibilities of Tax Collector or other municipal
officials.
The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges,
hereinafter referred to as "the Tax Collector," shall annually furnish to
each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as
"the licensing authority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals
and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise,
hereinafter referred to as "the party," that has neglected or refused to pay
any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges
for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such party has not filed in
good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending
petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 189-3. Denials, revocation or suspension of local licenses or
permits.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector or
with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of
such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out
or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate
owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that written
notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by applicable
provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier
than 14 days after said notice.
§ 189-4. Evidence; findings.
The said list shall be prima facie evidence for the denial, revocation or
suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Tax Collector shall
have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension.
A.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such
license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purpose of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced
in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license
denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied,
suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or
renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the
Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any
and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
B.
§ 189-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:293
§ 189-5. Payment agreements; failure to comply.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 189-6. City Council waivers. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds
there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its
officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on
said property.
§ 189-7. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to Chapter 188 of the Code of the City of
Chicopee. In addition, the following licenses and permits are exempt from
this chapter:
charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said
certificate.
A. Open burning: MGL c. 48, § 13.
B. Bicycle permits: MGL c. 85, § 11A.
C. Sales of articles for charitable purposes: MGL c. 101, § 33.
D. Children work permits: MGL c. 149, § 69.
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses: MGL c. 140,
§ 21E;
E.
F. Dog licenses: MGL c. 140, § 137.
G. Fishing, hunting, trapping license: MGL c. 131, § 12.
H. Marriage licenses: MGL c. 207, § 28.
I. Theatrical events, public exhibition permits: MGL c. 140, § 181.
§ 189-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 189-7
1:294
Chapter 190
MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor vehicles on City property — See Ch.
198.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 190-1. Purpose. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council finds and declares the following:
§ 190-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — Any two- or three-wheeled device, including, but
not limited to, the so-called mini-bikes, pocket bikes, mini choppers, gas
scooters, electric scooters or motorized skateboard, that has handlebars,
and is designed to be stood upon or seated upon by the operator, and is
powered by a gas or electric motor that is capable of propelling the device
with or without human propulsion at any speed on any street, roadway or
alley in the City, that is not defined as a motor vehicle under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 190-3. Prohibition absent express written permission.
That because of the severely congested streets, roadways and alleys
of the City, these regulations banning motorized scooters would serve
public interest and safety.
A.
That motorized scooters adversely affect traffic flow and the response
time of emergency vehicles in the City.
B.
That motorized scooters lead to motor vehicle accidents for the
operator and other vehicles and pedestrians in the City.
C.
No person shall operate a motorized scooter, motorized skateboard, or
other similar motorized vehicle (hereinafter referred to as "personal
motorized vehicles") on any City-owned or controlled public way,
sidewalk, park, playground, recreational area, public school property
or any other property owned or controlled by the City, without the
express written permission to do so from the City official(s) or officer
having jurisdiction over the use of said City property or their respective
designee (hereinafter referred to as the "authorizing official"). The
following vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
A.
§ 189-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-3
1:295
§ 190-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Vehicles licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as motor
vehicles;
(1)
Vehicles licensed or used by the United States government or
any other federal agency, instrumentality or entity, including, but
not limited to the United States Postal Service, while performing
service to the public;
(2)
(3) Personal motorized vehicles used by disabled persons;
Personal motorized vehicles used by governmental law
enforcement personnel including, but not limited to, police officers;
(4)
(5) Landscaping equipment; and
(6) Parade vehicles used during a licensed parade.
Conditions on the grant of written permission.
At a minimum, any grant of written permission to use a personal
motorized vehicle issued by the authorizing official shall include
the following conditions and restrictions:
No person under the age of 16 shall operate a motorized
scooter without a valid learner's permit or driver's license;
(a)
The personal motorized vehicle must be properly equipped
with a braking system;
(b)
(c) A helmet must be worn at all times;
No personal motorized vehicle shall be operated in a careless
and reckless manner so as to endanger the safety of any person
or the property of any person; and
(d)
All owners and operators must comply with all applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
(e)
(1)
The authorizing official is further empowered to impose such other
restrictions, regulation, or limitations as they deem appropriate or
necessary to protect public safety, interest and welfare. All persons
using City property pursuant to a grant of permission shall comply
with the restrictions and limitations referenced herein or imposed
thereto.
(2)
B.
Enforcement. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any
police officer or any special police officer designated by the City
Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Violations. The following penalties shall be applicable for violations of
this chapter:
B.
§ 190-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 190-4
1:296
Chapter 195
MOBILE HOME PARKS
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine in the amount of $100 for the first offense, $200 for
a second offense and $300 for a third or any subsequent offense.
(1)
As an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, violations of
this chapter may be enforced in a manner provided in Chapter
21D of the Massachusetts General Laws, which procedure is
incorporated herein by reference. The penalty for each violation
shall be as set forth under Subsection B(1) above for each day or
part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued,
or permitted; provided, however, that if a violator fails to follow the
procedure and requirements of said Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 21D, the fine or fines shall be recovered by indictment or
a complaint pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40,
§ 21.
(2)
Upon the violation of any provision of this chapter any police officer
or any special police officer designated by the City Council may
impound the personal motorized vehicle until the operator appears
in Court. If an operator is an adult and is convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter, the personal motorized vehicle may
be subject to forfeiture laws under Massachusetts General Laws. If
the operator or owner is a minor, the personal motorized vehicle
may also be subject to forfeiture laws under Massachusetts General
Laws, if the minor is adjudicated delinquent or the matter is
continued without a finding. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(3)
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-4
1:297

ARTICLE I
Rent Control
[Adopted 1-27-1978]
§ 195-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Mobile Home Park Rent
Control Ordinance."
§ 195-2. Definitions.
§ 195-3. Establishment of Mobile Home Park Rent Control Board;
membership; terms. [Amended 12-2-1980; 9-1-2009]
There is hereby established a Mobile Home Park Rent Control Board
consisting of five members representing public interest, none of whom shall
be a tenant or landowner, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a
majority of the City Council. The members in the first instance shall be
appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. Upon expiration
of a term of office, the subsequent term shall be for a period of two years
from the date of appointment.
§ 195-4. Powers and duties of Board.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein, unless the
context in which they are used clearly requires a different meaning:
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit built on a chassis and containing
complete electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities and designed to
be installed on a temporary or a permanent foundation for permanent
living quarters.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A park licensed by the Board of Health
pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 32B.
RENT BOARD and BOARD — The Mobile Home Park Rent Control
Board as established herein.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Rules and regulations as promulgated
by the Board.
A.
B. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
The Board:
Shall regulate rents and set minimum standards for use or
occupancy of mobile home park accommodations and evictions of
tenants therefrom.
(1)
(2) May require registration by owners of mobile home parks.
A.
§ 195-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-4
1:299
§ 195-5. Standards for adjusting rents.
§ 195-6. Regulation of evictions; summary process.
The Board may regulate evictions of tenants at mobile home parks and may
issue orders which shall be a defense to an action of summary process for
possession.
§ 195-7. Effect of other provisions.
§ 195-8. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article or any order of the Board shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000 for any one offense.
May require information of said owners relating to their parks,
under penalties of perjury.
(3)
The Board may make rules and regulations, sue and be sued, compel
attendance of persons and the production of papers and information
and issue appropriate orders which shall be binding on both the owner
and tenant of such mobile home park accommodations.
B.
The Board may make individual or general adjustments, either upward
or downward, as may be necessary to assure that rents for mobile home
park accommodations are established on levels which yield to owners a
fair net operating income for such units.
A.
"Fair net operating income" shall be that income which will yield a
return, after all reasonable operating expenses, on the fair market
value of the property, equal to the debt service rate generally available
from institutional first mortgage lenders or such other rates of return
as the Board, on the basis of evidence presented before it, deems more
appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
B.
Fair market value shall be the assessed valuation of the property or
such other valuation as the Board, on the basis of evidence presented
before it, deems more appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
C.
The Board may establish further standards and rules consistent with
the foregoing.
D.
The Board and its actions shall be subject to the provisions of MGL c.
30A, Administrative Procedures Act, as if the Board were an agency of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
Pursuant to Chapter 596 of the Acts of 1977, judicial review may be
had in the District Court of Chicopee or the Superior Court of Hampden
County.
B.
§ 195-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 195-8
1:300
Chapter 198
MOTOR VEHICLES ON CITY PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 198-1. Motor vehicle prohibitions.
All motor vehicles, including snowmobiles, motorbikes, etc., shall be
prohibited from entering on any City property unless specifically authorized
to be on the property or unless facilities and access (such as parking
facilities) are specifically provided for motor vehicles.
§ 198-2. Violations and penalties.
A fine of $500 shall be levied for infraction of this chapter, plus the actual
costs of any damages involved.
§ 198-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not include maintenance or safety personnel.
Chapter 200
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 122.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 132.
Curfews — See Ch. 139.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 144.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 200-1. Applicability.
This chapter not apply to the operation or use of any organ, radio, bell,
chimes or other instrument, apparatus or device by any church, synagogue
or school.
§ 200-2. Unnecessary and unreasonable noise prohibited.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the creation of any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of such
character, intensity and duration, as to be detrimental to the life or health
of any individual or contrary to the public welfare is prohibited.
§ 195-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:301
§ 200-3. Enumeration of prohibited noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but the enumeration herein
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
Horns; signaling devices. The repeated or continuous sounding of any
horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle while stationary, except as a danger signal to warn of
something, such as when an approaching vehicle is apparently out of
control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are
being applied and decelaration of the vehicle is intended; the creation
by means of any such signal device of any reasonably loud or harsh
sound or the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary period of
time.
A.
Noisy vehicles. The use of an automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so
out of repair or so loaded in such a manner so as to create repeated or
continuous loud, unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
B.
Discharge of exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle
or boat engine or motor except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
C.
Construction; demolition; excavation. The erection, including
excavating, demolition or repair of any building, further than between
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Friday), except
in case of an urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and
then only with a one-to-two-day permit from the Building Department,
which permit may be renewed three times or less while the emergency
continues. The prior sentence does not apply on weekends to private
residences for which hired contractors are not employed. Weekend
hours that apply to such private residences shall be limited to 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. from September through April and to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
from May through August.
D.
Noise near schools and other institutions. The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, installation of learning,
church or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions,
provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital, church or court house. Excessive
noise, for the purposes of this section, shall be repeated and/or
continuous noise that can reasonably be construed to impair or hamper
the activities involved in any of the above stated entities.
E.
Loading; unloading. The creation of a loud and/or excessive noise in
connection with loading or unloading any vehicle and/or the opening
and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. Loud or
excessive noise for the purposes of this section shall be 70 decibels or
more for a period in excess of 4 hours.
F.
§ 200-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 200-3
1:302
§ 200-4. Boom boxes and audio equipment.
§ 200-5. Dumpsters. [Added 10-20-2009 by Ord. No. 09-2749]
Dropoff, pickup, emptying and removal of trash container dumpsters within
1,000 feet of any residential zone shall be prohibited between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Hawking, peddling. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
G.
Drums; loudspeakers; similar devices. The use of a drum, loudspeaker
or any other sound-producing instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention to any election campaign, performance, show or
sale or display of merchandise by the creation of noise, except when
authorized by a special permit issued by the Chief of Police, who shall
make reasonable rules and regulations therefor.
H.
Noise in conduct of business. The creation of any unnecessary noise
in the operation, conduct and/or maintenance of any business, factory,
plant, yard or manufacturing establishment, including excavating,
blasting (where permitted), grinding, breaking, crushing or processing
of any substance or materials.
I.
Any person who creates an unreasonably loud noise through the use of
amplification sound devices, including, but not limited to, a boom box
or radio amplification or similar equipment, including any audio, stereo,
cassette player, radio or similar equipment in a parked or moving motor
vehicle shall be subject to the following:
(1) Fine of $50 for the first offense.
Fine of $100 for the second offense within a one-year period.
[Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-23]
(2)
Fine of $300 for a third and subsequent offense within a one-year
period. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-23; 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-31]
(3)
A.
Loud and unreasonable noise defined. For purposes of this section, an
unreasonable loud noise is defined as a sound which is greater than 50
decibels in the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and 70 decibels
at other times or any sound which is discernible at a distance of 100
feet, provided that such sound is not otherwise authorized by permit or
license granted by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the City or
by permission of the Chief of Police.
B.
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 200-5, Enforcement, as § 200-6.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-6
1:303
§ 200-6. Enforcement. [Amended 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-40;
9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-36]
Violations of this chapter are enforceable by the Chicopee Police
Department, Chicopee Building Department and the Chicopee Health
Department. Any person or entity who fails to comply with §§ 200-2, 200-3
and 200-5 shall be fined $25 per day. A person or entity commits a separate
offense for each and every day a violation continues.50
Chapter 206
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 169.
§ 206-1. Commission established; membership; vacancies;
compensation.
§ 206-2. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have the exclusive management and control of any
land and building which the City may provide for a public park, playground
or recreational purpose. It may prepare and equip the same in a manner
suitable for a park, playground or recreational activities and employ a
There shall be a Commission of Parks and Recreation appointed by
the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, consisting of five
members who shall hold office for terms of one, two, three, four and
five years respectively, from the first Monday in May next following
such appointment or until their successors are qualified and thereafter
the Mayor shall annually, before the first Monday in May, with like
approval, appoint one such Commissioner for a term of five years from
said first Monday in May. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
No member of the City Council, Clerk or Treasurer of such City shall be
a Commissioner. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
Vacancies in such board shall be filled in a like manner for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
C.
A Commissioner may be removed by a vote of 2/3 of all the members of
the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
D.
E. Such Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 200-6, Violations and penalties, and § 200-7, Appeals, which
immediately followed, were repealed 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-40. For current provisions,
see Ch. 132, Code Enforcement, Art. I, Noncriminal Disposition of Certain Violations.
§ 200-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 206-2
1:304
Superintendent of Parks and Recreation, an Assistant Superintendent of
Parks and Recreation, supervisors, instructors, caretakers, laborers and
such other persons and officials as may be necessary. The Assistant
Superintendent of Parks and Recreation shall be in charge of, coordinate
and direct all recreational activities for the Parks and Recreation
Department under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of Parks
and Recreation. They may make rules and regulations in regard to use of
the grounds and apparatus thereon and the hours, time and by whom said
grounds and apparatus may be used. Said Commission shall also have and
may exercise all the powers which are conferred on such Commission by
law. See MGL c. 45.
§ 206-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any rule or regulation of said Commission shall be
liable to the same penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article I of this Code.
§ 206-4. Current members of Commission continued.
The persons presently holding the position of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners shall continue to hold the position of Parks and Recreation
Commissioners until the terms for which they were appointed have expired.
§ 206-5. Dumping rubbish in parks prohibited. [Amended 2-15-2005
by Ord. No. 05-119]
The dumping of rubbish or trash in City parks is forbidden. Violators will be
liable to a penalty of $100 for each offense. (See Chapter 169.)
§ 206-6. Playing golf in parks prohibited. [Added 11-7-1985;
amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-24]
Playing golf in parks is prohibited. The penalty for a first offense is $100.
§ 206-7. Chicopee Parks Summer Day Camp Revolving Fund. [Added
7-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-44B; amended 4-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-951]
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2, entitled "Revolving funds," shall be and hereby
is accepted for the purpose of establishing a Recreation Department
Summer Day Camp Program. Said authorization shall be for the 1994
fiscal year, in accordance with the provisions of said enactment.
A.
The programs, purpose and funding are identified as follows:
(1) Program: summer day camp.
Purpose: to provide children with a recreational and learning
experience, including sports, creative arts and crafts, music and
drama, nature activities, swim lessons and other related events.
(2)
B.
51.Editor's Note: This section was deleted and reauthorized 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-21.
§ 206-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-7
1:305
Chapter 211
PORNOGRAPHY
§ 211-1. Prohibited display.
Consistent with MGL c. 272, §§ 28 through 31, or as may be amended,
and the definitions contained therein, no person having custody, control
or supervision of any commercial establishment shall knowingly display
the covers (front or back) of any magazines, newspapers or periodicals
which are harmful to minors as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, or as may
be amended, in such a way that minors, as part of the invited general
public, will be exposed to view such magazines, newspapers or periodicals;
provided, however, that a person shall be deemed not to have displayed
said magazines, newspapers or periodicals to said minors if said magazines,
newspapers or periodicals are sheathed in opaque covers or kept behind
devices commonly known as "blinder racks" so that only the title and no
more than 1/3 of the cover (front or back) of said magazines, newspapers or
periodicals is exposed to view.
§ 211-2. Exceptions.
It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this chapter
that said material was displayed, presented or disseminated to a minor
at a recognized and established school, church, museum, medical clinic,
hospital, public library, governmental agency, quasi-governmental agency
and by persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of such
persons or organizations, and which institution displays, presents or
disseminates such said material for a bona fide governmental, educational
or scientific purpose.
§ 211-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined a sum not exceeding $300. Each day that any violation of this
chapter occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punishable as a separate violation. Each of said materials prohibited
by this chapter shall constitute a separate offense as to each item, issue
Departmental receipts. Fees sufficient to operate the program shall
be charged in accordance with a schedule provided by the Parks/
Recreation Department and shall be credited to the Chicopee Parks
Summer Day Camp Revolving Fund.
(3)
Expenditures. The Superintendent of Parks and Recreation or the
Assistant Superintendent shall be authorized to expend directly
from the revolving fund.
(4)
Limit on expenditure. All funds received may be expended for the
program during the year of operation.
(5)
§ 206-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 211-3
1:306
or title involved and shall be punishable as such. For the purpose of this
section, multiple copies of the same identical title, monthly issue, volume
and number of an issue or other such identical material shall constitute a
single offense.
Chapter 217
RADIOACTIVE WASTE, STORAGE OR DISPOSAL OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 169.
§ 217-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the storage and/or disposal of
radioactive wastes within the boundaries of the City of Chicopee.
§ 217-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RADIOACTIVE WASTES — Waste materials contaminated with or
containing radioactivity.
RADIOACTIVITY — The disintegration of unstable atomic nuclei by the
emission of radiation, with a definite half-life.
§ 217-3. Prohibited activity.
It shall be unlawful to establish, operate or maintain any radioactive waste
material storage facility and/or waste material disposal facility within the
boundaries of the City, but not limited to wastes classified as low-level
wastes.
§ 217-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 211-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-4
1:307
Chapter 223
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 169. Storage or disposal of radioactive
waste — See Ch. 217.
§ 223-1. Establishment of program; applicability; purpose and
intent.
§ 223-2. Materials to be recycled; definitions.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
certain recyclable material from garbage and rubbish by the residents
of the City of Chicopee and the collection of recyclables at the
residents' curbside. The collection of separated recyclables shall be
made periodically under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public
Works.
A.
All buildings shall be included in the mandatory recycling program.
Unless otherwise provided by the City through grant or other programs,
each homeowner, property owner, or property manager shall provide,
or cause to be provided, recycling receptacles to each residential unit
of such characteristics as to meet the minimum standards established
by the Chicopee Department of Public Works.
B.
All units and properties served by City Sanitation Collection service as
well as those served by private hauling services shall conform to all
sections of this chapter.
C.
The purpose and intent of this program is to comply with
Commonwealth of Massachusetts promulgated regulations 310 CMR
19.017, commonly known as "waste bans," which restrict the disposal
of certain items at solid waste facilities, landfills, and incinerators in
Massachusetts.
D.
"Recyclables" are the discarded materials described below which may
be reclaimed and are considered saleable, recyclable, or reusable. For
the purposes of this chapter, these materials are defined and described
in the following categories:
Aluminum: cans made from aluminum, aluminum foil, aluminum
wrappers and containers or trays used in the packaging,
preparation, or cooking of prepared dinners, pies, cakes, or other
foods.
(1)
Glass: all unbroken jars and bottles or similar products made from
silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the product being
(2)
A.
§ 217-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 223-2
1:308
transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or
bottling of various matter and all other material commonly known
as "glass," excluding:
Blue and flat glass and glass commonly known as "window
glass."
(a)
(b) Dishes and crockery.
Ferrous metal cans: all containers composed in whole of iron or steel
and so-called "tin" cans used for the packaging or storing of various
food and nonfood items, except containers which contained paint or
petroleum-based solvents and any pressurized aerosol cans.
B.
Clean and unsoiled newspaper, as defined in Subsection B, "landfill,"
including newsprint, all newspaper advertisements, supplements,
comics, and enclosures. Newspapers shall be considered clean and
uncontaminated if they have not been exposed to substances or
conditions rendering them unusable for recycling.
C.
Corrugated paper: old corrugated cardboard, cardboard boxes and
cartons, paperboard, and similar corrugated and kraft paper materials.
D.
Mixed paper: all grades of recyclable paper, including white paper,
copy, fax, and printer paper, colored and construction paper, brown
paper bags, paperbacks and telephone books, magazines and catalogs,
mail, including junk mail without waxy coatings and plastic windows,
and boxboard, i.e., cereal, shoe, and cracker boxes.
E.
Single polymer plastic: plastic which is labeled by resin numbers 1
through 7 and further classified by name, such as Number 1 PET,
polyethylene terephthalate, Number 2 HPPE, high density
polyethylene, Number 3 PVC, vinyl/polyvinyl chloride, Number 4 LDPE,
low-density polyethylene, Number 5 PP, polypropylene, Number 6, PS
polystyrene (with the exception of styrofoam), Number 7, other resins
and layered multimaterial.
F.
Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms,
words, and phrases shall have the specific meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ACCESS — The implementation of a recycling program which provides
the opportunity to recycle for residents, tenants, and occupants of
all buildings. The program must be at least as convenient as rubbish
collection or placement whenever possible.
BLUE BIN — A rectangular recycling receptacle, usually blue in color
and between six-gallons (apartment size) and 18 gallons (residential
size) in volume for use as a curbside set-out container or as an
accumulation and carrier box to a recycling storage area. The City
reserves the right to change or add colors of containers to differentiate
materials as needed.
G.
§ 223-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-2
1:309
CITY — The City of Chicopee, Massachusetts.
COMMERCIAL RECYCLING PLAN FORM — The form required to be
submitted to the Chicopee Department of Public Works by each
property owner or manager business or nonprofit establishment within
the City which identifies their plan offering recycling access in all
buildings. This form shall be submitted one time for the current
establishment and resubmitted upon any change in ownership, name,
substantial function or physical layout of the buildings.
DWELLING UNIT — Any residential unit that contains living facilities
which provide for sleeping, eating, cooking, and bathing and which
otherwise meets the definition as provided for in the State Sanitary
Code 105 CMR 410.000.
HAULER — A duly authorized rubbish and recycling company,
permitted in the City, whose primary business is to collect and transport
same throughout Chicopee and whose ultimate destination is a disposal
facility recognized by the City. This meaning will apply to any company
doing business for the City as well as those employed by private owners
or property managers.
HAULER PERMIT — The permit issued by the Board of Health to
haulers which authorizes them to work within the City.
HAULER REPORTING FORM — The form required by the Chicopee
Department of Public Works to be submitted by each hauler which
allows for an orderly reporting process on the status of recycling
programs for each of their multifamily and business customers.
LANDFILL — The Connecticut Valley Sanitary Landfill, owned by USA
Waste, operated by Waste Management Inc., and located on New
Lombard Road, Chicopee.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING, COMPLEX, AND PROPERTY — A residential
property within the City which has five or more dwelling units,
including apartments, rooming and boarding units, condominiums,
cooperatives, group homes, nursing homes and so-called assisted living
facilities, mobile home parks, school dormitories, temporary shelters,
and seasonal living quarters for farm laborers, but excluding hospitals
and clinics.
MULTIFAMILY RECYCLING PLAN FORM — The form required by the
Department of Public Works to be submitted by each property owner or
manager of a multiunit property (five or above) within the City which
identifies their plan to offer recycling access to all buildings. This form
shall be submitted by September 1, 2001, and by each July 1 thereafter.
PROPERTY OWNERS OR MANAGERS — Those individuals, singlefamily
occupants, homeowners, condominium or other tenant
associations, property management businesses, commercial
businesses, nonprofit organizations, churches and other similar
institutions, and municipal and governmental entities responsible for
§ 223-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 223-2
1:310
§ 223-3. Separation and placement of materials; violations and
penalties.
It shall be mandatory for all occupants in all buildings to separate all
designated recyclables from other refuse and properly place them for
ultimate disposal in accordance with the following:
providing recycling services and waste management services for a
building or property in the City.
REFUSE — The total solid waste as defined in § 169-1.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste as defined in
§ 169-1.
TOTER — A container on wheels widely used for the collection of
certain recyclable material, which can be 32, 64, or 96 gallons, and
which is designed for mechanical lifting and loading into a collection
vehicle.
Buildings which receive City solid waste collection services.
It shall be mandatory for residents of single-family, two-, three-,
four-family, and any other property currently served by the City
(grandfathered) to separate from refuse all recyclables as
designated by the Superintendent. This requirement shall also
apply to City owned buildings. The City (through the DPW
Sanitation) will offer access to the City's recycling program and
will make every effort to make it as convenient as regular rubbish
collection.
(1)
Residents and occupants shall use the recycling receptacles issued
to each household, apartments (up to and including four-family),
and grandfathered properties, including multifamilies, small
business and commercial properties. Receptacles shall be placed
on and removed from the curbside or tree belt in accordance with
the provision of Sec. 9-6(a).
(2)
So long as containers are available through grants or available
funds, one blue bin will be provided to each residential dwelling.
The City shall retain ownership of all recycling receptacles issued
by the City and residents shall take proper care to protect them
from loss or damage. After the City's supplies are depleted, it shall
be each resident's responsibility to obtain a suitable replacement
within 30 days.
(3)
The City may provide a suitable number of recycling receptacles,
including toters, to some buildings that currently receive City
rubbish collection services. The City shall determine the number,
location, and type suitable for the building and shall retain
ownership of all receptacles issued to owners or managers of each
building. Owners or managers shall take proper care of receptacles
(4)
A.
§ 223-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-3
1:311
§ 223-4. Ownership of recyclables; violations and penalties.
to protect them from loss or damage and shall be responsible for
obtaining suitable replacements within 45 days.
All the metal and glass recyclables, as defined in § 223-2, shall be
placed together in the designated recycling receptacle separate
from rubbish or garbage. These recyclables need not be washed,
but should be rinsed of any food residue, and labels and lids need
not be removed.
(5)
Recyclable newspapers and corrugated paper shall be placed on
top of or next to the recycling receptacle in a manner to prevent
the scattering of the paper.
Newspapers shall either be packed in standard grocery or
paper bags, placed in cardboard boxes or securely tied in flat
bundles, none of which shall weigh more than 50 pounds.
(a)
If not used for packing paper recyclables, corrugated boxes
and cardboard cartons shall be collapsed and tied in bundles
not weighing more than 50 pounds and placed on top of or next
to the recycling receptacle.
(b)
(6)
Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic garbage bags for
collection, removal, or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in
the same refuse container as or otherwise mixed with other forms
of solid waste for collection, removal, or disposal.
(7)
Buildings which do not receive City solid waste collection services.
It shall be mandatory for each owner, manager, and occupant of
a building which does not receive City solid waste collection to
separate recyclable material from other refuse.
(1)
Owners and managers of these buildings shall contract with
properly licensed recycling hauling companies permitted to
operate within the City of Chicopee and are responsible for all costs
incurred.
(2)
From time to time, the City may offer recycling containers, tenant
and occupant education, and other information which is designed
to increase the ease and efficiency with which the building
recycles.
(3)
B.
Any violation of this section or any part thereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $50.
C.
From the time of placement at the curbside tree belt of any recyclables
for collection by the City of Chicopee pursuant to the program
established hereby and the rules and regulations issued hereunder,
such materials shall become the property of the City of Chicopee.
From the time of placement at the designated area of any recyclables
A.
§ 223-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 223-4
1:312
§ 223-5. Property owner responsibilities.
for collection by a private hauler, such materials shall become the
property of that hauler. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person, other than authorized agents of the City acting in the course
of their employment or authorized employees of a private hauler acting
in the course of their contract, to collect, or cause to be collected,
any recyclables so placed. Any and each such collection or pickup in
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as herein after provided.
The recyclables collected by the City shall be transported to and
disposed of at the Materials Recycling Facility (MRF), Springfield, MA.
Any other recyclables collected by private haulers which are destined
for facilities other than the MRF must be so stated on the hauler
permit and whose operation must allow for the efficient and accurate
accounting of reportable tonnage to the City of Chicopee periodically.
B.
Any violation of this section or any part thereof shall be punishable by
a fine of $100, and the violator shall make restitution to the City for the
value of any recyclables illegally removed.
C.
Single-family residences, and two-, three-, and four-family unit
properties, whether single or multiple structures, shall participate in
the City of Chicopee Curbside Recycling Program. The biweekly
collection is performed by the Chicopee Department of Public Works'
Sanitation Department Recycling crews and parallels the rubbish
collection schedule as outlined in § 169-12. Curbside recycling
calendars are annually distributed to most residences of this size or are
available at the DPW and describe materials accepted and procedures
to follow. Procedures are reviewed and can be changed periodically
at the discretion of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works to comply with Commonwealth of Massachusetts solid waste
regulations. Blue bins, of between 14 and 18 gallons' capacity, are the
accepted set-out containers, and shall be used by these dwellings.
A.
Multifamily properties are five residential units or more and shall be
responsible for providing their tenants and occupants access to a
recycling program. Every effort will be made for the building's
recycling program to parallel its rubbish collection program in order
to provide convenient access for tenants. Recyclables shall be collected
from each property at least once every two weeks.
Tenant education. Property owners and managers must notify
tenants at the time of renting or leasing and at least annually
thereafter about their expected participation in the building's
recycling program. Tenants shall be provided with the following
information:
(a) Reasons to reduce solid waste by recycling;
(1)
B.
§ 223-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:313
(b) Which materials are collected;
How to prepare the materials to meet the processing
requirements; and
(c)
Collection schedules and location of bins, toters, and
dumpsters.
(d)
Agreement with private hauler. Contractual arrangements must
be made between multifamily owners and managers and haulers
authorized by the Board of Health to operate within the City of
Chicopee. Recycling collection schedules, storage and pickup
locations, and traffic flow issues shall be mutually agreed upon
by the parties. The City is not responsible for any problems,
unauthorized collections, liabilities, or any other difficulties that
arise between the haulers and their customers.
(2)
Written recycling plan.
A multiple-unit recycling plan form will be provided by and
must be submitted back to the Chicopee Department of Public
Works upon implementation of any recycling activity or
program by the property owner or manager of each building
which has five or more residential units. The Form must be
completed, approved, and on file at the DPW before any
technical assistance, tenant and employee education, or
equipment grants are given by the City to a multifamily. The
plan will cover the following:
[1] Materials collected;
Quantity, size, and type of collection/storage containers
used;
[2]
[3] Location of storage area;
[4] Frequency of collection; and
[5] Tenant education procedure.
(a)
The Form shall be resubmitted annually by July 1, even if there
are no changes to report from the previous year.
(b)
(3)
Implementation of recycling plan. The recycling plan must be
implemented within 90 days of approval by the DPW for a new
multifamily property or within 90 days of adoption of these
provisions by the City Council52 for existing properties. A new plan
shall be submitted by the new owner or property manager within
90 days upon the sale and purchase of the property or by the
existing owner or property manager upon a significant change in
the property's recycling activity. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(4)
52.Editor's Note: These provisions were originally adopted by the Board of Aldermen.
§ 223-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 223-5
1:314
General compliance with applicable laws. The location and
placement of recycling containers for storage purposes before final
pickup and disposal shall comply with all applicable state and
local laws, and be at least as convenient to tenants as rubbish
receptacles.
Indoor or interior collection/storage areas shall be established
in accordance with Chicopee Fire Department Codes and State
Sanitary Codes-Minimum Standards of Fitness For Human
Habitation.
(a)
Outdoor or exterior storage structures shall be established in
accordance with all state and City Building Codes. In addition,
containers located outdoors shall be covered to protect
materials from the elements and from vector populations. The
property owner/manager shall maintain all recycling areas in a
clean and sanitary condition to meet Chicopee Board of Health
regulations, State Sanitary codes, and City of Chicopee Code
§ 169-9A, B, C, and D as it relates to responsibilities of owners
of land.
(b)
(5)
Business/commercial buildings and properties and owners thereof,
including nonprofit enterprises, shall be responsible for providing
recycling access to commercial tenants, and all other persons or
establishments occupying space within their buildings. Every effort
shall be made to parallel the building's recycling program to its rubbish
collection in order to provide convenient access to all occupants. These
commercial entities shall establish an on-site recycling program which
collects at a minimum two materials from the list as described and
defined in § 223-1. Grandfathered commercial properties receiving City
Sanitation collection service (rubbish and recycling) on the date of
adoption of this chapter will continue to be serviced and will be worked
with on an individual basis to increase ease and efficiency of recycling.
Any building or property which has generated, or will generate rubbish
is included in this chapter.
Business tenant and employee education. Building owners and
property managers must notify individual business owners
(commercial tenants) at the time of renting or leasing and at least
annually thereafter about their expected participation in the
building's recycling program. Individual businesses must notify
their employees at the time of hire and at least annually thereafter
about their expected participation in the business' recycling
program. All occupants shall be provided with the following
information:
(a) Reasons to reduce solid waste by recycling;
(b) Which materials are collected;
How to prepare the materials to meet the processing
requirements;
(c)
(1)
C.
§ 223-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:315
Collection schedules and locations of bins, toters, and
dumpsters;
(d)
(e) Name of hauler under contract; and
Contact person and telephone number responsible for
coordinating all aspects of the commercial recycling plan.
(f)
Agreement with private hauler. Contractual arrangements must
be made between commercial properties and haulers authorized
by the Board of Health to operate within the City of Chicopee.
Recycling collection schedules, storage and pickup locations, and
traffic flow issues shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties. The
City is not responsible for any problems, unauthorized collections,
liabilities, or any other difficulties that arise between the haulers
and the customers.
(2)
Written recycling plan. A commercial/business recycling plan form
will be provided by, and must be submitted back to, the Chicopee
DPW upon the implementation of any recycling activity or program
by the owner or commercial building property manager. The form
must be completed, approved, and on file at the DPW before any
technical assistance, tenant and employee education, or equipment
grants are given by the City to a commercial building or business.
The plan will cover the following:
(a) List of eligible recyclables collected;
(b) Frequency of collection;
(c) Container characteristics and markings; and
(d) Commercial tenant and employee education process.
(3)
Implementation of commercial recycling plan. The commercial
building's recycling plan must be implemented within 90 days of
approval by the DPW or within 180 days of adoption of these
provisions by the City Council53. A new plan shall be submitted
by the new owner or property manager within 90 days of the sale
and purchase of the building or business or by the existing owner
or property manager upon a significant change in the building's
recycling activity. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(4)
General compliance with applicable laws. The indoor and/or
outdoor placement of recycling containers shall also comply with
all codes as previously described for multifamily properties in
§ 223-5B(5).
(5)
Any violation of this section or any part thereof shall be punishable
by a fine of $100.
(6)
53.Editor's Note: These provisions were originally adopted by the Board of Aldermen.
§ 223-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 223-6
1:316
§ 223-6. Hauler responsibilities.
To obtain hauler status in Chicopee, a permit to operate within the City must
be obtained from the Chicopee Board of Health. All haulers permitted to
pickup rubbish from property within the City shall also have the capability
to offer recycling pickup services, by sorting, separating, delivering, or
otherwise managing recyclable material apart from rubbish. This capacity
shall include the ability to deliver recyclable materials to a DEP-approved
facility and to effectively report tonnages to the City.
Haulers providing ongoing recycling collection services shall be
responsible for the collection, intermediate storage or transfer,
transportation, and delivery to the MRF or another DEP-approved
processing facility for recyclables.
A.
Recycling collection schedules and pickup locations shall be mutually
agreed upon by property owners/managers, businesses, nonprofit
establishments, and the haulers. The City of Chicopee shall not be
responsible for any problems, unauthorized collections, liabilities, or
other difficulties that arise between the haulers and their customers.
B.
Haulers shall be responsible for furnishing, maintaining, and replacing
all recycling containers and collection vehicles which are deemed
necessary in the recycling program.
C.
Recycling containers provided by haulers, including compactors, shall
be clearly labeled in English and in other languages when appropriate,
including indicating the materials to be placed in the container and the
word "recycle" or "recyclable."
D.
The type of containers used to collect the recyclable material, agreed
upon between the hauler and the customer, shall have adequate
capacity and durability to efficiently meet the needs of the occupants
and meet the spatial constraints of the building.
E.
Haulers shall provide a list of their multifamily property customers,
a list of their business/commercial property customers, and indicate
whether a recycling program has been established and maintained. The
DPW will provide each hauler with a hauler reporting form which shall
be submitted to the Superintendent of Public Works on a semiannual
basis: January 1 and July 1, and beginning January 1, 2002. All such
reports, and the data contained therein, once received by the City
of Chicopee, become the property of the City and will be considered
confidential.
F.
Haulers shall not be responsible for the establishment of a program
unless contracted by the property owner/manager.
G.
Haulers shall be entitled to deliver only those recyclables which the
operator of the MRF is contractually obliged to accept. Haulers shall
be entitled to reject loads of recyclables containing in excess of 10%
by weight of nonrecyclables, or loads contaminated by hazardous waste
H.
§ 223-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-6
1:317
Chapter 230
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 266.
Water — See Ch. 269.
§ 230-1. Definitions; word usage; abbreviations.
or any other nonconforming substance. When the origin of the rejected
load can be determined, haulers shall notify the customer immediately
and the City in writing when such occurrences become chronic.
Failure of a hauler to comply with any of the terms and conditions set
forth in § 223-6 may cause the City to notify the hauler of the deficiency,
and to work with the hauler to remedy the situation. Failure to remedy
such noncompliance to the satisfaction of the City or the DEP may
result in the suspension, modification, or termination of the rights of
the hauler to operate within the City. Circumstances under which the
City may exercise such options include, without limitation:
Failure to cooperate with DEP and the operator of the MRF to
coordinate deliveries or to deliver compliant loads.
(1)
(2) Failure to provide the City with customer noncompliance data.
Failure to provide recycling services to rubbish generating
customers.
(3)
(4) Failure to accurately complete or submit the hauler reporting form.
(5) Failure to accurately complete or submit tonnage data periodically.
I.
Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT OR "THE ACT" — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The administrator of US EPA Region I, or
authorized representative.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER — The manager of
one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities,
provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions
that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having
explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environment compliance with
A.
§ 223-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-1
1:318
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary
systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and
accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.[Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-30]
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days 20° centigrade, usually expressed
as a concentration.
BUILDING DRAIN — The privately owned part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil,
waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to the building sewer, beginning 10 feet outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The privately owned extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which may apply to a specific category of users
and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471.
CITY OR CITY OF CHICOPEE — A municipal corporation in the county
of Hampden, Massachusetts.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
CSO — Combined sewer overflow.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — For monitoring requirements, a combination
of individual samples of equal volume collected at equally spaced
intervals (not to exceed one hour) during hours of production (not to
exceed a twenty-four-hour period) or proportional according to flow. In
the case of a batch discharge of two hours or less, the composite will
consist of eight or more volume, flow, or time proportional samples.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A sampling and monitoring station which may
be located in a manhole, vault, pit or room within the premises of the
user.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
DWO — Dry weather overflow.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:319
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of
proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable
to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance
with Section 307 of the Act.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — For monitoring requirements, an individual sample
which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard
to flow or time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from manufacturing
processes, trade, or business, distinct from sanitary sewage.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307 (b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use, or disposal; and therefore is a cause of a violation of the City's
NPDES permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued hereunder, or any more stringent state or local
regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resources Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMITS — Site specific pretreatment standards developed in
accordance with EPA protocol and enforced by the City of Chicopee,
included in local wastewater discharge permits. The limits address
criteria such as biological inhibition, effluent toxicity, sludge disposal,
worker health and safety, etc.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued to the City pursuant to Section 402
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
§ 230-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-1
1:320
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
or pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater-generating process of the
building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors, such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source, should be considered.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program, any placement, assembly, or installation
of facilities or equipment or significant site preparation work,
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing
buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Entered into a building contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this definition.
(b)
(3)
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:321
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which
does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finishing product.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with other discharge or discharges from other sources, is
a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Chicopee's
NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain
characteristics of wastewater such as pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants,
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, or local limits.
PRESCRIPTIVE RIGHTS — Right or privilege or other easement form
of way upon or over land of another when use is continued for 20 years.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 230-24B of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
§ 230-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-1
1:322
PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of property.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and is controlled by the City of Chicopee.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW — A "treatment
works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which
is owned by the City of Chicopee. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally added.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER — A man-made pipe or conduit for carrying off sewage or
rainwater.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
§ 230-24 of this chapter.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, nonconductor
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(c)
(2)
Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2)
above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operations or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City may, at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should
not be considered a significant industrial user.
(3)
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-1
1:323
STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
STORM DRAIN — (Sometimes termed "storm sewer.") A pipeline in
which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is
controlled by the City of Chicopee, which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other
than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City of Chicopee
to supervise the Department of Public Works and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his duly
authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
USER — Any source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried wastes from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment for
municipal sludge and industrial waste.
Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. All references
to "days" in this chapter shall refer to calendar days, unless specified
otherwise.
B.
Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD -- Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR -- Code of Federal Regulations
CSO -- Combined Sewer Overflow
DWO -- Dry Weather Overflow
EPA -- Environmental Protection Agency
gpd -- gallons per day
mg/l -- milligrams per liter
NPDES -- National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System POTW--
Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SIC -- Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA -- Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
C.
§ 230-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-1
1:324
§ 230-2. Sewer Commission; general duties. [Amended 10-21-2008
by Ord. No. 08-50]
The Commission shall have all the rights and powers necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate this chapter, including, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the rights and powers to:
§ 230-3. Sewer betterment assessments. [Amended 9-1-2009;
9-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-27]
TSS -- Total Suspended Solids
U.S.C. -- United States Code
Inquire into the necessity of laying any public sewers and to consider
and investigate all petitions and applications thereof and report thereon
to the City Council as needed;
A.
Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business, to promulgate rules, regulations and procedures in
connection with the performance of its functions and duties and to fix,
enforce and collect penalties for the violation thereof;
B.
Notify the Board of Water Commissioners of delinquent accounts and
request termination of the water service to all customers located
outside the City of Chicopee limits who have unpaid balances for sewer
use and storm fees. Termination will be in accordance with the Water
Department's written policy and regulations titled "Billing, Termination
& Appeal Regulations."
C.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to allow private residential or
commercial properties which are not connected to the City's
sewerage system to connect to that system, and to allow those
properties whose connection to the City's sewerage system is in
a state of disrepair or is inadequate to meet the needs of such
properties to be repaired or made adequate.
(1)
This section establishes procedures for the City to assess
betterment charges against such properties in accordance with
the City Charter and the laws of the Commonwealth, and to take
ownership of the betterments so constructed and any interest in
real property necessary to do so.
(2)
This section affirms that building sewers connected to the
extension of the sewerage system contemplated by this section will
remain under the ownership of the property owner.
(3)
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
B.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:325
BENEFIT — An advantage accruing to a property by means of the
construction of an extension to the sewerage system. There are two
types of benefits, a general benefit and a specific benefit.
BUILDING SEWER — The privately owned extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
CITY or CITY OF CHICOPEE — A municipal corporation in the county
of Hampden, Massachusetts.
COMMISSION — The Chicopee Water and Sewer Commission.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT — The person
designated by the City of Chicopee to supervise the Department of
Public Works, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this Code, or his duly authorized representative.
GENERAL BENEFIT — The advantage accruing to a property which
is already connected to the sewerage system. An example of such an
advantage would be better flow of sewage from that property or less
likelihood of a sewer back-up due to increased capacity of the system.
ORDER OF CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT — The final form of
the original petition for construction and assessment as adopted and
approved by the City Council and recorded at the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds. It shall contain all information required by Chapter
80 and 83 of the Massachusetts General Laws, including all of the
information required by a petition for construction and assessment but
specifically, a list of owners and parcels and streets to be assessed.
PETITION FOR CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT — Either a
petition for extension or improvement of the sewerage system signed
by not fewer than 50% of the owners of land abutting a private way
as set forth in Subsection D(1)(b)[2], or a petition initiated upon the
recommendation of the Superintendent as set forth in Subsection
D(1)(b)[1]. Such a petition shall have a standard cover sheet and shall
refer to a plan identifying the proposed improvements and affected
parcels of land as well as the list of owners to be assessed. A successful
petition shall be supported by attached data, plans, estimated costs and
any other pertinent information.
PRIVATE WAY — A privately owned street that has not been accepted
by the City Council as a public way.
PROPERTY OWNER — The property owner of record at the Registry of
Deeds as of the date of the betterment assessment and as of January 1
of the year in which the taking is approved.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by the City of Chicopee.
PUBLIC WAY — A street formally accepted by legislative act of the City
Council and open for travel owned in fee or easement by the City of
Chicopee and the general public.
§ 230-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-3
1:326
SPECIAL BENEFIT — The advantage accruing to a property which for
the first time may be connected directly to the sewerage system due to
the construction of the extension of the system.
Areas of responsibility.
Responsibilities of the Superintendent. The Department of Public
Works Superintendent shall review all petitions for sewerage
system extensions and the analysis of such petitions by the City
Engineer. The Superintendent's review shall include an analysis of
whether the work will benefit the people of the City of Chicopee
and that the extension of the sewerage system, when completed,
will result in an improvement in their living conditions. The
Superintendent shall initiate and ensure that all public hearings
are duly advertised and held in compliance with the Massachusetts
Open Meeting Law.
(1)
Responsibility of the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall review
all petitions for sewerage system extensions. The City Engineer's
review shall include an analysis of the need for the extension and
its compatibility with the existing system, and shall insure that
any design of such extension complies with all engineering and
design requirements of the City. In addition, the City Engineer may
make recommendations to extend the sewerage system on private
ways based on analysis that the overall sewerage system would be
improved by construction of such an extension.
(2)
Responsibility of the City Solicitor. The City Solicitor shall be
responsible for drafting the order of assessment and filing it in
the Hampden County Registry of Deeds following its approval and
certification as a public record by the City Clerk.
(3)
Responsibility of the DPW Financial Administrator. The Financial
Administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that all betterment
assessments are properly computed, and billed, whether on the
regular monthly bill or on a special bill.
(4)
C.
Procedure for approval of betterments.
Requesting the construction of betterment and filing of the petition
for construction and assessment with the City Council.
The decision to extend or improve the sewerage works system
within the City of Chicopee shall be by the recommendation
of the Superintendent to the City Council following a public
hearing, in consultation with the City Engineer.
(a)
A request to extend the system shall be initiated in one of two
ways outlined here:
By a written recommendation of the Superintendent to the
City Council after a study of the sewerage system, taking
[1]
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:327
into account the need for a sewer in the street, the need
for increased capacity of an existing private sewer, or the
need to replace an existing sewer for environmental or
public health reasons; or
By petition to the Superintendent of not fewer than 50% of
the owners of land abutting the specific streets affected.
[2]
Nature of petition for construction and assessment ("petition").
Any petition for construction and assessment submitted to the
City Council authorized by this section shall 1) describe the
area to be benefitted by the particular project; 2) state with
specificity the reason for the request; 3) state the nature of the
work to be done; and 4) state whether it is to be done in a
public way or a private way requiring a taking or conveyance
of any necessary interest in real estate and an estimate of the
cost of the work or taking. The petition shall acknowledge that
facilities constructed under this policy will be the sole property
of the City of Chicopee.
(a)
The form of a Petition to the City Council according to
Subsections D(1)(b)[1] and [2] above shall be submitted with
a standardized cover sheet, introductory correspondence and
an executive summary, and all support data and documentation
outlining the criteria established in this section. The petition
for construction and assessment must refer to a plan of the
area according to MGL c. 80, § 2 and must identify all of the
streets in which infrastructure is to be installed and any parcel
that will be assessed. MGL c. 83, §§ 25 and 27. A Petition
from the Superintendent according to Subsection D(1)(b)[1]
may rely on information and materials prepared by private
residents or their engineers, which must be submitted with the
petition to the City Council.
(b)
(2)
Preliminary evaluation of the petition. Upon receipt of the Petition
from residents according to Subsection D(1)(b)[1] or upon his or
her own initiative, the Superintendent shall circulate and forward
the petition to the City Engineer and the City Solicitor. The City
Solicitor shall review the petition to ensure conformity with the
requirements of this section. If the City Solicitor finds the petition
to be deficient under this section, then the City Solicitor shall
inform the Superintendent and the City Engineer immediately, and
the petition shall be rejected, with written notice sent to the
petitioners detailing the reasons why the petition was rejected. If
the petition conforms to the requirements of this section, the City
Solicitor shall approve the petition "as to form." The City Engineer
shall examine the need for the extension or improvement of the
sewerage system, and in the case of an existing sewer, shall inspect
said facility. The City Engineer shall make a report of findings,
(3)
§ 230-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-3
1:328
including an estimate of cost, and submit it to the Superintendent
and copy to the City Council.
Public hearing. In the case of a recommendation of the City
Engineer pursuant to Subsection D(1)(b)[1] of this section and in
the case of a petition submitted pursuant to Subsection D(1)(b)[2]
of this section, within 30 days of the transmittal of the City
Engineer's recommendation or the report, as the case may be,
the Superintendent shall cause to be advertised a public hearing
concerning the extension or improvement of the sewerage system,
in accordance with the Open Meeting Law. Notice of the hearing
shall be sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid to all owners of
land abutting the streets affected. The hearing shall be chaired
by the Superintendent or his or her designee, and relevant
Department of Public Works staff shall present its findings
regarding the petition or the recommendation for extension or
improvement of the sewerage system, including a summary of the
report or the recommendation of the City Engineer. Any member
of the public may present data, views or argument relevant to the
proposed extension or improvement of the sewerage system.
(4)
Approval of the petition for construction and assessment; order of
construction and assessment.
Once the Superintendent conducts a public hearing on the
petition, the City Council shall review the petition and the
analyses of the City Engineer and the Superintendent, data,
views and argument presented at the public hearing, and shall
make a timely preliminary decision regarding the petition at a
duly noticed meeting of the City Council.
(a)
The decision of the City Council shall be in the form of an
order of assessment passed by a majority of the City Council,
which will be communicated, in writing, to all owners of land
abutting the street where the infrastructure improvement is to
be constructed.
(b)
A final determination by the City that the extension or
improvement is to be built shall be made not later than the
time the contract for construction of the extension is awarded.
Within 90 days of the final determination, the order of
construction and assessment adopted by the City Council shall
be filed in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. The order
of construction and assessment shall detail the nature of the
City Council's action and state that betterments are to be
assessed for the system extension. The order of construction
and assessment shall specify the street or streets in which
the sewer is to be located, identify the properties specially
benefited by the extension, identify the owners of said
properties as appearing on the City of Chicopee Assessor's
records on the preceding January 1, and estimate the dollar
(c)
(5)
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:329
amount of the betterment to be assessed against each such
property in accordance with Section (4)(b) of this policy.54
Financing the project. The betterment cost to be apportioned among
properties specially benefiting from the betterment (the betterment
assessment) shall be established by the City Council with approval of
the Mayor for designing and constructing the work at the time the final
approval of the sewerage system extension or improvement is made
by the City Council. The betterment assessment shall be assessed in
accordance with this section, the City Charter and the provisions of §§
14 through 24 and 27 through 29 of Chapter 83 of the Massachusetts
General Laws, governing the assessment of betterments for the
improvement of the sewerage system, and Chapter 80 of the
Massachusetts General Laws, governing the assessment of betterments
generally.
Procurement practices. Any system extension work is a capital
construction project of the City. The City shall follow all applicable
federal and state laws, its own policy on procurement, and
procurement and engineering practices with respect to the design,
engineering and construction of the project. Costs associated with
the project shall be segregated by the City, for the purpose of
assessing the betterment assessment.
(1)
Determination of betterment assessment. Within six months
following the completion of construction of the project extending or
improving the sewerage system, the City Council shall assess the
betterment assessment against those parcels which have accrued
a special benefit as a result of the extension of the system. Each
parcel that is specially benefited by the extension shall be assessed
its proportion of the betterment cost by the uniform unit method
described in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 83, § 15. Under
this method, the costs to be assessed shall be divided among the
total number of existing and potential sewer units to be served.
Each such sewer unit shall be equal to a single family residence.
Existing sewer units shall be calculated on the basis of existing
structures. Potential sewer units shall be calculated on the basis
of zoning then in effect. Parcels shall be allocated existing sewer
units, potential sewer units, or both. No parcel which, by reason of
its grade or level or any other cause, cannot be drained into such
sewer shall be assessed until such incapacity is removed. A parcel
directly connected to the sewerage system or to a private sewer
system not the subject of the sewerage system which is the subject
of the petition shall be deemed not to benefit from the extension of
the system and shall not be assessed a betterment cost; provided,
however, that should the property at a later point in time seek to
connect to the extension of the sewer system it shall be charged
a connection fee commensurate with the betterment cost which
(2)
E.
54.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 230-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-3
1:330
§ 230-4. Public sewer construction, alterations and repairs.
All construction, alteration and repairs of public sewers and the
appurtenances thereto and all connections therewith shall be done under
the direction of the Superintendent, and no person other than the
Superintendent or persons acting under his direction shall be allowed to
dig up any street or open any storm drain or public sewer within any street
for any purpose whatever or connect the same with any private drain. All
plans, profiles and levels relative to and necessary for the construction
of sewers and storm drains shall be approved by the City Engineer. The
Superintendent has the power to move utilities at the cost to the utility in
order to construct new sewers and storm drains.
would have been assessed had the property been benefited by the
construction of the betterment. In no event shall the amount of the
betterment assessed against a parcel exceed the amount estimated
in the order of assessment filed in the Registry of Deeds.
Apportionment of payment. A property owner has the option of
paying the assessed amount to the City apportioned over a period
of 20 years. The payment shall include interest at the rate equal to
the interest rate chargeable to the City. A property owner whose
payment is apportioned may pay the total amount of the
outstanding betterment cost at any time.
(3)
Betterments to constitute a lien. All betterments shall constitute
a lien on the property assessed from the time the Order of
Construction and Assessment is filed with the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds with the list of streets and owners of each
parcel to be assessed and will remain in effect until the time the
assessment is paid in full. Demands shall be sent and takings
made not later than October 1 in the second year following the
filing of the order of construction and assessment or, in the case
betterment assessments apportioned over a period of 20 years,
not later than October 1 in the year in which the final payment
becomes due. Liens terminate by operation of law two years after
the final payment is made in accordance with Chapter 80 of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
(4)
Property owner remedies. Property owners aggrieved by a betterment
assessment under this section may seek an abatement by filing an
application with the City Council within six months of the date by which
the City Collector mailed the assessment notice (MGL c. 80, § 5). The
City Council has six months from the filing date of the application to
review said application for abatement and must notify the applicant
within 10 days of a decision. Alternatively, and/or simultaneously, the
aggrieved owner may bring suit in the Massachusetts Superior Court to
challenge the validity of the assessment in accordance with MGL c. 80.
F.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:331
§ 230-5. Street openings not to interfere with sewers.
Whenever any street shall be opened for laying or repairing water or
gas pipes or any other purposes, the work shall be executed so as not
to obstruct the course, capacity or construction of public sewers; and
whenever pipes for that purpose or any work of construction shall be found
to exist in such locations so as to interfere with the storm drains or sewer,
the corporation, person or persons having charge of maintaining the same
shall, on notice from the Superintendent, remove, change or alter such
pipes or other work in such manner as said Superintendent may direct.
If such corporation or person neglects or refuses to remove, change or
alter such pipes or other work in accordance with said notification, then
the Superintendent may make such removal, change or alteration, and said
corporation or persons thereof shall pay the cost.
§ 230-6. Connecting building drains with public sewers.
Any person may have his building drain connected with any public sewer or
sanitary sewer upon application to the Superintendent, who may prescribe
the place of such connection, materials and manner of construction of such
particular or building drain; provided, however, that the same shall be
constructed with due observance of all regulations of the Board of Sewer
Commission and the Superintendent so far as applicable thereto.
§ 230-7. Permit required for any sewer work.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
§ 230-8. Easements and prescriptive rights.
The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter all private properties
through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the POTW lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said
easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
A.
No length of possession or occupancy of land within the limits of a City
easement and any fences, trees, pools, shrubs, buildings or any other
objects encroaching upon a City easement shall, upon written notice
by the Superintendent, be removed within 14 days by the owner, and
if not so removed, the Superintendent may either remove the same to
such adjoining land or such encroaching objects, other than a building
used for residential purposes, may be removed by workers working
under the direction of the Superintendent and shall be placed in the
nearest maintenance area of the City. Notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, shall be given to the owner, stating where such
encroachment object is located and further stating that, if not claimed
B.
§ 230-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-8
1:332
§ 230-9. Separate building sewers required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building with the following exceptions:
§ 230-10. Use of existing building sewer.
Existing building sewers may not be used in connection with new buildings.
The Superintendent may issue an exception upon presentation of a written
request accompanied by a camera inspection video with the written
inspection report that indicates that, upon examination, the building sewer
meets all requirements of the Code. The Superintendent reserves the right
to require additional testing.
§ 230-11. Connections to conform to rules and regulations.
within three weeks, said object may be destroyed. The City may seek
cost recovery for all expenses incurred in the removal and relocating of
objects in the easement of the City.
The City shall have prescriptive rights or privilege over land of another
to perform maintenance, repair, replacement, maintain access,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and repair of any
portion of the POTW lying within said land.
C.
Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer, provided all lots are under the
same property owner; and,
A.
Where a multiple-family complex, a commercial complex, or an
industrial complex has a privately owned and maintained collection
system.
B.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules, regulations, and standards of the City.
A.
The building drain must include at a minimum the installation of a
cleanout and shutoff valve. Drainpipes subject to backflow from sewer
shall be supplied with backwater valves and shall be installed according
to the state Plumbing Code Section 2.09.
B.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or
other applicable rules, regulations and standards of the City. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight, and in accordance
with City-prescribed procedures and materials. The Superintendent,
C.
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-11
1:333
§ 230-12. Sewers entering the building.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
a level below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted and discharged to the building
sewer by means reviewed by the Superintendent and approved by the City's
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 230-13. Connection/discharge of stormwater.
§ 230-14. Notice to Superintendent of inspection of connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall provide twenty-fourhour
notice to the Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.
§ 230-15. Protection from hazard; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent.
§ 230-16. Damage to POTW prohibited.
Damage to or tampering with the publicly owned treatment works (POTW)
is prohibited. No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the POTW.
before installation, must approve any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials.
In the absence of Code provisions, the materials and procedures set
forth in the appropriate specifications of the Water Environment
Federation Manual of Practice MFD5 or Gravity Sanitary Sewer Design
and Construction shall apply.
D.
No person shall make any connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, stormwater, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted process waters, or other
sources or surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sewer or combined sewer.
A.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to a
natural outlet if such outlet is reasonably accessible. If no such outlet
is available, such unpolluted wastes may be discharged into combined
sewers or storm sewers, if approved by the Superintendent.
B.
§ 230-11 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-17
1:334
§ 230-17. Liability for costs and expenses for building sewer.
All costs and expenses, including but not limited to materials,
appurtenances, pumps, pipe, labor, and inspection incident to the
installation, maintenance, repair, testing, connection, and cleaning of the
building sewer for its entire length to the public sewer, shall be borne
privately by the property owner for whom installation, maintenance, repair,
testing, connection and cleaning is made.
§ 230-18. Entrance fees and assessments for sewer connections.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
Fees and/or assessments shall be made upon the property owners within
the territory of said POTW by a rate determined by the Board of Sewer
Commissioners and confirmed by the City Council.
§ 230-19. Rate of assessment and entrance fees.
§ 230-20. Superintendent to estimate assessments. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Should the Sewer Commission, with the approval of the City Council,
establish a special rate of assessment, the Superintendent shall,
immediately upon the completion of a public sewer in any street or way,
have a sewer assessment bill sent to each and every owner of an estate on
such street or way whose property can be drained into such public sewer. If
buildings are already on the estate, the sewer connection shall be made and
the assessment bill shall contain the total assessment prescribed.
§ 230-21. Billing of entrance fee and assessments.
The rate of assessment and entrance fees shall be set by the Board of
Sewer Commissioners for each connection to the public sewer on any
street or way upon which a sewer is constructed and upon application
of entrance to said sewer55.
A.
Rates are subject to approval of the City Council.56 [Amended
9-1-2009]
B.
Upon application for sewer entrance by the property owner, the Board
of Sewer Commissioners shall, upon the completion of a sewer
connection, render the property owner a bill for the amount of the
sewer entrance fee.
A.
In the case of a special assessment, the Board of Sewer Commissioners
shall, upon completion of a public sewer, render a bill for said
assessment to all applicable property owners.
B.
55.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Art. XXIII, Sewer Commission, § 16-100A.
§ 230-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-22
1:335
§ 230-22. Sewer use charges; stormwater fee; other fees.
§ 230-23. Billing discounts.
All sewer use charges, stormwater fees and other fees are to be set by
the Board of Sewer Commissioners subject to the approval of the City
Council and kept on file with the City Clerk. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
A stormwater charge shall hereby be established to manage the storm
and surface water system, maintain a good hydrological balance,
prevent property damage, and protect water quality for the safety and
enjoyment of citizens and the preservation and enhancement of wildlife
habitat. The stormwater fee will be used to provide and administer any
management responsibilities that will include construction and ongoing
operations and maintenance responsibilities related to stormwater and
combined sewer overflow (CSO) infrastructure in the City.
B.
Payments and late fees. All charges or bills shall be due and payable
45 days after issue, and charges or bills remaining unpaid after such
due date shall be charged interest thereon at a rate of 14% per year, as
provided in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21E.
C.
Sewer fund. To implement this section of the chapter, the City Council
hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 83, Sections 16, 16A thru
F inclusive, as amended, of the Massachusetts General Laws, for the
specific purpose of establishing a separate sewer fund. [Amended
9-1-2009]
D.
Storm line connection fee schedule. [Added 4-20-2010 by Ord. No.
10-13]
Cost Description
$0 A resident who completed separation work on his or her
property prior to a request for a storm drain connection
(storm drain pipe from main line to property line) and prior to
the installation of the new pipe in front of his or her property.
$250 A resident’s property which has not been separated prior to a
request for a storm drain connection and installation of a new
pipe in front of his or her residence; a resident may request
a connection in the street. A resident will be billed $250 on
his or her storm/sewer bill. This $250 is fully refundable if
the separation on the property is completed and confirmed
within five years of the date of the request for a storm drain
connection.
Full
Cost
If a new pipe is installed in front of a residence and the
resident chooses not to request a storm drain connection and
pay the deposit, the resident will be responsible for all future
storm drain separation and connection costs associated with
connection to the pipe in the street.
E.
§ 230-22 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-23
1:336
Secondary meters can be installed to measure water usage for
irrigation purposes only. The secondary meter usage will not be billed
a sewer use fee. A secondary meter program, beginning July 1, 1991
and that the residential property owners be allowed to have installed
an approved meter. The meter shall be purchased from and installed by
the Water Department and inspected by the Water Department, Sewer
Department and Plumbing Inspector. The meter program shall be the
joint effort and responsibility of the Water and Sewer Commissions. All
costs for installation and maintenance shall be borne by the property
owner.
A.
Summer discounts. For those residential property owners who do not
install a secondary meter, a 10% discount for each month of June, July
and August shall begin in June of 1991 and continue until changed.
Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
B.
Rain Smart Rewards. [Added 5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 12-14]
Objective. The objective of the Rain Smart Rewards is to increase
ratepayer control over stormwater management charges and to
advance City environmental goals. The City achieves these
objectives by providing economic incentives, technical assistance,
and environmental education to ratepayers who control and
manage the quality and quantity of stormwater runoff on their
private property.
(1)
Authority. The Superintendent is authorized to establish and
administer Rain Smart Rewards, and promulgate administrative
rules and policies to implement the program. The program must
contain the following elements with the approval of the City
Council:
Definitions for all terms and concepts that are unique to Rain
Smart Rewards, unless otherwise referenced by the City Code;
(a)
Criteria to be used by the City to determine eligibility for Rain
Smart Rewards;
(b)
Methods for calculating the amount of incentives and discounts
to be awarded to eligible registrants;
(c)
Procedures for verifying the validity and accuracy of incentives
and discounts, and enforcing administrative rules.
(d)
(2)
The Sewer Commission, as prescribed in §§ 230-28P and 231-13 of
the City of Chicopee Code, shall be the hearing Board for review
and reconsideration of Superintendent decisions upon request of
ratepayers.
(3)
C.
Sewer Backup Prevention and Cost-Sharing Program. [Added
1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2]
D.
§ 230-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-23
1:337
Objective. The intent of this program is to reduce and eventually
eliminate sewer surcharging and potential backups into homes/
buildings. The removal of the groundwater and wet weather water
from the combined sewer system and/or installation of approved
sewer backup prevention device(s) will enhance the health and
safety of our environment. The reduction/removal of wet weather
flows from the combined sewer system allows for the City to only
treat actual sanitary sewer flow and reduces the costs associated
with treating sewage for all rate payers. The Sewer Backup
Prevention Program is intended to separate the inflow and
infiltration from building footings, foundation drains and roof
leader connections from the sanitary sewer system. When heavy
rains, continuous wet weather, sudden thunderstorms or
downpours occur; the combined sewer system may become
surcharged. Surcharging is the overfilling or overloading of the
designed pipe capacity. The overloading of the pipe causes the
incoming flow to slow down and sometimes back up. The causes of
the surcharging are attributed to several factors such as: combined
one-pipe sanitary and drain sewer system; foundation and footing
drains of homes directly connected to the sewer system introducing
constant groundwater flow into the sewer system; roof leaders and
gutters that are directly connected to the sewer system allowing
rain water from outside of the building to enter the sewer system.
By removing the outside water sources from the combined sewer
system, and/or installation of approved sewer backup prevention
devices, the potential for surcharging is reduced considerably
during wet weather events.
(1)
Authority. The Commission is authorized to establish the Sewer
Backup Prevention and Cost Sharing Program, and promulgate
administrative rules and policies to implement the program.
(2)
Program elements. The Program must contain the following
elements:
(a) Description and overview of the Program.
Criteria to be used by the City to determine eligibility for the
Program.
(b)
(c) Applicant responsibilities and Program application.
(d) Reimbursable costs.
(e) City and property owner agreement.
Cost sharing of 75% of eligible costs, up to a maximum $2,000
per application.
(f)
Participation is limited to one approved reimbursement per
address.
(g)
(3)
§ 230-23 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-23
1:338
§ 230-24. Prohibited waters and wastes.
These prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are
subject to categorical pretreatment standards, or any other federal, state or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.
Funding. The Sewer Backup Prevention and Cost Sharing Program
is to be funded by appropriation to the dedicated line item for
this purpose in the public utilities budget. Cost sharing will be on
a first-completed-application-first-served basis, with participation
limited by each fiscal year funding.
(4)
General prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes
pass-through or interference. No person shall discharge materials,
waters, or wastes if the Superintendent determines that such wastes
can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise
endanger worker health and safety, public health and safety, or public
property.
A.
Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the POTW any of the following pollutants, substances,
or wastewater;
Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup flash
point of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21;
(1)
Wastewater having a pH of less than 5.5 s.u., or greater than 9.5
s.u., or otherwise capable of causing corrosive structural damage
to the POTW or equipment;
(2)
Wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified
or not, in excess of 150 mg/l;
(3)
Wastewater containing solid or viscous substances in amounts
which will cause obstruction of the flow to the POTW or result in
interference;
(4)
Pollutants, including but not limited to oxygen-demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/
or concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;
(5)
Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F. (65° C.) at
the point of discharge to the POTW or which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the POTW
headworks to exceed 104° F. (40° C.);
(6)
B.
§ 230-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-24
1:339
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
(7)
Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health
and safety problems;
(8)
Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at points designated by the
Superintendent;
(9)
Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or in interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10)
Wastewater which imparts color that cannot be removed by the
POTW treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color or
sheen to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby causing a violation
of the City of Chicopee's NPDES permit;
(11)
Wastewater containing any radioactive isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
(12)
Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, artesian well
water, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water, or any other unpolluted
industrial process wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the
Superintendent;
(13)
Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes, or any waste containing substances at
concentrations that could jeopardize the beneficial reuse of the
POTW's sludge;
(14)
Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;
(15)
Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
(16)
Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming at the POTW; or
(17)
Wastewater containing pollutants in excess of local limits
established by the Superintendent; pollutants, substances stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(18)
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N,
Parts 405 to 471 are hereby incorporated.
C.
§ 230-24 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-24
1:340
§ 230-25. Pretreatment of wastewater.
Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Superintendent may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(1)
When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined
waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(2)
A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered
by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(3)
A user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
(4)
State pretreatment standards. The state pretreatment standards found
at 314 CMR 1.00 to 15.00 are hereby incorporated and applied where
they are more stringent than applicable federal or local law.
D.
Local limits. To implement the objectives of § 230-24A and B of this
chapter, the Superintendent may further regulate the discharge of any
specific pollutant by the establishment of specific local limits to be
included in wastewater discharge permits. These limits will be applied
at the point where the user discharges wastewater to the POTW and
may be expressed as either concentration or mass-based limitations.
The Superintendent will provide adequate public notice and an
opportunity for users to respond prior to the limits' adoption. The
City reserves the right at any time to establish, either by Code or
wastewater discharge permit, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW.
E.
Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any
way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The Superintendent may impose mass
limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
F.
Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance
with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set forth in § 230-24B of this chapter within the time
limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Superintendent,
A.
§ 230-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-25
1:341
whichever is most stringent. The Superintendent may issue to the
user a compliance schedule for the installation of technology required
to meet any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. Any
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such
facilities and operating procedures shall be acceptable to the
Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the City of Chicopee under the
provisions of this chapter.
Additional pretreatment measures.
Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific
sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and impose
such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the user's compliance with the conditions of this
chapter.
(1)
The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow.
(2)
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease
and oil or sand; grease traps shall be provided for all
establishments that prepare food for sale and distribution. Such
interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and/or the City's Health Department and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as
needed, by the user at their expense. The user shall also maintain,
for inspection by City personnel, records of any interceptor
cleaning performed during the previous three years.
(3)
B.
Accidental discharge/slug control plans. Within a year of an industrial
user being designated as significant, the Superintendent shall evaluate
whether the significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/
slug control plan. The Superintendent may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the
Superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
[Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-30]
C.
§ 230-25 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-25
1:342
§ 230-26. Wastewater discharge permits.
Description of all discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(1)
(2) Description of all stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 230-27F;
(3)
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant
site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures
or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(4)
Hauled wastewater.
Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at
locations designated by the Superintendent. Septic tank waste
haulers must apply for and obtain a wastewater discharge permit
prior to the discharge of the waste at the established site.
Discharge of septic tank waste must occur only at times established
in the wastewater discharge permit. All such waste must originate
from locations within the City of Chicopee, except where allowed
by special permit under § 266-1 of this chapter, and comply with all
conditions included in Chapter 230 of this chapter as well as any
other requirements in the wastewater discharge permit or state or
federal law.
(1)
The discharge of any hauled industrial waste is prohibited, except
where specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(2)
The Superintendent reserves the right to require monitoring by the
user and/or the POTW of any hauled waste prior to discharge, to
reject any waste, or to revoke any permit to discharge hauled waste
at any time.
(3)
D.
Control manholes. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of
any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary
meters and other appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
E.
A. Wastewater discharge permit application requirements.
§ 230-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-26
1:343
Any user as described below must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its wastewater, including the filing of a
permit application and/or providing laboratory analysis of the
proposed discharge. The following users are required to file an
application for a wastewater discharge permit:
Any existing or new user that meets or could meet, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, the criteria for significant
industrial user but has not yet been classified as such;
(a)
Any existing significant industrial user proposing to continue
to discharge to the POTW and whose existing permit is at
expiration date;
(b)
Any other user, when the Superintendent deems that the
application is necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter.
(c)
(1)
Applying for or obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a user from its obligation to comply with all federal, state
and local pretreatment standards or requirements, or any other
requirements of federal, state and local law.
(2)
Any new user described in Subsection A(1)(a) or (c) above must
submit a completed application at least 45 days prior to the
beginning of discharge.
(3)
Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
All users required to obtain a discharge permit must submit a
permit application. The Superintendent may require all users to
submit as part of an application the following information:
(a) All information required by § 230-27A(2) of this chapter;
Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals
used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally
or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(b)
Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;
(c)
Each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate
of production;
(d)
Type and amount of raw materials processes (average and
maximum per day);
(e)
(f) Time and duration of discharges;
Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application; and
(g)
(1)
B.
§ 230-26 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-26
1:344
A signature of an authorized representative of the user
following this certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons
who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."
(h)
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision. The Superintendent will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. The Superintendent may deny any application for a
wastewater discharge permit as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
(2)
Wastewater discharge permit contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as
are deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to prevent
pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the POTW's effluent, protect worker health and safety,
facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
(1)
Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following:
A specific date upon which the permit will expire, not to exceed
five years from its effective date. At the discretion of the
Superintendent, a permit may be issued for less than five
years;
(a)
A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the
Superintendent in accordance with § 230-26F of this chapter,
and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(b)
Applicable pretreatment standards, including prohibited
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and
local limits;
(c)
Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
(d)
(2)
C.
§ 230-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-26
1:345
frequency, and sample type, based on federal, state, and local
law;
A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule, not to exceed time limits set
forth in applicable federal, state and local law;
(e)
Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/
or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(f)
Requirements for the installation and/or maintenance of
pretreatment technology, monitoring facilities or equipment,
pollution control, or appropriate containment devices designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants
into the treatment works;
(g)
Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plan or any plan including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent the introduction of pollutants
into the treatment works, or any waste minimization plan to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(h)
A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
and
(i)
Any other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and
state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
(j)
Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
The permittee may petition the Superintendent to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days of the
permittee's receipt of the permit. Failure to submit a timely petition
for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative
appeal.
(1)
In its petition, the permittee must indicate the specific permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit. The effectiveness of the issued permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.
(2)
The Superintendent may decide not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit,
or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit. Any applicant
(3)
D.
§ 230-26 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-26
1:346
aggrieved by this action may file a request before the hearing
board, as described in § 230-28P of this chapter.
Wastewater discharge permit modification. The Superintendent may
modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including but not
limited to the following reasons:
To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(1)
To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of permit issuance;
(2)
A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(3)
Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters;
(4)
Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
(5)
Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
(6)
Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(7)
To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
(8)
To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
(9)
E.
Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days' advance
notice to the Superintendent, and the Superintendent approves
the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the
Superintendent must include a written certification by the new
owner or operator which:
States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(a)
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(c)
(1)
F.
§ 230-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-26
1:347
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of the facility
transfer.
(2)
Revocation of wastewater discharge permit. The Superintendent may
revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including but not
limited to the following reasons:
Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(1)
Failure to provide notification to the Superintendent of changed
conditions pursuant to § 230-27E of this chapter;
(2)
Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(3)
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
Refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to the facility
premises and records;
(6)
(7) Failure to meet any applicable effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay any civil or criminal penalty;
(9) Failure to pay sewer use charges within 45 days of bill due date.
(10)Failure to meet any compliance schedule;
Failure to complete a wastewater discharge permit application or
associated discharge monitoring;
(11)
Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(12)
Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of this chapter or the facility's discharge permit.
(13)
G.
Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in
accordance with § 230-27A(2), a minimum of 90 days prior to the
expiration of the user's wastewater discharge permit.
H.
Wastewater discharge from other jurisdictions.
If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the City shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
(1)
The intermunicipal agreement shall contain the following
conditions:
(2)
I.
§ 230-26 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-26
1:348
§ 230-27. Reporting requirements.
A requirement that the contributing municipality must adopt a
sewer use code which is at least as stringent as this chapter
and local limits which are at least as stringent as the local
limits adopted by the City of Chicopee;
(a)
A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(b)
A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including permit issuance, inspection and sampling,
and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by
the Superintendent; and which of these activities will be
conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
Superintendent;
(c)
A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide
the Superintendent with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities;
(d)
Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;
(e)
Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(f)
A provision ensuring the Superintendent access to the facilities
of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection,
sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the
Superintendent; and
(g)
A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the municipal agreement.
(h)
Baseline monitoring reports.
Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the
Superintendent a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection A(2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical
users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard shall submit to the Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in Subsection A(2) below. A new
(1)
A.
§ 230-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-27
1:349
source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to
be discharged.
Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
(a)
Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
(b)
Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial
classification(s) of the operation(s) carried out by the user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which
indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
process.
(c)
Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to
the POTW from regulated process waste streams and other
streams, as necessary to allow for the use of the combined
waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(d)
Measurement of pollutants, including the categorical
pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process
and the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required, of regulated
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations, and
analyzed in accordance with procedures set forth in
Subsections J and K of this section.
(e)
Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or pretreatment is required to meet
the applicable standards or requirements.
(f)
Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in § 230-27B of this chapter.
(g)
(2)
§ 230-27 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-27
1:350
Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with
§ 230-26B(1)(h) of this chapter.
(h)
Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to any compliance schedule issued by the Superintendent for
installation of technology necessary to obtain compliance with an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement:
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
(1)
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for the delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to
the established schedule; and
(3)
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
(4)
B.
Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new
source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater
into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the Superintendent a report containing
the information described in § 230-27A(2) of this chapter. For users
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in
accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall
contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate.
For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 230-26B(1)(h)
of this chapter.
C.
Periodic compliance reports.
All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year, submit
a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
(1)
D.
§ 230-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-27
1:351
the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with § 230-26B(1)(h) of this chapter.
All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(2)
If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
Superintendent, using the procedures described in § 230-27J and K
of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(3)
Reports of new discharges or changed conditions.
Each new user or existing user must notify the Superintendent and
obtain prior approval before making any significant changes to the
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
(1)
The Superintendent may require the user to submit any additional
information, including a completed wastewater discharge permit
application as described in § 230-26B of this chapter. The
Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit or
modify an existing permit as needed. The Superintendent may deny
or condition any new or increased contribution.
(2)
For the purposes of this requirement, "significant" changes include,
but are not limited to, flow or average daily BOD or TSS increases
of 20% or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants.
(3)
E.
Reports of potential problems.
In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to an
accidental discharge, a discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken
by the user.
(1)
Within five days following the discharge, the user shall submit a
detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
(2)
F.
§ 230-27 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-27
1:352
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as
a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other
damage to a person or property, nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed pursuant to this chapter.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in Subsection F(1) above. Employers
shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(3)
Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
Superintendent as the Superintendent may require to fulfill the intent
of this chapter.
G.
Report of discharge violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If
sampling performed by the user indicates a violation of any applicable
pretreatment standard, the user must notify the Superintendent within
24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat
the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis
to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. The user will be waived from the resampling requirement if
the Superintendent has monitored the user's effluent between the time
of user's initial sampling and when the user received the results of this
initial sampling.
H.
Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and State Hazardous Waste Division Director, in writing,
of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous
waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch,
or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of
such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification
shall also contain the following information to the extent that
such information is known and readily available to the user:
an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged
during that calendar month and an estimate of the mass of
such constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged in the following 12 months.
(a)
All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after
the discharge commences, Any notification under this
(b)
(1)
I.
§ 230-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-27
1:353
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous
waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under § 230-27E of this chapter.
The notification requirement in this section does not apply
to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of § 230-27A, C, and D of this chapter.
Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection I(1)
above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes
in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 216.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
(2)
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must
notify the Superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and the State Hazardous Waste Division Director
of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective
date of such regulations.
(3)
In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
(4)
This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(5)
Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application
or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant
in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
(1)
In addition, a laboratory certified by the state for the wastewater
analyses of each analyte shall perform all laboratory analyses
required by the Superintendent.
(2)
J.
K. Sample collection.
§ 230-27 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-27
1:354
Except as indicated in Subsection K(2) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow-proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow-proportional sampling is infeasible,
time-proportional composite samples, as defined in § 230-1, will be
allowed.
(1)
Grab samples must be obtained when sampling for the parameters
oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and
volatile organic compounds. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous daily maximum
discharge limits.
(2)
Date of submission of reports. Written reports, whether or not they
have been mailed by the user or delivered otherwise, will be deemed to
have been submitted on the date received by the Superintendent.
L.
Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records
of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter and any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user
independent of such requirements.
(1)
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the
analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for
the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City, or
where the Superintendent has specifically notified the user of a
longer retention period.
(2)
M.
Right of entry; inspection and sampling.
The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Superintendent
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the
performance of any additional duties.
(1)
Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the
Superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(2)
N.
§ 230-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-27
1:355
While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
Superintendent and all duly authorized employees of the City shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and which shall be made available to the City upon
request.
(3)
The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. The
Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices
used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
and/or cleaned at a frequency prescribed in the user's wastewater
discharge permit.
(4)
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the
Superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing
such access shall be born by the user.
(5)
Any unreasonable delay, as defined by Department policy or
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, in allowing the Superintendent ready access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(6)
Search warrants. If the Superintendent has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as
part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City designed
to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of
the community, then the Superintendent may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the appropriate court.
O.
Confidential information.
Information and data obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from the Superintendent's inspection
and sampling activities shall be available to the public per
Departmental policy, unless the user specifically requests, and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that
the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets under applicable state law.
(1)
Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission
of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated
(2)
P.
§ 230-27 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-27
1:356
§ 230-28. Enforcement.
The remedies provided in this chapter are not exclusive. The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the City of Chicopee's Enforcement
Response Plan. However, the Superintendent may take other action against
any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Superintendent
is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.
by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately
upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent
data," as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be made available to the public
per Departmental policy.
Notification of violation. When the Superintendent finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permit, or any applicable state or federal
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may serve
upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days' receipt
of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted to the Superintendent. Submission
of this plan shall in no way relieve the user of liability for any violations
occurring before or after the receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing
in this section shall limit the authority of the Superintendent to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
A.
Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The Superintendent
shall publish at least annually, in a newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction served by
the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance"
shall mean: [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 12-30]
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits;
(1)
B.
§ 230-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-28
1:357
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed
the product of a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria
(1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
(2)
Where a discharge is monitored continuously for pH using a
method approved by 40 CFR 136, any individual excursion from a
range of 5.5 to 9.5 s.u. for greater than 60 minutes; or when total
time outside this range during any calendar month exceeds seven
hours and 26 minutes; or any excursion of pH less than 5.0 s.u., or
greater than 12.5 s.u., for any length of time;
(3)
Any other discharge that the Superintendent believes has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
passthrough, including endangering the health of POTW personnel
or the general public;
(4)
Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the Superintendent’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
(5)
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit
or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6)
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(7)
(8) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s) which the Superintendent determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(9)
Consent orders. The City may enter into consent orders, assurances
of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document.
Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to § 230-28E and F of this
chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
C.
§ 230-28 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-28
1:358
Show-cause hearing. The Superintendent may order a user which has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
applicable state or federal pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on
the user, specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show-cause hearing shall not be a bar
against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
D.
Administrative order.
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
applicable state or federal pretreatment standard or requirement,
or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an administrative order to the user,
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may
be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
(b)
(1)
Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(2)
E.
Emergency suspensions.
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's discharge
after informal notice to the user whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
(1)
The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge after notice and opportunity to respond that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.
(2)
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure
to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary,
(3)
F.
§ 230-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-28
1:359
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent may allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in § 230-28G of this chapter are initiated against the
user.
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Superintendent prior to the date of any show-cause or termination
hearing under § 230-28D of this chapter.
(4)
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(5)
Such user or owner will be notified of the proposed termination of
its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under
§ 230-28D why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(6)
Termination of discharge. In addition to the provisions in § 230-28B of
this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to
discharge termination:
Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions or discharge
limitations;
(1)
Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(2)
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; or
(3)
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, records examination, or sampling.
(4)
Failure to make any payments required herein, including but not
limited to sewer use fees, storm fees, cost recovery fees, late fees
and any other fees required to carry out this chapter. Payments are
deemed late 45 days after bill date. For nonpayment, the City shall
provide at least 30 days' notice prior to termination of service.
(5)
G.
Injunctive relief. When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated
or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any state or federal
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may
petition the appropriate court through the City Solicitor for the
H.
§ 230-28 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-28
1:360
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter
on activities of the user. The Superintendent may also seek such other
action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including
a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A
petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.
Departmental cost recovery.
The general costs for implementation, management, and
enforcement of the City's industrial pretreatment program are
borne by all users of the POTW. However, under this section, the
City may assess against any user that violated any provision of
this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder,
charges to recover pretreatment program actual costs resulting
from enforcement action of said violation, including but not limited
to:
(a) Costs for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
Costs for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(b)
(c) Costs for sampling and analysis;
Charges to recover the cost of consultants' services required to
carry out the review of specific concerns regarding industrial
wastewater discharges;
(d)
Charges to recover legal costs associated with pretreatment
program violations;
(e)
Other costs as the Superintendent may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
(f)
(1)
These charges relate solely to the matters covered by the industrial
pretreatment program and are separate from all other fees
chargeable by the City, such as sewer entrance fees, sewer user
charge fees, etc.
(2)
I.
Civil penalties.
A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other state or federal standard or requirement shall be liable
to the City of Chicopee for a civil penalty of up to $1,000 but not
to exceed $5,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or
long-term average, penalties shall accrue for each day during the
period of the violation.
(1)
J.
§ 230-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-28
1:361
The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any
actual damages incurred by the City of Chicopee.
(2)
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(3)
Criminal prosecution. A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other applicable state or federal pretreatment
standard or requirement, shall be subject to prosecution as allowed by
Massachusetts General Laws.
K.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the City of Chicopee may elect to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in G.L. Ch. 40, § 21D. The Department
of Public Works shall be the enforcing entity. The penalty for the first
violation shall be up to $100. The penalty for the second violation shall
be up to $200. The penalty for the third and subsequent violations
shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
L.
Performance bonds. The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue
a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder or any other applicable state or
federal pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first
files a satisfactory bond, payable to the City of Chicopee, in a sum not
to exceed a value determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to
achieve consistent compliance.
M.
Liability insurance. The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue
a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other applicable state or
federal pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first
submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
N.
Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
applicable state or federal pretreatment standard or requirement, is
hereby declared a "public nuisance" and shall be corrected or abated
as directed by the Superintendent. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Codes of the City of
Chicopee governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City of
Chicopee for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying said
nuisance.
O.
P. Sewer commission as hearing board.
§ 230-28 CHICOPEE CODE § 230-28
1:362
§ 230-29. Severability.
Any user who is aggrieved by the actions of the Superintendent
may request a hearing before a hearing board, which, for the
purposes of this chapter, is deemed to be the City of Chicopee
Sewer Commission, as defined in Article XXIII, § 16-101A of this
chapter.
(1)
The aggrieved person shall file a written request for such a hearing
within seven days after the day the Superintendent's order was
served or given in the office of the Sewer Commission. The Sewer
Commission shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
inform the petitioner thereof, in writing.
(2)
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the
day on which the written request was filed and shall be concluded
within an additional 30 days thereafter. If a petitioner is aggrieved
under § 230-28F of this chapter, the hearing must commence within
five days of the date on which the written request was filed.
(3)
At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why the order or decision of the Superintendent
should be modified or withdrawn.
(4)
After the hearing, the Commission shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the order or decision of the Superintendent, and shall
inform the petitioner and the Superintendent, in writing, of its
decision within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing.
(5)
If a written letter for hearing is not filed in the office of the Sewer
Commission within seven working days after an order has been
issued or if after a hearing the order has been sustained in any
part, each day's failure to comply with the order as issued or
modified shall constitute an additional offense.
(6)
Not less than three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum, and a
majority of the quorum shall be required in order to sustain, modify
or withdraw an order or decision of the Superintendent.
(7)
The provisions of this chapter, or any order or permit of the
Superintendent are severable, and if any provision contained therein,
or the application thereof, is held invalid, the application of such
provision to other circumstances and the remainder of this chapter, the
order or permit shall not be affected thereby.
A.
B. All codes or parts of codes in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 230-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-29
1:363
Chapter 231
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood Control Department — See Ch. 37.
Dike system — See Ch. 142.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 266.
Water — See Ch. 269.
Wetlands — See Ch. 272.
§ 231-1. Purpose and authority.
A Stormwater Management Ordinance is hereby established to manage
the storm and surface water system, maintain a good hydrological
balance, prevent property damage, better manage land development,
and protect water quality for the safety and enjoyment of citizens and
the preservation and enhancement of wildlife habitat. The Stormwater
Management Ordinance will provide for the administration and
management of the stormwater system that will include construction
and ongoing operations and maintenance responsibilities related to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).
A.
The proper management of stormwater runoff will meet the following
objectives:
Reduce the adverse water quality impacts of stormwater and
combined sewer overflow discharges to rivers, lakes, reservoirs
and streams in order to attain federal water quality standards;
(1)
Prevent the discharge of pollutants, including hazardous chemicals
into stormwater runoff;
(2)
Minimize the volume and rate of stormwater which is discharged
to rivers, streams reservoirs, lakes and combined sewers;
(3)
Prevent erosion and sedimentation from improper land
development, and reduce stream channel erosion caused by
increased runoff;
(4)
Provide for the recharge of groundwater aquifers and maintain the
base flow of streams;
(5)
Provide stormwater facilities that are attractive, maintain the
natural integrity of the environment, and are designed to protect
public safety;
(6)
Maintain or reduce predevelopment runoff characteristics after
development to the extent feasible;
(7)
(8) Minimize damage to public and private property from flooding;
B.
§ 230-29 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-1
1:364
§ 231-2. Definitions; word usage; abbreviations.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this code shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands,
including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition,
aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses, or effects which are
or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety
or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including
outdoor recreation.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The administrator of US EPA Region I, or
authorized representative.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
To prevent pollutants from entering Chicopee's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4);
(9)
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4;
(10)
(11)To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges;
(12)
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement;
(13)
(14)To prevent contamination of drinking water supplies.
This regulation, for the proper management of stormwater, is adopted
under the provisions of Law Department General Laws, Chapter 40A,
§§ 1 through 22, inclusive.
C.
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation
in charge of a principal business function, or any other person
who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for the
corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in
second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(2)
A.
§ 231-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:365
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Department of Public
Works, its employees or agents designated to enforce this bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Are either structural or
nonstructural devices that temporarily store or treat urban stormwater
runoff to reduce flooding, remove pollutants, and provide other amenities,
or nonstructural practices that reduce pollutants at their source.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days, 20º C., usually expressed as a
concentration.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning 10 feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal (sometimes called sewer service).
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
CITY or CITY OF CHICOPEE — A municipal corporation in the County of
Hampden, Massachusetts.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
CSO — Combined sewer overflow.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — For monitoring requirements, a combination of
individual samples of equal volume collected at equally spaced intervals
(not to exceed 1 hour) during hours of production (not to exceed a twentyfour-
hour period) or proportional according to flow. In the case of a batch
discharge of two hours or less, the composite will consist of eight or more
volume, flow, or time-proportional samples.
CONTROL MANHOLE — A sampling and monitoring station which may be
located in a manhole, vault, pit or room within the premises of the user.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her
designee.
The individuals described in Subsections A through C above may
designate another authorized representative if authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
the Superintendent.
C.
§ 231-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-2
1:366
DESIGN STORM — A rainfall event of specified size and return frequency
that is used to calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate.
DETENTION — The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a BMP,
which is used to control the peak discharge rates, and provides gravitational
settling of pollutants.
DISCHARGE — The meaning of the term(s) "discharge" for use in this code
is as follows:
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the waters of the United States or commonwealth from any source.
DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single point
measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline.
DRYWELL — An approved structure used to infiltrate stormwater.
DWO — Dry weather overflow.
EASEMENT — A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of
such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be
included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The US
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE or EXISTING USER — Any source of discharge, the
construction or operation of which commenced prior to the enactment of
this code.
FLOW ATTENUATION — Prolonging the flow time (lagging) of runoff to
reduce the peak discharge.
GRAB SAMPLE — For monitoring requirements, an individual sample which
is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to flow or
time.
DIRECT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or
untreated stormwater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
A.
ILLEGAL STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect
nonstormwater discharge to the municipal storm drain system, except
as specifically exempted in § 231-7 of this code. The term does not
include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES stormwater
discharge permit.
B.
INDIRECT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge or flow of
treated or untreated stormwater indirectly to the City's MS4 by any
means other than a conduit.
C.
STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
stormwater directly by a conduit to the City's MS4.
D.
§ 231-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:367
GROUNDWATER — All water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any surface or subsurface drain or conveyance,
which allows an illegal discharge into the municipal storm drain system.
Illicit connections include conveyances which allow a nonstormwater
discharge to the municipal storm drain system, including sewage, process
wastewater or wash water, and any connections from indoor drains, sinks,
or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed,
permitted, or approved before the effective date of this chapter.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water from infiltrating the underlying soil.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from manufacturing processes,
trade, or business, distinct from sanitary sewage.
INFILTRATION — The downward movement of water from the surface to
subsurface soils.
INFILTRATION TRENCH — A stormwater management device filled with
aggregate, which removes both soluble and particulate pollutants. Trenches
are not intended to trap coarse sediments.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the City of Chicopee.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE or NEW USER — Any building, structure, facility or
installation from which there is, proposed (or may be) a discharge of
stormwater, the construction of which commenced after the adoption of this
code.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in redevelopment rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility, impervious surface or
installation.
A.
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work
(1)
B.
§ 231-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-2
1:368
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finishing product.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
OUTFALL — The terminus of a storm drain or other stormwater structure
where stormwater is discharged.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a
storm, usually in reference to a specific design storm.
PERMEABLE SOILS — Soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration
rate so as to greatly reduce or eliminate surface and stormwater runoff.
These soils are generally classified as Soil Conservation Service hydrologic
soil Types A and B.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include but not be limited to:
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement,
assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
Entered into a building contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts, which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies,
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordinances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
F.
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
§ 231-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:369
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in stormwater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW or MS4. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed
by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement or devices related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other
than a pretreatment standard.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by the City of Chicopee.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by
the City of Chicopee. This definition includes any devices or systems used
in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through
the soil.
RETENTION — The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by
means of evaporation, infiltration, or emergency bypass.
SANITARY SEWER — A conduit that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally added.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SIGNIFICANT USER — A user of the MS4 that in the opinion of the
Superintendent has the capacity to adversely impact:
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock; sand; salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
A. Public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 231-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-2
1:370
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A conduit which
carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City of Chicopee
to supervise the Department of Public Works, and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this code, or his duly authorized
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
SWALE — A natural depression or wide shallow ditch used to temporarily
store, route or filter runoff.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material which,
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately
or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment.
Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C
and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
TR 55 — Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," a
hydrologic model developed by the Soil Conservation Service to calculate
stormwater runoff and to aid in designing detention basins
TR-20 — A watershed hydrology model developed by the Soil Conservation
Service that is used to route a design storm hydrograph through a pond.
UNCONTAMINATED — Water containing no pollutants.
B. Cause a nuisance.
C. Wildlife habitat.
D. Hydrological balance.
E. Property, public or private.
F. Operation and maintenance of the MS4.
G. Water quality.
§ 231-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-2
1:371
USER — Any property owner or permittee that has any stormwater
discharge, direct stormwater discharge, or indirect stormwater discharge.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that, during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste
product.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide wastewater treatment.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, costal waters, and
groundwater.
§ 231-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm
drainage system (MS4), stormwater discharges, and indirect
stormwater discharges.
A.
Prior to the issuance of any stormwater discharge permit for any
proposed development listed below, the Superintendent must approve
a stormwater management plan, or a waiver of the requirement for
a stormwater management plan. In addition the user must submit
the required stormwater discharge permit application per § 231-9. No
person shall, on or after the effective date of this chapter, initiate any
land clearing; land grading, earth moving or development activities
without first complying with this chapter. The following uses shall
be required to submit drainage reports, plans, construction drawings,
specifications and as-built information in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Multifamily residential developments involving three or more units;
Any new source commercial, industrial, residential and
institutional structures under the same ownership, with at least
4,000 gross square feet of impervious surface.
(2)
Redevelopment or additions to existing commercial, industrial,
residential and institutional uses which result in a total impervious
surface area of greater than 4,000 gross square feet.
(3)
(4) Any activity that disturbs one acre or more of land.
Any other user, when the Superintendent deems that the
application and permitting is required to carry out the intent of this
code.
(5)
B.
§ 231-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-4
1:372
§ 231-4. Stormwater management plans.
Submittal of stormwater management plans.
A stormwater management plan or an application for waiver shall
be submitted to the Superintendent for review and approval for any
proposed development specified in § 231-3. The plan shall contain
supporting computations, drawings, and sufficient information
describing the manner, location, and type of measures in which
stormwater runoff will be managed from the entire development.
The plan shall serve as the basis for all subsequent construction.
(1)
The applicant may request, and the Superintendent may grant,
a waiver from any information requirements he/she judges to be
unnecessary to the review of a particular plan.
(2)
A.
Inspections.
No plan will be approved without adequate provision for inspection
of the property before development activity commences. The
applicant shall arrange with the City Engineer for scheduling the
following inspections:
(a) Initial inspection: prior to approval of any plan.
Erosion control inspection: to ensure erosion control practices
are in accord with the plan.
(b)
Bury inspection: prior to backfilling of any underground
drainage or stormwater conveyance structures.
(c)
Final inspection: when all work including construction of
stormwater management facilities has been completed.
(d)
(1)
The Superintendent shall inspect the work and either approve it
or notify the applicant in writing in what respects there has been
a failure to comply with the requirements of the approved plan.
The applicant shall promptly correct any portion of the work, which
does not comply, or the applicant will be subject to the bonding
provisions of § 231-22 or the penalty provisions of § 231-21. The
City may conduct random inspections to ensure effective control of
erosion and sedimentation during all phases of construction.
(2)
B.
Contents of the stormwater management plan. The applicant is
responsible for submitting a stormwater management plan, which
meets the design requirements provided by this code. The plan shall
include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the
proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and
acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff.
The applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading,
drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict
C.
§ 231-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-4
1:373
accordance with the plan. The minimum information submitted for
support of a stormwater management plan shall be as follows:
Plan contents:
(a) Locus map.
Drainage area map showing pre- and post-construction
watershed boundaries, drainage area and stormwater flow
paths.
(b)
(c) Location of existing and proposed utilities.
Topographic survey showing existing and proposed contours
(maximum two-foot contour intervals).
(d)
Soils investigation, including borings or test pits, to a depth
greater than four feet below estimated seasonal ground water
for areas where construction of infiltration practices will occur.
(e)
Description of all watercourses, impoundments, and wetlands
on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows.
(f)
(g) Delineation of one-hundred-year floodplains, if applicable.
Groundwater levels at the time of probable high groundwater
elevation (November to April) in areas to be used for
stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration.
(h)
Existing and proposed locations cross-sections, and profiles
of all brooks, streams, drainage swales and the method of
stabilization.
(i)
(j) Location of existing and proposed easements.
Proposed improvements including location of buildings or
other structures, impervious surfaces, and storm drainage
facilities, if applicable.
(k)
Structural details for all components of the proposed drainage
systems and stormwater management facilities.
(l)
Timing schedules and sequence of development, including
clearing, stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading,
and vegetative stabilization.
(m)
(n) Maintenance schedule.
Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used,
construction specifications, and typicals.
(o)
(1)
Computations: pre- and post-development drainage calculations
shall be included, for storm events with return periods of two-, ten-
, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year storms used as the basis of
design. Calculations for:
(2)
§ 231-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-4
1:374
§ 231-5. Stormwater management performance standards.
(a) Hydrology.
(b) Hydraulics.
(c) Structures.
(3) Estimate of stormwater management construction costs.
(4) Other information as required.
Minimum control requirements. The minimum stormwater control
requirements shall require that all developments provide management
measures necessary to maintain the post-development peak discharges
for a twenty-four-hour, two-year frequency storm event at a level that
is equal or less than the respective, pre-development peak discharge
rates, through stormwater management practices that control the
volume, timing, and rate of flows. When the proposed stormwater
discharge may have an impact upon a sensitive receptor, including
streams, storm sewers, and/or combined sewers, the Superintendent
may require an increase in these minimum requirements.
A.
Stormwater management measures.
Stormwater management measures shall be required to satisfy
the minimum control requirements and shall be according to the
following order of preference:
On-site infiltration, flow attenuation, and pollutant removal of
runoff on-site to existing areas with grass, trees, and similar
vegetation and through the use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions;
(a)
Retention and evaporation of stormwater on rooftops or in
parking lots;
(b)
Use of stormwater on-site to replace water used in industrial
processes or for irrigation.
(c)
Stormwater detention structures for the temporary storage of
runoff which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool
of water; and
(d)
Stormwater retention structures for the permanent storage of
runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
(e)
(1)
Infiltration practices shall be utilized to reduce runoff volume
increases. A combination of successive practices may be used to
achieve the applicable minimum control requirements. Justification
shall be provided by the applicant for rejecting each practice based
on site conditions.
(2)
B.
§ 231-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-5
1:375
Best management practices shall be employed to minimize
pollutants in stormwater runoff prior to discharge into a combined
or separate storm drainage system or water body.
(3)
All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to provide
an emergency overflow system, and incorporate measures to
provide a nonerosive velocity of flow along its length and at any
outfall.
(4)
The designed release rate of any stormwater structure shall be
modified if any increase in flooding or stream channel erosion
would result at a downstream dam, highway, structure, or natural
point of restricted stream flow or result in increased combined
overflow or sewer backups.
(5)
In addition. The specific standards and design criteria as detailed
in MA DEP Stormwater Management Volumes One & Two March
1997 edition, must be included. These standards and design
criteria include but are not limited to the following:
No new stormwater conveyances (e.g. outfalls) may discharge
untreated stormwater directly to or cause erosion in wetlands
or waters of the Commonwealth.
(a)
Stormwater management systems must be designed so that
post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed predevelopment
peak discharge rates.
(b)
Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized
through the use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent
practicable. The annual recharge from the post-development
site should approximate the annual recharge from the predevelopment
or existing site conditions, based on soil types.
(c)
For new development, stormwater management systems must
be designed to remove 80% of the average annual load (postdevelopment
conditions) of total suspend solids (TSS). It is
presumed that this standard is met when:
Suitable nonstructural practices for source control and
pollution prevention are implemented;
[1]
Stormwater management best management practices
(BMPs) are sized to capture the prescribed runoff volume;
and
[2]
Stormwater management BMPs are maintained as
designed.
[3]
(d)
Stormwater discharges from areas with higher potential
pollution loads require the use of specific stormwater
management BMPs. The use of infiltration practices without
pretreatment is prohibited.
(e)
(6)
§ 231-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-5
1:376
Stormwater discharges to critical areas must utilize certain
stormwater management BMPs approved for critical areas.
Critical areas are outstanding resource waters (ORWs),
shellfish beds, swimming beaches, cold water fisheries and
recharge areas for public water supplies.
(f)
Redevelopment of previously developed sites must meet the
stormwater management standards to the maximum extent
practicable. However, if it is not practicable to meet all the
standards, new (retrofitted or expanded) stormwater
management systems must be designed to improve existing
conditions.
(g)
Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to
prevent impacts during construction or land disturbance
activities.
(h)
All stormwater management systems must have an operation
and maintenance plan to ensure that systems function as
designed.
(i)
Specific design criteria.
Infiltration systems:
Infiltration systems shall be equipped with clean stone and or
filter fabric adjacent to the soil and have appropriate sediment
removal mechanisms;
(a)
Infiltration systems shall be located at least 20 feet from
basement walls;
(b)
Due to the potential for groundwater contamination,
infiltration systems shall not be an acceptable method for
management of runoff containing pollutants;
(c)
Infiltration systems designed to handle runoff from commercial
or industrial impervious parking areas shall be a minimum of
400 feet from any water supply well;
(d)
Infiltration systems shall not be used as sediment control
basins during construction unless specific plans are included
to restore or improve the basin surface;
(e)
Infiltration basins shall be constructed with a three-footminimum
separation between the bottom of the structure and
the maximum groundwater elevation; and
(f)
Provisions shall be made for safe overflow passage, in the
event of a storm, which exceeds the capacity of an infiltration
system.
(g)
(1)
C.
§ 231-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-5
1:377
Retention and detention ponds shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the criteria of the Soil Conservation Service's
"Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical Release No.
55, June 1986, unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent.
(2)
The applicant shall give consideration in any plan to incorporating
the use of natural topography and land cover such as natural
swales, and depressions as they exist prior to development to the
degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water.
(3)
The Superintendent shall give preference to the use of swales in
place of the traditional use of curbs and gutters based on a case-bycase
review of stormwater management plans by the Department
of Public Works.
(4)
The applicant shall consider public safety in the design of any
stormwater facilities. The banks of detention, retention, and
infiltration basins shall be sloped at appropriate grade into the
water as a safeguard against personal injury, to encourage the
growth of vegetation and to allow the alternate flooding and
exposure of areas along the shore. Basins may require fencing
depending on final design. Side slopes must be stabilized and
planted with vegetation to prevent erosion and provide pollutant
removal. The banks of retention areas shall be designed with
sinuous rather than straight shorelines so that the length of the
shoreline is maximized, thus offering more space for the growth of
vegetation.
(5)
Where a stormwater management plan involves direction of some
or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements
or other necessary property interests concerning flowage of water.
Approval of a stormwater management plan does not create or
affect any such rights.
(6)
All applicants for projects which involve the storage.or use of
hazardous chemicals shall incorporate handling and storage "best
management practices" that prevent such chemicals from
contaminating runoff discharged from a site into infiltration
systems, receiving water bodies or storm drains.
(7)
Runoff from parking lots shall be treated by oil/water separators or
other controls to remove oil and sediment;
(8)
A maintenance program for the basins/swales shall be prepared to
ensure long-term filtration integrity. All methodology implemented
for water quality protection shall follow the standards and
guidelines of the following documents: Stormwater Management,
Volume One: Stormwater Policy Handbook, MA DEP, MA CZM,
March 1997; Stormwater Management, Volume Two: Stormwater
Technical Handbook, MA DEP, MA CZM, March 1997;
Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines for Urban
(9)
§ 231-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-5
1:378
§ 231-6. Maintenance.
§ 231-7. Prohibited activities.
and Suburban Areas, Franklin, Hampden, Hampshire Conservation
Districts, March 1997, all as revised.
Maintenance.
Included in the stormwater discharge permit for which stormwater
management is required, the Superintendent shall require the
owner and/or permittee to execute an inspection and maintenance
program. The permit requirements shall be on all subsequent
owners and/or permittees of land served by the private stormwater
management facility. The permit shall provide for access to the
facility at all reasonable times for regular inspections by the City
or its authorized representative and for regular or special
assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is
maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards
and any provision established.
(1)
The agreement shall also provide that if, after notice by the
Superintendent to correct a violation requiring maintenance work,
satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner(s) within 30
days, the Department of Public Works may perform all necessary
work to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s)
of the facility shall be assessed the cost of the work and any
penalties.
(2)
A.
Maintenance responsibilities.
The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant
to this chapter for private stormwater management facilities, or
the permittee, shall maintain in good condition and promptly repair
and restore all grade surfaces, walls, drains, dams and structures,
vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other
protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and maintenance
shall be in accordance with approved plans.
(1)
A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any
stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance
to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shall
perform the maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be a
part of the stormwater management plan.
(2)
B.
Illegal discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge into the
municipal storm drain system, watercourse, or into the waters of the
Commonwealth.
A.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system,
B.
§ 231-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-7
1:379
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable
law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct
or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the
municipal storm drain system without written prior approval from the
Superintendent or designated agent.
C.
Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any of the following
nonstormwater discharges or flows, provided that the source is not
a significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain
system:
(1) Waterline flushing;
(2) Flows from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flows;
(6) Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(7)
Uncontaminated groundwater discharge from a residential sump
pump, which existed at the time of adoption of this bylaw;
(8)
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems, such as dewatering
excavations for foundation or pipelines), crawl space pumps, or airconditioning
condensation;
(9)
(10)Discharges from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
Water from individual residential car washing and temporary
fundraising car wash events;
(11)
Discharges from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine), provided it is allowed to stand for one week prior to
draining, or tested for chlorine levels with a pool test kit prior to
draining, and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a
nuisance;
(12)
Discharges from street sweepers of minor amounts of water during
operations;
(13)
(14)Discharges or flows resulting from fire-fighting activities;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Department
of Public Works prior to the time of the test;
(15)
D.
§ 231-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-7
1:380
§ 231-8. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding any other requirements of local, state or federal law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible
for emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any
known or suspected release of materials at that facility operation which is
resulting or may result in illegal discharge of pollutants, that person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure containment and cleanup of the release.
In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall
immediately notify the municipal fire and police departments, Department
of Public Works and Board of Health. In the event of a release of
nonhazardous material, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement
agency no later than the next business day. Written confirmation of all
telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications shall be provided to the
authorized enforcement agency within three business days thereafter. If the
discharge of prohibited material is from a commercial or industrial facility,
the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on site a written
record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 231-9. Stormwater discharge permits.
Nonstormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided
that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations;
and
(16)
Discharges for which advanced written approval is received from
the Department of Public Works if necessary to protect public
health, safety, welfare or the environment.
(17)
Stormwater discharge permit application requirements.
Any user as described below must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its stormwater, including the filing of a
permit application. The following users are required to file an
application for a stormwater discharge permit:
Any existing or new user that meets or could meet, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, the criteria for significant user
but has not yet been classified as such;
(a)
Any existing significant user proposing to continue to
discharge to the MS4 and whose existing permit will expire
within 90 days
(b)
Any other existing or new user, when the Superintendent
deems that the application is necessary to carry out the
purposes of this code.
(c)
(1)
A.
§ 231-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-9
1:381
Any new or existing user whose applicability is included in
§ 231-3 of this code.
(d)
Applying for or obtaining a stormwater management discharge
permit does not relieve a user from its obligation to comply with all
federal, state and local pretreatment standards or requirements, or
any other requirements with federal, state and local law.
(2)
Any new user described above must submit a completed
application at least 45 days prior to the beginning of stormwater
discharge.
(3)
Stormwater discharge permit application contents.
All users required to obtain a stormwater discharge permit must
submit a permit application. The Superintendent may require all
users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(a) All information required by § 231-4 of this code;
Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals
used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally
or intentionally be, discharged to the MS4;
(b)
Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the stormwater discharge permit
application; and
(c)
A signature of an authorized representative of the user
certifying the accuracy.
(d)
(1)
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision, The Superintendent will
evaluate the data furnished by the use and may require additional
information. The Superintendent may deny any application for a
stormwater discharge permit as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this code.
(2)
B.
Stormwater discharge permit contents. A stormwater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the Superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect
the quality of the water body receiving the discharge, protect worker
health and safety, and protect against damage to the MS4. Stormwater
discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to the following:
A specific date upon which the permit will expire, not to exceed
five years from its effective date. At the discretion of the
Superintendent, a permit may be issued for less than five years;
(1)
A statement that the stormwater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the Superintendent
in accordance with § 231-9D of this code, and provisions for
(2)
C.
§ 231-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-9
1:382
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
stormwater discharge permit;
Applicable standards, including prohibited discharge standards,
and local limits;
(3)
Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency,
and sample type, based on federal, state, and local law;
(4)
A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule not to exceed time limits set forth in
applicable federal, state and local law;
(5)
Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(6)
Requirements for the installation and/or maintenance of
pretreatment technology, monitoring facilities or equipment,
pollution control, or appropriate containment devices designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
MS4;
(7)
Requirements for the development and implementation of a spill
control plan or any plan including management practices necessary
to adequately prevent the introduction of pollutants into the MS4;
(8)
A statement that compliance with the stormwater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance
with all applicable federal, state and local standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the stormwater
discharge permit; and
(9)
Any other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Superintendent
to ensure compliance with this code, and state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
(10)
Stormwater discharge permit transfer.
Stormwater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
if the permittee gives no less than 60 days' advanced notice to the
Superintendent, and the Superintendent approves the stormwater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Superintendent must
include a written certification by the new owner which:
States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change
the facilities stormwater operations and process.
(a)
(b) Identifies the specific date the transfer is to occur.
(1)
D.
§ 231-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-9
1:383
§ 231-10. Suspension of storm drainage system access.
§ 231-11. Emergency suspensions.
Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing stormwater discharge permit.
(c)
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
stormwater discharge permit void as of the date of transfer.
(2)
The Superintendent may suspend municipal storm drain system access
to any person or property without prior written notice when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened illegal
discharge that presents or may present imminent risk of harm to the
public health, safety, or welfare of the environment. In the event any
person fails to comply with an emergency suspension order, the
authorized enforcement agency may take all reasonable steps to
prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, and welfare of
the environment.
A.
Any person discharging to a municipal storm drain system in violation
of this chapter may have his/her municipal storm drain system
discharge terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The Superintendent will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of municipal storm drain system access. The
violator may petition the Superintendent for reconsideration and
hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates
municipal. storm drain system access to premises terminated pursuant
to this section, without prior approval from the Superintendent.
B.
The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user's stormwater
discharge permit, after informal notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge,
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons.
A.
The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's storm
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the MS4, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.
B.
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer or storm drain connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment
C.
§ 231-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-11
1:384
§ 231-12. Termination of discharge.
§ 231-13. Responsibility for administration.
has passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 231-12 of this code
are initiated against the user.
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Superintendent prior to the date of any show-cause or termination
hearing under § 231-12 of this code.
D.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
E.
In addition to the provisions in § 231-9 of this code, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
Violation of stormwater discharge permit conditions or discharge
limitations;
(1)
Failure to accurately report the stormwater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(2)
Failure to report significant changes in operations or stormwater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; or
(3)
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, records examination, or sampling.
(4)
A.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 231-17, why the
proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
B.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall administer,
implement and enforce this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties
imposed upon the Department of Public Works may be delegated in
writing by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works to
employees or agents of the Department of Public Works.
A.
The Sewer Commission may promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter. Failure by the Sewer
Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have
the effect of suspending or invalidating this chapter.
B.
Sewer Commission as hearing board.
Any user who is aggrieved by the actions of the Superintendent
may request a hearing before a hearing board, which, for the
(1)
C.
§ 231-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-13
1:385
§ 231-14. Enforcement.
The Department of Public Works or its authorized agent shall enforce this
chapter, and the regulations promulgated hereunder, as well as the terms
and conditions of all permit, notices, and orders, and may pursue all civil
and criminal remedies for such violations.
purposes of this code, is deemed to be the City of Chicopee Sewer
Commission as defined in Article XXIII, § 16-100C, of the Code of
the City of Chicopee.
The aggrieved person shall file a written request for such a hearing
within seven days after the day the Superintendent's order was
served or given, in the office of the Sewer Commission. The Sewer
Commission shall set a time and place for such hearing, and shall
inform the petitioner thereof, in writing.
(2)
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after the
day on which the written request was filed and shall be concluded
within an additional 30 days thereafter. If a petitioner is aggrieved
under § 231-12 of this code, the hearing must commence within five
days of the date on which the written request was filed.
(3)
At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why the order or decision of the Superintendent
should be modified or withdrawn.
(4)
After the hearing, the Commission shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the order or decision of the Superintendent, and shall
inform the petitioner and the Superintendent, in writing, of its
decision within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing.
(5)
If a written letter for hearing is not filed in the office of the Sewer
Commission within seven working days after an order has been
issued or if after a hearing the order has been sustained in any
part, each day's failure to comply with the order as issued or
modified shall constitute an additional offense.
(6)
Not less than three Commissioners shall constitute a quorum, and
a majority of the quorum shalt be required in order to sustain,
modify, or withdraw an order or decision of the Superintendent.
(7)
Civil relief. If anyone violates the provisions of this chapter, regulations,
permit, notice, or order issued hereunder, the Department of Public
Works may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
to restrain the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to abate or remediate the violation.
A.
Orders. The Superintendent may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions of this chapter or the regulations hereunder, which may
include: elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the storm
drainage system; termination of access to the storm drainage system;
B.
§ 231-13 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-14
1:386
§ 231-15. Notification of violation.
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this code, stormwater discharge permit, or any
applicable state or federal standard or requirement, the Superintendent
may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include: specific required
actions, shall be submitted to the Superintendent. Submission of this plan
shall in no way relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after the receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the Superintendent to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.
performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; cessation of
unlawful discharges, practices, or operations; and remediation of
contamination in connection therewith. If the Superintendent
determines that abatement or remediation of contamination is
required, the order shall set forth a deadline for completion of the
abatement or remediation. Said order shall further advise that, should
the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation
within the specified deadline, the City may, at its option, undertake such
work, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator or property
owner.
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate the
violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property
owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the City, including
administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a written
protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the
Superintendent within 30 days of receipt of the notification of the costs
incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time
in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a decision of the
Superintendent affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision
of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a special
assessment against the property owner and shall constitute a lien on
the owner's property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin
to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in MGL c.
59, § 57, after the 31st day at which the costs first become due.
C.
The remedies provided in this code are not exclusive. The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. However, the Superintendent may take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further,
the Superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
D.
§ 231-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-16
1:387
§ 231-16. Consent orders.
The City may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to § 231-18 of
this code and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 231-17. Show-cause hearing.
The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this code, a stormwater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other applicable state or federal standard
or requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A showcause
hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
§ 231-18. Administrative order.
§ 231-19. Injunctive relief.
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this code, a stormwater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any state or federal standard or requirement, the
Superintendent may petition the appropriate court through the City
Solicitor, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this code, a stormwater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other applicable state or federal
standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to
recur, the Superintendent may issue an administrative order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(2)
A.
Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
B.
§ 231-16 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-19
1:388
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
stormwater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this
code on activities of the user. The Superintendent may also seek such
other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition
for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against a user.
§ 231-20. Departmental cost recovery.
§ 231-21. Violations and penalties.
The general costs for implementation, management, and enforcement
of the City's stormwater management program are borne by all
property owners. However, under this section, the City may assess,
against any user that violated any provision of this code or a
stormwater discharge permit issued hereunder, charges to recover
program actual costs resulting from enforcement action of said
violation, including but not limited to:
(1) Costs for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
Costs for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(2)
(3) Costs for sampling and analysis;
Charges to recover the cost of consultant's services required to
carry out the review of specific concerns regarding industrial
stormwater discharges;
(4)
(5) Charges to recover legal costs associated with program violations;
Other costs as the Superintendent may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein.
(6)
A.
These charges relate solely to the matters covered by the stormwater
management program, and are separate from all other fees chargeable
by the City, such as building permit fees, storm fees, sewer entrance
fees, sewer user charge fees, etc.
B.
Civil penalties.
A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this code, a stormwater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other state or federal standard or requirement
shall be liable to the City of Chicopee for a civil penalty of up to
$1,000 but not to exceed $5,000 per violation, per day. In the case
of a monthly or long-term average, penalties shall accrue for each
day during the period of the violation.
(1)
The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
(2)
A.
§ 231-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-21
1:389
§ 231-22. Performance bonds.
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any
actual damages incurred by the City of Chicopee.
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(3)
Criminal penalties. A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this code, a stormwater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other applicable state or federal standard or
requirement, shall be subject to prosecution as allowed by
Massachusetts General Laws.
B.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the City of Chicopee may elect to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D. The Department
of Public Works shall be the enforcing entity. The penalty for the first
violation shall be up to $100. The penalty for the second violation shall
be up to $200. The penalty for the third and subsequent violations
shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a stormwater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this code, a previous stormwater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder or any other applicable state or federal pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory
bond, payable to the City of Chicopee, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Superintendent to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
A.
The Superintendent may require from the user a surety or cash bond,
irrevocable letter of credit, or other means of security acceptable to
the Superintendent prior to the issuance of any stormwater discharge
permit for the construction of a development requiring a stormwater
management facility. The amount of the security shall not be less than
the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management
facility. The bond so required in this section shall include provisions
relative to forfeiture for failure to complete work specified in the
approved stormwater management plan, compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations,
and any time limitations. The bond shall not be fully released without a
final inspection of the completed work by the City Engineer, submission
or as-built plans, and certification of completion by the City Engineer
of the stormwater management facilities being in compliance with the
approved plan and the provisions of this chapter.
B.
§ 231-21 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-23
1:390
§ 231-23. Liability insurance.
The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a stormwater discharge
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this code,
a previous stormwater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other applicable state or federal standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the MS4 caused by its discharge.
§ 231-24. Public nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this code, a stormwater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other applicable state or federal standard or
requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected
or abated as directed by the Superintendent. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the Codes of the City
of Chicopee governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the City of
Chicopee for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said
nuisance.
§ 231-25. Entry upon premises to perform duties.
To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other
party in control of the property, the Superintendent, its agents, officers,
and employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose
of performing their duties under this bylaw and regulations and may make
or cause to be made such (examinations, surveys or sampling as the
Superintendent deems reasonably necessary.
§ 231-26. Appeals.
The decisions or orders of the Superintendent and Board of Sewer
Commissioners shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 231-27. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this bylaw are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
§ 231-28. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The Superintendent shall publish, at least annually, in the largest daily
newspaper where the MS4 is located, a list of the users that, during the
previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
stormwater management standards and requirements. The term
"significant noncompliance" shall mean:
Any other discharge that the Superintendent believes has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
A.
§ 231-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 231-28
1:391
§ 231-29. Severability; repealer; when effective.
Chapter 238
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Spray paint and indelible markers — See Ch.
239.
including endangering the health of DPW personnel or the general
public;
Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
B.
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contined in a stormwater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
C.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
stormwater management standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
D.
E. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s), which the Superintendent determines, will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
stormwater management program.
F.
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this bylaw, code, or
any order or permit of the Superintendent shall be held invalid for any
reason, all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
A.
B. All parts of this code in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
C. This Code will take affect upon passage.
§ 231-28 CHICOPEE CODE § 231-29
1:392
ARTICLE I
Graffiti On Private Property
[Adopted 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 13-9]
§ 238-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to eliminate graffiti. Graffiti on
buildings, walls, signs, and other structures or places or other surfaces
causes and contributes to blight within neighborhoods and commercial
districts of the City of Chicopee and constitutes a public nuisance. Graffiti
impairs public health and safety and degrades the value, condition, or
appearance of real or personal property and contributes to the general
deterioration of property and business values for adjacent and surrounding
property. The purpose of this article is to provide the City with enforcement
tools to eliminate graffiti on private property and to impose penalties upon
private property owners who fail to remove graffiti from their property
in a timely manner. This article is not intended to supersede any existing
vandalism and anti-graffiti state laws.
§ 238-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings:
GRAFFITI — The intentional painting, marking, scratching, coloring,
tagging or other defacement of any property with/without the consent of the
owner.
OWNER — Any person who owns, manages or controls any property and
shall be sufficiently identified by the name and address appearing in the
records of the City Assessor.
PERSON — Any individual, voluntary association of individuals, business,
entity, organization, whether incorporated or not.
PROPERTY — Any land, building, structure of real property, including any
fixtures attached thereto, or any personal property located within the City
of Chicopee.
§ 238-3. Removal.
It is the responsibility of the owner of the property to which graffiti has been
applied to promptly remove the graffiti. No owner of property shall allow
graffiti to remain on the property for a period of 14 days after service of
notice of the graffiti from the Building Commissioner or Health Director or
their designee. The notice shall contain the following information:
The street address and description of the property sufficient for
identification of the property;
A.
A statement that the property has been declared a public nuisance
because of the presence of graffiti on the property;
B.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:393
§ 238-4. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A concise description of the conditions on the property that have led to
the determination that the property is a public nuisance;
C.
A statement that the graffiti shall be removed from the property within
seven days from service of the notice and that if the owner fails to
remove the graffiti within the time frame specified that the owner will
be in violation of this article and subject to penalties described therein.
D.
This article may be enforced by civil process, criminal process or by
noncriminal disposition. Any person in violation of this article shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $25. Each day on which a violation
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
A.
The Building Commissioner or the Health Director or their designee
may seek an injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction to
restrain any violation of this article. This article shall not be enforced
against the City or the commonwealth, its authorities, departments or
agencies.
B.
§ 238-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 238-4
1:394
Chapter 239
SPRAY PAINT AND INDELIBLE MARKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
Code Enforcement — See Ch. 132.
Curfew — See Ch. 139.
§ 239-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface of 1/
2 or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PERSON — Any retail establishment.
§ 239-2. Prohibited conduct.
§ 239-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
00-25; 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-31]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine or penalty of $200 for the first offense; $300 for the second and
subsequent offense within a one-year period.
No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint container or
indelible marker to a minor, unless the minor is accompanied by his or
her parent or legal guardian at the time of the purchase or transfer.
A.
No minor shall, at the time of purchase of items specified in Subsection
A above, knowingly furnish fraudulent evidence of maturity, including,
but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration
certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, an
identification card issued to a member of the armed forces or any
document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to possess an
open, uncapped or broken capped spray paint container or undilutable
marker upon any public street, public sidewalk or public way or any
grounds owned by the City or any place to which the public has a right
of assess as invited within the limits of the City. [Added 3-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-21C]
C.
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 239-4
1:395
§ 239-4. Enforcement.
This will be enforced by the Police Department.57
Chapter 243
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department — See Ch. 80.
Building construction — See Ch. 122.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
57.Editor's Note: Former § 239-5, Appeals, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-16-1998 by Ord. No. 98-41. For current provisions, see Ch. 132, Code
Enforcement, Art. I, Noncriminal Disposition of Certain Violations.
§ 239-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 239-4
1:396
ARTICLE I
Street Numbering58
[Adopted as Secs. 26/I/8 through 26/I/10 of the 1976 Code]
§ 243-1. Determination of numbering system. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Street numbers shall each cover a frontage of 20 feet, more or less, at the
discretion of the City Engineer, and be measured continuously from end to
end of the street with the odd numbers on the southerly and easterly sides
and the even numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of all streets. On
any streets already wholly or partially numbered, said Engineer shall assign
such number as he shall deem will best correspond with the majority of
numbers already used on said street; and he shall also assign a new number
whenever he finds that the number in use thus fails to correspond, but
he shall not have authority to renumber a street unless such renumbering
is ordered by the City Council, which it may do whenever it deems it
necessary.
§ 243-2. Responsibility for placement of numbers; dimensions.
[Amended 6-21-1988; 3-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-7; 4-20-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-12]
Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, the proper placement of
numbers shall be as required by the City Ordinances, Article I, §§ 243-1
through 243-4; the owner and occupant of every tenement and building
situated on any street, public or private, shall cause to be placed and
maintained above or about the outside doors fronting on the street,
but not to include the stoop, or on the front corner of every tenement
or building having its entrance on the side thereof, such number or
numbers as may be assigned thereto by the City Engineer, said numbers
to be in figures not less than four inches in height for buildings 25 feet
or less from the property line, and six inches for buildings beyond 25
feet from the property line, and to be so placed as to be easily observed
from the street in front of the premises. Where buildings are not easily
observed from the street, the owner and/or occupant shall cause to be
placed and maintained at the entrance thereof a sign with the number
or numbers as may be assigned by the City Engineer, indicating the
location of the premises.
A.
Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUILDING, FRONT —
The numbers that are assigned on corner lots shall be based on
where the main or primary entrance to the house faces the street.
(1)
Any housing unit set back from the street shall display a number at
the driveway entrance.
(2)
B.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, § 28-7, for authority to assign street numbers.
§ 243-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-2
1:397
§ 243-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-21-1988]
§ 243-4. Numbers in letter form. [Added 6-21-1988]
The owners and occupants of buildings and tenements who wish to place
numbers in letter form may do so, provided that they meet the requirements
of § 243-2 where numbers must be in figure form and in contrasting colors.
Any housing unit on the side of a building where there is no door
facing the street shall display a number on the portion of the
building facing the street.
(3)
The number must be visible from the street in the opinion of the
City Engineer and in any questionable situations.
(4)
Whoever shall refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of this
article within 30 days after a notice, in writing, delivered to the owner
or occupant of such tenement or building, of the number or numbers
so assigned by the City Engineer shall, for each and every offense, be
liable to a penalty of $100. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
A.
If the owner or occupant of any building or tenement fails to number
the same in accordance with the provisions of this article, it shall be
the duty of the City Engineer to place the proper number or numbers
thereon and the cost thereof may be assessed by the City Council upon
said owner or occupant, not to exceed a maximum penalty of $50.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
§ 243-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-4
1:398
ARTICLE II
Superintendent of Streets
[Adopted as Ch. 28 of the 1976 Code]
§ 243-5. General duties.
The Superintendent of Streets shall, under the direction of the Mayor, cause
the streets, roads, lanes, squares, sidewalks, bridges, parks and public
places of the City to be kept in good repair so as to be safe and convenient
for travelers. He shall also:
§ 243-6. Duties when bridges or streets become unsafe.
Whenever any street or bridge or other public place in the City shall from
any cause become unsafe for public travel, the Superintendent of Streets
shall forthwith put up a suitable fence or barrier across the same to exclude
travelers therefrom or shall cause the same to be suitably lighted by at least
two lighted lanterns at night and shall maintain such fence and barrier and
lights until the defects shall be repaired.
See that all nuisances and obstructions therein are forthwith removed
or notice thereof given to the Chief of Police.
A.
Superintend the construction and alteration of all streets or ways which
may be laid out, relocated, altered or widened by order of the City
Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
Superintend the laying of all sewers and the construction of all
sidewalks which may be ordered by the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
C.
Supervise the digging up of the streets or any part thereof by any
person, whether he is an officer of the City or not, and shall see that
such streets are left in a safe and convenient condition for travel.
D.
§ 243-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-6
1:399

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 29 of the 1976 Code]
§ 243-7. Appointment of Committee on Highways; duties. [Amended
9-1-2009]
The City Council shall appoint a standing Committee on Highways, whose
duty shall be to investigate all petitions which may be presented to the
City Council for the laying out, relocating, altering, discontinuing or making
specific repairs in any way, street or highway in the City and to report
thereon to the City Council and to consider and report upon any other
matters relative to highways, streets, bridges and other public places,
which may be referred to said Committee by the City Council.
§ 243-8. Street paving order to specify dimensions to be paved.
Any order or petition for the paving of a street or public highway must
specify not only the length but also the width of such street or highway to
be paved.
§ 243-9. Establishment of street names. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The several streets in the City of Chicopee shall be called and known by
the names by which they are now called until the same shall be altered by
the City Council, and the City Council may at any time change or alter the
name of any street, highway or public place and shall establish the names of
all streets, highways and public places which may hereafter be laid out and
accepted by the City or by any authority within the City, and no two streets
or public places shall bear the same name.
§ 243-10. Minimum required street width; exceptions. [Amended
9-1-2009]
No private street or way shall be hereafter laid out, established or accepted
or made a public street unless all parties interested in the premises waive
damages, and then such street shall not be laid out of a width less than 50
feet, unless the same was actually constructed prior to January 1, 1907, or
was in existence prior to the incorporation of the City unless, in the opinion
of the City Council, it would be impracticable to have such street laid out of
the full width of 50 feet.
§ 243-11. Public streets to be marked.
All streets accepted as public streets shall be marked with permanent
markers so that they can be located at any time.
§ 243-12. Requirements for acceptance of streets.
No street or way constructed on private lands by private parties after
January 1, 1907, shall be laid out, established or accepted as a public street
§ 243-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-12
1:401
or recommended for such acceptance unless the same has been previously
constructed and completed in accordance with the following specifications:
§ 243-13. Exceptions.
Sections 243-10, 243-11 and 243-12 of this article shall have no application
to highways laid out and established within that area of the City which is
bounded as follows: easterly by the westerly line of Bridge Street; westerly
by land now or lately of Fisk Rubber Company; northerly by the southerly
A plan and profile showing the location and grade of every street or
way which it is proposed to lay out and establish as a public street shall
be filed with the City Clerk by the corporation, company or individual
proposing to open said street at the time of laying out as a private way
and before the same is graded or improved. Such plan and profile shall
be drawn to such scale as may be required by the City Engineer and
to his approval and shall show the location and grade of all connecting
streets.
A.
Every such street or way shall be constructed not less than 50 feet in
width and shall have a roadway of not less than 25 feet in width and
shall be of such cross section as the City Engineer may prescribe.
B.
The entire area of every such street or way shall be cleared of stumps,
rocks, roots and other unnecessary materials and of all trees not
desirable for preservation.
C.
All clay, loam and loamy materials shall be removed from the limits of
the roadway and of the sidewalks to such depth as may be required by
the City Engineer and shall be deposited outside of the limits of such
street, and the space to the subgrade shall be filled with sand or other
suitable materials, thoroughly compacted.
D.
All work in excavation and embankment shall be brought accurately to
a subgrade of not less than six inches for the roadway and four inches
for the sidewalk below the finished grade. All side slopes in excavation
and on adjoining land shall be at a ratio to be furnished by the City
Engineer.
E.
All embankments shall be made of loam, clean sand, gravel, cinders,
furnace slag, rocks or broken stone only. Under no circumstances shall
any perishable material be used for the making of such streets or street
embankments.
F.
The roadway shall be covered with binding gravel or other good
hardening material as may be prescribed by the City Engineer and
finished to the established grade to the satisfaction of the Mayor and
Superintendent of Streets. The tree belt and side slopes adjoining the
street line shall be covered with good loam at least eight inches in
depth and so applied as to ensure against slipping. The roadway shall
be completed before any report is made on the petition for acceptance.
G.
§ 243-12 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-13
1:402
bank of the Chicopee River; and southerly by the northerly line of Main and
West Main Streets.
§ 243-14. Sewer approval prior to street acceptance.
No street or way shall hereafter be laid out, established or accepted as
a public street in the City of Chicopee unless the sewer or drain therein,
if one exists at the time of acceptance, is constructed in accordance with
the directions of or is approved by the City Engineer in regard to the
dimensions, materials and grade thereof.
§ 243-15. Action upon petitions. [Amended 9-1-2009]
All petitions which may be presented to the City Council for laying out,
widening, altering, relocating or discontinuing any street or way in the City
shall be referred to the standing Committee on Highways, which shall give
a public hearing thereon at such time and place as said Committee shall
determine. The Committee shall cause a written notice of such hearing,
signed by the City Clerk, to be left at the usual place of abode of the owners
of the land over which such way is proposed to be laid out, widened, altered,
relocated or discontinued and of the owners of land abutting on said way
or to be delivered to such owners in person or to the tenants or authorized
agents of such owners. If an owner has no such place of abode in the City
and no tenant or authorized agent therein known to the Committee or if,
being a resident of the City, he is not known as such to the Committee, such
notice shall be posted up in some public place in the City. Said notices shall
be delivered or posted up at least seven days before the time appointed
for the hearing. At the time and place appointed, the Committee shall meet
and hear all parties interested who shall claim to be heard. The Committee
shall view the premises and, after such view and hearing, shall report to
the City Council whether the common convenience and necessity require
that such street be laid out, widened, relocated, altered or discontinued as
petitioned for; and in case the report is in favor of granting the petition,
it shall contain a description of the boundaries and measurements of the
street as proposed, the names of the owners of all lands included therein or
abutting thereon who claim damage by reason of the laying out, widening,
relocating, altering or discontinuing of said street or persons affected by
said laying out, widening, relocating or discontinuing of such street or way
as proposed, together with the amount of damages proper and reasonable
to be awarded to each of such owners or other persons affected by said
laying out, widening, relocating or discontinuing. The aforesaid notices may
be served by the Chief of Police or any duly qualified police officer, constable
or special police officer who may be designated by the Mayor or the City
Council.
§ 243-16. Establishment of permanent bounds. [Amended 9-1-2009]
In case of the laying out, widening, relocating or altering of any street
or way, the City Council shall cause permanent bounds thereof to be
established and marked.
§ 243-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-17
1:403
§ 243-17. Change of street grades.
No street or way shall be altered in its grade to the damage of any persons
or corporation, in any real estate or in the convenient use and enjoyment of
any interest in any real estate unless like proceedings are had in reference
to notice, hearing, report and determination as are provided for in the case
of laying out streets.
§ 243-18. Conflict with statutes.
This Article shall not be construed as forbidding the laying out of the
highways in accordance with the statutes of the commonwealth.
§ 243-19. Method of assessment.
The Superintendent of Streets shall, immediately on the completion of the
installation of a curbing on any street or way, have the proper assessment
bill of 1/2 the cost of such installation sent to each and every estate owner
whose estate abuts on such improved street or way. The Superintendent of
Streets shall see that the City Collector and the City Auditor are furnished
a duplicate bill of each and every charge.
§ 243-20. Laying of sewer and water connections.
In all streets and roads in which main sewers or water pipes are laid and in
all streets and roads that may be paved with so-called permanent material,
all pipe connections shall first be made and sub ends carried to the side of
the street to each respective lot. Such connections shall be made whether
or not the abutting property is improved.
§ 243-17 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-20
1:404
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalks
[Adopted as Ch. 30 of the 1976 Code]
§ 243-21. Appointment of Committee on Sidewalks; duties.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
The President of the City Council shall appoint a standing Committee on
Sidewalks, whose duties shall be to consider and investigate all petitions
for the establishing, grading and construction of sidewalks and to report
thereon to the City Council and also to consider such other matters relating
to sidewalks as may be proper to be considered by the City Council and as
may be referred to it by said Council.
§ 243-22. Action on petitions to lay out or construct sidewalks.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
Whenever any petition is presented to the City Council for the establishing,
grading or constructing of a sidewalk, such petition shall be referred to
the standing Committee on Sidewalks, which shall give a hearing thereon
to all parties interested. Said Committee shall cause written notice of said
hearing, signed by the City Clerk, to be served at least seven days prior
thereto upon the owner of any land abutting thereon, which notice shall be
served by leaving the same or a copy thereof at the usual place of abode
of such owner or delivering the same or a copy thereof to such owner or
his tenant or agent. If the owner has no such place of abode within the City
and no tenant or agent therein or if, being a resident of the City, he is not
known as such to the Committee, a copy of such notice shall be posted in
some public place in the City seven days at least before the time of hearing.
At the time and place appointed for the hearing, the Committee shall meet
and hear all parties interested and claiming to be heard in regard to the
necessity of such sidewalk. If it adjudges that such should be established,
graded or constructed, said report shall prescribe the dimensions, material
and grade thereof, together with waivers, signed by all abutters of said
petition for the establishing, grading or construction of a sidewalk, waiving
their rights to damages because of the establishing, grading or construction
of said sidewalk.
§ 243-23. Supervision of sidewalk construction. [Amended
9-1-2009]
Every sidewalk ordered to be constructed or completed shall be built or
completed under the direction of the Superintendent of Streets, of such
dimensions, materials and general descriptions as have been prescribed by
the City Council.
§ 243-24. Method of assessment. [Amended 8-4-1981]
Whenever the City Council determines that public necessity requires
a sidewalk to be installed, the Superintendent of Streets need not
A.
§ 243-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-24
1:405
assess any estate owner in accordance with Subsection B. [Amended
9-1-2009]
The Superintendent of Streets shall, immediately upon the completion
of a new sidewalk on any street or way, have the proper assessment bill
of 1/2 the cost of such construction sent to each and every estate owner
whose estate abuts on such improved street or way. The Superintendent
shall send to the City Collector and the City Auditor duplicates of each
and every bill so sent.
B.
§ 243-24 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-24
1:406
ARTICLE V
Use of Highways
[Adopted as Ch. 32 of the 1976 Code]
§ 243-25. Street excavation permit required.
No person, unless authorized by law, shall break up or dig up any part of
any street in the City for any purpose without a written permit from the
Superintendent of Streets.
§ 243-26. Excavations or obstructions restricted. [Amended
2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 95-9B]
License required. [Amended 9-1-2009]
No person, except the Superintendent of Streets in the
performances of his duties, shall break or dig up or cause to be
broken or dug up the pavement or ground in any public street or
any sidewalk or common in the City or erect or cause to be erected
any staging for building thereon or place or cause to be placed any
materials or rubbish thereon without first obtaining from the City
Council or the Superintendent of Streets the following license.
(1)
The following is a written agreement approved by the City Council,
in compliance with the requirement of Section 2 of Chapter 37 and
of Section 13, Chapter 36, as amended:
CITY OF CHICOPEE
Date __________________
The _______________________________ hereby applied for a license to
open and occupy _________________________________________ for the
purpose of ________________________________________________.
As a condition to the granting of said license, the applicant
agrees as follows:
A. The road surface, sidewalk or tree belt is replaced in a
manner equal or better than the existing road surface or
sidewalk.
B. The patches shall be neat and kept uniform in height to
road surface and, upon completion, the street shall be
cleaned of all excess debris caused by the excavation and
work performed under this license.
C. Excavations shall be designated and marked at night for the
protection of the public with necessary light and signs.
D. Said opening and occupancy shall be subject to the
supervision and direction of the Superintendent of Streets.
E. The company will save the City of Chicopee harmless and
indemnify from all loss, cost or expense that the City may
suffer by reason of such opening or occupancy.
(2)
A.
§ 243-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-26
1:407
F. The license shall be effective for 30 days from date of
issuance, unless it specifically provides otherwise; however,
this effective license date shall in no way alter or terminate
the obligation or liabilities of the hereinabove referred to
utility company under the above written provisions
numbered A, B, C, D and E.
G. The license issued upon this application is made a part
hereof and all conditions therein contained shall be binding
upon the applicant when said license is accepted.
H. This license granted by the City of Chicopee to the aforesaid
utility company bears a signature of a duly authorized
officer, acknowledging acceptance of the above conditions,
and a clerk's certificate is attached hereto, under seal,
stating that said officer has authority to bind said utility
company and thereby obligates the same to said herein
contained conditions.
I. The replacement of pavement after excavation by
contractors or utility companies will commence with a
temporary patch to allow the excavation to be compacted
for a period of 14 days or unless otherwise specified by the
City Engineer, after which six inches of Class A concrete
shall be installed and allowed to cure for a period of seven
days, before a final patch of three inches of bituminous
concrete, laid in two lifts, can be installed.
Upon completion, the contractor or utility company will notify
the City Engineer and City Highway Department for final
inspection.
Signed and sealed this _____ day of ____________ 19 __
Accepted by
(Seal)
Road work.
Removal of debris.
Utility companies, as well as repair or construction companies,
shall be responsible for properly removing any and all debris
that results from or is in any way caused by the work that
is or has been done by the utility or repair or construction
company involved. Any such utility company, repair company
or construction company that fails to maintain their worksite
in a clean and safe manner shall be subject to a daily fine of
$200 up to the point in time wherein the worksite involved is
returned to a safe and clean area as determined by the DPW
Superintendent.
(a)
Any fines levied by the DPW Superintendent shall be subject
to appeal and review by the Public Works Subcommittee of
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 243-26 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-26
1:408
§ 243-27. Railings required near street excavations.
No person shall dig any cellar or make other excavations in ground near to
or adjoining any street unless he shall, so long as necessary for the purpose,
keep a railing or fence on or near the line of such street, sufficient to protect
travelers from falling in the place so dug or being injured thereby.
§ 243-28. Obstruction of streets or sidewalks prohibited.
§ 243-29. Placing awnings over streets or sidewalks. [Amended
4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-23; 9-1-2009]
No person shall place over any sidewalk in front of any building any awning
or shade less than eight feet in height at the lowest part thereof, nor shall
such awning or shade extend beyond the line of the sidewalk; and no person
the City Council. Any decision reached by the Public Works
Subcommittee of the City Council shall be final and binding,
subject to appeal only as spelled out in the administrative
appeal process of MGL c. 30A. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Roadwork that cannot be finalized and brought back to a proper
and safe condition in the same day must be posted and protected
and/or well lit, as the circumstances may dictate, so that the public
will be notified and protected from any harm that could come
about as a result of the roadwork involved. The absence of proper
postings, protection and/or lighting, as the circumstances may
dictate, shall subject the utility company, repair or construction
company involved to a fine of $300 per day for each violation. Fines
may be appealed to the Public Works Subcommittee of the City
Council whose decision will be final and binding subject to appeal
to the courts in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 30A.
[Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-31; 9-1-2009]
(2)
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his/her
designee shall be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions
of this section of the Code of the City of Chicopee, Massachusetts.
(3)
The failure of any person to obtain the necessary permit(s) as
required by this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $500
for each day. [Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
(4)
No person shall place or cause to be placed in or on any public way
or street or on any sidewalk or footwalk or crosswalk in the City any
article or thing whatsoever so as to interfere with the convenient use of
the same by any person traveling thereon.
A.
A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $300.
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13; 3-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-31]
B.
§ 243-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-29
1:409
shall erect any post in any street or sidewalk for the support of any awning
or for any other purpose, except by permit of the City Council.
§ 243-30. Rude and disorderly conduct prohibited.
No person shall behave in a rude or disorderly manner or use any indecent,
profane or insulting language in any street, lane, alley or other public place
in the City or near any dwelling house or other building therein.
§ 243-31. Defacing of public property. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-13]
§ 243-32. Runoff from buildings onto streets or sidewalks.
§ 243-33. Placing ice or snow on streets.
§ 243-34. Removal of snow from sidewalks. [Amended 2-4-1986]
No person shall make any indecent figures or write any indecent or
obscene words upon or mark, disfigure, or deface any fence, building
or other public place within the City nor injure, deface or destroy any
guidepost or guideboard or any lamppost, lamp or lanterns, nor any
tree, fence post or other thing set, erected or made for use or ornament
of the City. A violation of this subsection shall subject the violator to a
fine of $300. [Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-31]
A.
No person shall post any written or printed matter upon any tree, fence,
wall building or other property of the City. A violation of this subsection
shall subject the violator to a fine of $25.
B.
No person shall suffer his building to shed water on any sidewalk or
street in the City, to the injury or inconvenience of passengers.
A.
A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $50.
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
B.
No person shall throw or put or cause to be thrown or put any snow or
ice into any street, lane or alley in the City. [Amended 3-15-1983]
A.
Any person who violates Subsection A, or if said person is agent or
servant, then his principal, and in either case said person or his
principal shall be liable to the City for cost of removal of said snow or
ice. A violation of Subsection A shall subject the violator to a fine of
$100. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
B.
The owner or person having the care of any estate abutting upon any
street, lane, court or square within the City where there is a sidewalk
which now is or may hereafter be established or set apart as such shall,
after the ceasing to fall of any snow thereon, within 24 hours, cause the
same to be removed therefrom.
A.
§ 243-29 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-34
1:410
§ 243-35. Responsibility for removal of snow fallen from buildings.
[Amended 2-4-1986]
§ 243-36. Responsibility for removal of ice from sidewalks.
[Amended 2-4-1986]
§ 243-37. Maintenance of sidewalk and tree belt. [Added 6-19-1984]
§ 243-38. Overgrowth on land.59 [Added 9-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-64]
The owner or person in control of any parcel of land, including a vacant
piece of property, shall at all times maintain said parcel of land free from
overgrowth. Any property with 12 inches or more shall be considered
overgrowth. The owner or person in control of any parcel of land or vacant
lot shall cut and or remove said overgrowth. Failure to comply shall result
in a noncriminal fine of $50 enforced by the Health Department.
A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $50.
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
B.
Whenever any snow shall be collected or deposited upon any sidewalk
mentioned in the preceding section, either by falling from some
adjoining building or by drifting upon said sidewalk, the owner or
person having the care of the estate abutting upon said sidewalk shall,
within 24 hours after its being so collected or deposited, cause the same
to be removed therefrom.
A.
A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $50.
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
B.
Whenever any sidewalk mentioned in § 243-34 of this article shall be
encumbered with ice, it shall be the duty of the owner or person having
the care of the estate abutting thereon to cause such sidewalk to be
made safe and convenient for travel by removing the ice therefrom or
by covering the same with sand or some other suitable substance within
24 hours after such sidewalk shall have become so encumbered.
A.
A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $50.
[Added 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-07]
B.
Any person or corporation owning or occupying property abutting a
sidewalk or tree belt shall make sure that the sidewalk and/or tree belt
is maintained in a clean and safe fashion free from loose sand or other
material on the paved walk and shall keep lawn and trees appropriately
trimmed.
A.
A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a fine of $100.
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13]
B.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 243-38, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13A.
§ 243-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-39
1:411
§ 243-39. Deposit of sand, small stones or rubbish in streets
prohibited. [Amended 6-19-1990; 9-20-1990]
§ 243-40. Placing of nails and other injurious articles in streets.
§ 243-41. Parade permit required.
No person or persons shall be permitted or allowed to parade in a public
street or square without a written permit from the Chief of Police, approved
by the Mayor, at least 24 hours before the scheduled parade.
§ 243-42. Addressing of public gatherings on streets.
No person or persons shall be permitted or allowed to address a public
gathering on a public street, square, way or on any property owned or
leased by the City without securing a written permit from the Chief of
Police, approved by the Mayor, at least 24 hours before the scheduled
gathering.
§ 243-43. Designation of routes for parades and gatherings.
The Chief of Police shall designate the route of the parade and also the place
of the public gathering according to the foregoing sections.
No person shall put or place or cause to be put or placed in any street,
lane or alley or other public place in the City any sand, small stones or
any type of rubbish or distribute or cause to be distributed or thrown
any handbills, circulars or printed materials other than newspapers
provided to the purchasers thereof.
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be required to
remove from the street, lane, alley or public place said items within 24
hours. Any person who shall neglect to comply with the requirement to
remove said items shall be liable to a fine of $50 and the cost to the City
to clean the area as soon as the 24 hours have passed. The maximum
fine shall be double the cost to the City for the cleanup. [Amended
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13A]
B.
No person shall put, place or throw or cause to be put, placed or thrown
in any street, lane, alley or other public place in the City any nails,
tacks, broken glass or other articles or substances which may in any
way be liable to puncture the tire of any vehicle or which may in any
way impede or obstruct the passage of any vehicle over said street,
lane, alley or place.
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to
a fine of $50 for each offense. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
00-13A; 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-14]
B.
§ 243-39 CHICOPEE CODE § 243-44
1:412
§ 243-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
00-13A; 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
The Superintendent of Public Works, Chicopee Police Department, Chicopee
Building Department, Chicopee Health Department, Chicopee Fire
Department, or any of their designee(s) shall enforce the provisions of
Chapter 243 and shall have the authority to issue citations for any said
violation(s). Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, except
where a different penalty is specially provided, shall be liable to a fine of
$50 and to a like penalty for every day such offense shall be repeated or
continued.
§ 243-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-44
1:413

ARTICLE VI
Debris on Highways
[Adopted 3-2-1982]
§ 243-45. Prohibited activity; violations and penalties. [Amended
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-13A; 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-15]
Any person, firm, company or corporation who carries or hauls any material
whatsoever and either knowingly or unknowingly causes or allows for the
same to be dispersed upon any City street or way and, after having been
given reasonable notice to either remove or clean the same by the Chicopee
Police Department, refuses or neglects to do so shall be liable by a fine of
$150 for each day thereafter.
§ 243-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-45
1:415

ARTICLE VII
Highway Account for Pothole Repairs
[Adopted 2-24-1984]
§ 243-46. Transfer of moneys into account.
Money appropriated by the City for street repairs, street construction,
street reconstruction, sewer repairs, sewer construction, sidewalk
construction, sidewalk reconstruction, sidewalk repair, street overlay,
drainage or signs or any other highway sewer drainage, sidewalk or sign
project shall automatically be transferred to the highway special account
for pothole repairs when:
§ 243-47. Expenditure of moneys.
Money in the highway special account for pothole repairs shall be expended
solely for the repair of potholes by the Highway Superintendent after
consultation with the City Engineer.
§ 243-48. Bidding procedure.
Potholes will be repaired by available City forces, as determined by the
Highway Superintendent, or by a qualified bidder after competitive bids
are advertised, received and approved by the Purchasing Department. Bid
specifications shall be prepared by the City Engineer.
Such project is not commenced within one year from the date of
appropriation and when funds for said project are not reappropriated
by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Proceeds remain in such project account 45 days after the completion
of said project, as determined by the Highway Superintendent and the
City Engineer.
B.
§ 243-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 243-48
1:417
Chapter 244
TAG SALES/YARD SALES
§ 244-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, a "tag sale," "cellar sale," "garage sale,"
"lawn sale," "rummage sale," "attic sale," "yard sale," "estate sale" or its
equivalent shall be defined as the sale of new or used items offered for sale,
barter, or trade to the general public when conducted in whole or in part in
a residential zone.
§ 244-2. Time restrictions.
All tag sales/yard sales as hereinabove defined shall be held for no more
then a continuous seventy-two-hour period and the sale hours shall be
limited to 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. All items for sale must be removed at
the conclusion of the seventy-two-hour period and secured in the owner's
primary residence.
§ 244-3. Frequency.
A tag sale/yard sale as hereinabove defined may be conducted only from
the owner's primary residence or from the primary location of the nonprofit
organization. No more than three tag sales may be conducted from the same
residence per calendar year in a residential zone. More than three tag sales
would violate the Zoning Ordinance.60
§ 244-4. Signs.
No notices, advertising signs or directional signs are to be attached to utility
poles or street signs. Signs must be removed at the end of the seventy-twohour
period.
§ 244-5. Enforcement.
The Building Inspector's office as the Zoning office shall enforce this
chapter.
§ 244-6. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter results in a fine of $50 pursuant to Chapter 132.61
A person commits a separate offense for each and every day a violation
continues.
60.Editor's Note: See Chapter 275, Zoning.
61.Editor's Note: See Chapter 132, Code Enforcement.
§ 243-48 CHICOPEE CODE § 244-6
1:418
Chapter 250
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sealer of Weights and Measures — See Ch. 89. Licenses — See Ch. 188.
§ 250-1. Purpose. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council licenses and regulates the operation of taxicabs in order to
protect the safety and welfare of the public.
§ 250-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER OR OPERATOR — The person driving or having control or
possession of a motor vehicle while the same is being used in a taxicab
business.
OWNER — The person, firm, corporation or association having the
ownership of any vehicle used or licensed to be used in the taxicab business.
TAXICAB — Also taxi or cab. With the exception of limousines and limousine
services, every motor vehicle for hire used or to be used for the conveyance
of persons, except a motor vehicle operated in a manner and for the
purposes stated in MGL c. 159A, § 1.
TAXICAB MEDALLION — A sticker issued in concert with a taxicab license
to identify a licensed vehicle.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
required to park while waiting to be engaged.
§ 250-3. Permits required.
DBA (Doing business as) certificate or articles of incorporation.
For unincorporated businesses, DBA certificates are issued by the
City Clerk.
(1)
For incorporated businesses, copies of articles of incorporation
filed and approved by the Secretary of State.
(2)
A.
Taxicab license and medallion.
Taxicab license application and fees. Applications for taxicab
licenses shall be made to the Chicopee City Council on forms
furnished by it and shall set forth, under oath, such information
as said Council may require. The fee for each such license shall
(1)
B.
§ 244-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-3
1:419
be as set by the City Council. A taxicab license that is not in
possession of the taxicab owner, acquired from the City Clerk's
office, within 10 working days from the time of issuance by the City
Council shall become null and void. The applicant's only recourse
after nullification would be to start the process over and reapply.
Medallions shall be issued as part of an approved license and
are subject to the same regulations and process of revocation.
[Amended 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 04-75; 9-1-2009]
Certificate of registration; required information. No such license
shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall have presented
to the City Clerk of the City of Chicopee, in the case of each
car, a valid certificate of registration issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles, and every such license shall be signed by said
City Clerk. It shall set forth the name and residence and place
of business of the licensee, a description of the motor vehicle to
be operated under it and the current registration number and
the engine number of said vehicle and the number of persons,
not exceeding five in number or some other reasonable number
appropriate to the vehicle involved, as determined by the Council,
exclusive of the operator, which it may carry and, unless sooner
revoked or rendered void, shall continue in effect until the 31st day
of December next after date thereof. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(2)
Insurance.
Certificate of insurance required. No taxicab license shall be
issued until the applicant has delivered to the City Clerk a
policy of insurance or a certificate issued by an insurance
company authorized to transact business specified in MGL c.
175, § 47, Clause 6, Subdivision (b), covering the motor vehicle
to be operated by the applicant under his license, conforming
to the provisions of MGL c. 175, §§ 112 and 113, nor until
the applicant has also delivered to the City Clerk a certificate
of the insurance company issuing the policy showing that the
policy shall not be canceled without giving the City Clerk five
days' notice thereof.
(a)
Type and amount of insurance. Such policy shall be a policy of
liability insurance which provides indemnity for or protection
to the insured and any person responsible for the operation
of the insured's car with his/her express or implied consent
against loss by reason of the liability to pay damages to others
for injury to property or bodily injuries, including death at any
time resulting therefrom, sustained during the term of said
policy by any person other than employees of the insured or of
such other person responsible as aforesaid, who are entitled to
payments or benefits under the provisions of MGL c. 152, and
arising out of the ownership, operation, maintenance, control
or use upon the ways of the commonwealth of such car, to
the amount or limit of at least $50,000 on account of injury
(b)
(3)
§ 250-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 250-3
1:420
to or death of any one person and, subject to such limits as
respects injury to or death of one person, of at least $100,000
on account of any one accident resulting in injury or death of
more than one person and to the amount or limit of at least
$100,000 on account of any one accident resulting in injury to
property.
Public access to policies. The City Clerk of the City of Chicopee
shall, upon the request of any person, furnish the name of
the company issuing such policy covering any particular car
licensed and shall exhibit such policy to any such person or his
duly authorized representative.
(c)
Taxi identification card. The City Clerk shall issue to the licensed
vehicle a card bearing the words "Taxi Vehicle License, Chicopee,
Massachusetts" and setting forth the owner's name, a description
of the motor vehicle, the Massachusetts registration number, the
vehicle identification number and the number of passengers it is
permitted to carry. Such card shall be attached to the interior of
the vehicle so as to be plainly visible to the occupants thereof.
(4)
Medallions. The City Clerk shall issue to the licensed vehicle a
medallion in the form of a sticker to be affixed to the rear of the
cab.
(5)
Transferability. A license or medallion issued for any taxicab is
not transferable to any other taxicab without the prior written
approval of the City Council and under no circumstances is a
taxicab license or medallion transferable or to be sold from one
company or operator to another. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(6)
Operators license.
All operators to be licensed by City Council. No owner or person
having care or management of a taxicab shall employ or suffer any
person to drive the same other than a person thereto licensed by
said City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
Taxicab operators license application and fees. Applications for
taxicab operator's licenses shall be made to the Chicopee City
Council on forms furnished by it and shall set forth, under oath,
such information as said Council may require. The fee for each such
license shall be as set by the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(2)
English requirement. No such license shall be granted to any
person who cannot read, write and speak the English language.
(3)
Police Department review. Before issuing a taxicab driver's license,
the Council must receive and review the recommendation of the
Chief of Police or his designee concerning such application. The
review by the Chief of Police must take into consideration a review
of the record or lack thereof for the applicant involved. No license
(4)
C.
§ 250-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-3
1:421
§ 250-4. Rules and regulations.
The following are the general rules and regulation for taxicabs and taxicab
operators in the City of Chicopee. A copy of these rules and regulations shall
be placed in every taxicab and shall be available to any taxicab passenger
upon request.
shall be granted to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or
who has been convicted of a misdemeanor within the last eight
years. The Police Chief or his designee will provide a
recommendation based on the review to the Council on a proper
form. No license shall be granted unless the applicant shall have
furnished the Police Department with a personal description,
presented a valid Massachusetts driver's license and provided an
appropriate photograph, said photograph to be updated every four
years. [Amended 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 02-44; 9-1-2009]
Taxicab operator's identification card. Such licenses shall be signed
by the City Clerk of the City of Chicopee, shall be numbered
in order as granted and, unless sooner suspended or revoked,
shall continue in force until the 31st day of December next after
the date thereof. The City Clerk shall provide the licensee under
Section 12, an identification card bearing the words "Licensed Taxi
Driver No. ______ , Chicopee, Massachusetts," setting forth the
name of the licensee and the company the driver is employed by
or self employed. If the applicant is a corporation, the names of
the president and secretary thereof shall be given and the personal
description of the licensee, including the age, height, weight,
complexion, color of hair, color of eyes and Massachusetts driving
license number and an expiration date for said license. Said license
shall have a photograph of the driver pasted on said identification
card, and the card shall be attached to the interior of the vehicle so
as to be plainly visible to the occupants thereof.
(5)
Taxicab owner's responsibilities for compliance with regulations.
All persons, firms, corporations or associations having the
ownership of any vehicle to be used as a taxicab within the
jurisdictional bounds of the City of Chicopee must obtain all
permits, pay all fees and abide by all regulations outlined in this
chapter.
(1)
The operation of each taxicab, recordkeeping, conduct of taxicab
drivers and operators, adherence to proper rates of hire, and
compliance with Chicopee City Code and all rules and regulations
promulgated by the Chicopee City Council and shall be the sole
and exclusive responsibility of the taxicab owners. [Amended
9-1-2009]
(2)
A.
B. Driver and taxicab daily logs.
§ 250-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 250-4
1:422
Taxicab owners shall ensure that drivers maintain a daily log for
each taxicab. A separate daily log shall be started for each driver
and also for each day. The daily log shall contain the date, vehicle
number, driver, time of dispatch, origin, destination, completed
time of destination, fare and number of passengers. All revisions to
daily logs shall be made by drawing a line thought the part in error
and initialed by the party making said revision, and the correct
entry made immediately below.
(1)
Taxicab owners are required to collect a copy of each taxicab
driver's daily log on a daily basis and shall maintain the daily logs
for inspection by the Chief of Police or his/her designee for a period
of 24 months.
(2)
Taxicab service area limitations. Only taxicabs licensed by the Chicopee
City Council may pick up passengers within the limits of the City of
Chicopee. Taxicabs licensed in other cities or towns may drop off fares
in the City of Chicopee so long as the fares are picked up in another city
or town. [Amended 9-1-2009]
C.
Taxicab minimum operation volume in City limits. All taxicabs licensed
by the Chicopee City Council must conduct a minimum of 50% of its
daily operation within the limits of the City of Chicopee. [Amended
9-1-2009]
D.
Obligation to pick up passengers. No person having charge of driving
a taxicab shall refuse to carry any person asking to be carried as a
passenger therein, unless the person so asking is exhibiting disorderly
conduct or appears to be a threat to others, including but not limited to
the driver or other passengers.
E.
Operation of unsafe taxicab. No driver is to knowingly operate, as a
taxicab, any vehicle that is unsafe in any way.
F.
Hours of operation. Taxi services must be provided on a twenty-fourhour
basis.
G.
Maximum shifts; compliance with safety laws. No taxicab driver shall
be required or permitted to operate a taxicab or remain on duty for
more than 12 hours in any 24 consecutive hours and any such driver
shall be relieved from duty for at least one period of not fewer than
eight consecutive hours during said 24 hours. All federal and state
safety laws and regulations must be complied with.
H.
Taking on or discharge of passengers. No taxicab shall be stopped to
take on or to discharge passengers at any place on any street except
from the side nearest the curb.
I.
Reporting of lost and found articles. Every person having charge of or
driving a taxicab shall deliver any article left therein by any passenger
to the Police Department of the City of Chicopee no later than 24 hours
after finding the same and shall receive from the Police Department a
J.
§ 250-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:423
receipt therefor, and the Police Department shall take proper steps to
return the same to the owner. All such articles delivered to the Police
Department and not claimed by the owner within one year from such
delivery may be delivered to the licensee of the vehicle in which they
were left, unless prohibited by law.
Routes.
Fixed routes prohibited. No person operating a taxicab shall
establish and maintain therefor any route between fixed terminals
under reduced fare so as to compete with motor bus or street
railway service.
(1)
Direct routes. Each taxicab owner shall ensure that taxicab drivers
shall use the most direct route available from the point or origin to
the point to destination for each trip unless otherwise directed by
the passenger, or in the case of unusual circumstances in which an
alternative route is in the best interest of the passenger.
(2)
K.
Additional rules and regulations. All owners and drivers of taxicabs
shall be subject to such further rules, orders and regulations as may
from time to time be promulgated by said Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
L.
Violations and penalties. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule, order or regulation adopted and published by said
Council relating to said business shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $100 per offense, per day. [Amended 9-1-2009]
M.
Rates.
Rates to be charged. Taxicab rates per day and night shall be set
by the City Council. The rate schedule will be available in the City
Clerk's Office. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
Rates to be set and posted. No owner or driver of a taxicab shall
charge any passenger or passengers therein any higher or lower
rates for any service than those that shall from time to time be
fixed by said Council. A schedule of said rates then in force shall
be delivered to every owner and every driver of a taxicab at the
time of delivery to them of their licenses, and new schedules shall
be so delivered whenever said rates may be changed. Drivers must
receive written confirmation from the Council before any rates may
be changed. Said schedule shall be posted in each cab so that it
may be easily read from the rear seat. Rates shall also be posted on
both sides of the exterior of the cab at all times in an easy-to-read
typestyle with letters and numbers no less than 3 1/2 inches high.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(2)
Rate disputes. Whenever requested by a passenger, or whenever
there is a dispute over a fare, the taxicab driver shall give a receipt
to said passenger which shall contain the taxicab company name,
(3)
N.
§ 250-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 250-4
1:424
taxicab driver's full name and badge number, the taxicab number,
date, time, origin and destination of the trip in addition to the
amount charged.
Taxicab cleanliness and inspections. All taxicabs must be kept clean
both inside and outside at all times. All taxicabs are subject to
inspection without notice by the Chicopee Police Department,
Massachusetts State Police, and City of Chicopee Sealer of Weights and
Measures, or a duly appointed inspector for compliance with any City
ordinance or rules and regulations promulgated by the Chicopee City
Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
O.
Taxicab operator appearance and conduct.
Appearance. Every taxicab owner and taxicab driver while
operating a taxicab shall be appropriately attired at all times while
transporting passengers for hire.
(1)
Language and behavior. No taxicab driver shall speak in an
obscene, boisterous, loud or abusive manner while he/she is
engaged in the transportation of passenger. Nor shall a taxicab
driver threaten, harass or abuse any passenger or use or attempt
to use any physical force against a passenger except in self-defense
or in defense of another.
(2)
Smoking, eating, drinking, drugs.
No taxicab driver shall eat, drink, carry open alcoholic
beverages, nor smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe
or other smoking object or device while the taxicab is in
service.
(a)
No taxicab driver shall consume, be in possession of or under
the influence of alcohol or controlled substance while
operating a taxicab. No taxicab driver shall drive a taxicab
while his/her ability is impaired by any prescribed or
nonprescribed drug.
(b)
(3)
P.
Driver's seat. No taxicab driver shall, while on duty, occupy any seat in
the taxicab other than the driver's seat, and at no time shall the taxicab
driver permit anyone other than him/herself to occupy the driver's seat
of said taxicab.
Q.
Use of taxicab in perpetuation of crime. No driver shall knowingly
permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetuation of a crime or
misdemeanor.
R.
Passenger requests. A taxicab driver shall comply with all reasonable
requests of a passenger.
S.
Maximum occupancy. A taxicab shall not carry more persons that the
maximum rating for the vehicle as established by the manufacturer of
said vehicle.
T.
§ 250-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:425
§ 250-5. Suspension or revocation of licenses and medallions.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
Any taxicab license shall terminate upon the canceling or the expiring of
such policy of insurance covering the car licensed. The City Council may
suspend or revoke any taxicab or taxi operator license issued under this
chapter for violation of any law or of this chapter or of any rule, order
or regulation herein or hereafter promulgated by said Council. A notice
will be provided to the individual or company involved relative to the date
and time when such a contemplated hearing for a potential suspension
or revocation is to take place. Failure to attend such a hearing will be
grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of a license and medallion,
as determined by the Council.
§ 250-6. Taxi stands. [Amended 9-1-2009]
§ 250-7. Meters.
Roof lamps. Roof lamps shall be turned on when the taxicab is
operational or engaged. Roof lamps shall be turned off when the taxicab
is not operational or engaged.
U.
Designation authority. Taxicab stands shall be designated by the
Chicopee City Council.
A.
Restricted areas; change in designations. No taxicab shall be allowed
to stand or to wait for passengers in any street, square or public place,
except on such portions thereof and during such hours as may be
designated therefor by said Council in conjunction with the Chief of
Police or his designee. Said Council, in conjunction with the Chief of
Police or his/her designee, may from time to time designate locations
in streets, squares and public places where and the hours during which
such vehicles may so stand or so wait and may cancel or change such
locations or hours as and whenever the public interests seems to it to
require such changes.
B.
Cabs to be equipped with taximeters. All cabs shall be equipped with a
mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for transportation
is mechanically calculated and indicated by means of figures for
distance traveled, herein called "taximeters."
A.
Basis of rates. All taximeters shall calculate and register fares based on
distance at a single schedule of rates only.
B.
Meters to be visible from rear seat. Taximeters shall be affixed to the
taxicab so that the fare registered may be easily read from the rear
seat.
C.
Illumination of meters. Between sunset and sunrise and at all other
times when necessary, the dial of the taximeter shall be clearly and
continuously illuminated while the taximeter is operating.
D.
§ 250-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 250-7
1:426
Chapter 256
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 109.
§ 256-1. Conditions for operation.
Effective February 1, 1997, no person, firm, corporation, establishment or
agency shall install or maintain a vending machine to distribute or sell
tobacco products in the City of Chicopee unless:
Meters to be sealed by Sealer of Weights and Measures. No taxicab on
which a taximeter is installed shall be used for hire unless the taximeter
is sealed by the Sealer of Weights and Measures or his representative
with wire and lead seals as follows:
(1) The meter mechanism shall be sealed within its case.
(2) The meter shall be sealed to the meter bracket.
Driving equipment shall be sealed at the upper end to the meter
bracket.
(3)
The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall also affix a bright orange
sticker on the driver's side of the rear window to verify the
appropriate licensing of such taxicab for use in the City of
Chicopee.
(4)
E.
Responsibility for accuracy. The licensee of a taxicab will be held
responsible for the accuracy of taximeters within the tolerances
allowed, and he shall make tests with sufficient frequency and
regularity to ensure continued accuracy of the taximeter. A record shall
be kept of each such test showing the details thereof and the degree of
accuracy as found, which record shall be kept available for inspection
by the Sealer of Weights and Measures.
F.
Variance tolerances; annual inspection or sealing. The tolerances
allowed for all taximeters shall be 2% for distances under a mile and
4% for distances over a mile. All taximeters shall be sealed or inspected
annually.
G.
A license for location of tobacco sales is obtained through the Board
of Health of the City of Chicopee. The fee for said license will be $10,
renewable annually.
A.
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-1
1:427
§ 256-2. Enforcement.
The Board of Health and its enforcement officers shall enforce this chapter.
Any person working in conjunction with the Chicopee Police Department
or the Chicopee Board of Health during an approved compliance check are
exempt from any fines or punishment outlined in this chapter.
§ 256-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever sells tobacco products by vending machines or otherwise to a
person under the age of 18 years of age shall be punished by a fine of:
§ 256-4. Appeals.
The appeal process for anyone who wishes to challenge a fine issued as a
result of an alleged violation of this chapter shall be to the full Board of
Health. Thereafter any such appeal would be through the provisions of MGL
c. 30A.
Chapter 257
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Forestry Department — See Ch. 39.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 206.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain
view and control of a responsible adult employee so that all sales are as
observable and controllable as if cigarettes were sold over the counter.
B.
The vending machine is supplied with a lock-out device approved by
the Board of Health. Said device shall lock-out sales from vending
machines unless an adult employee releases the locking mechanism.
The release mechanism must not allow continuous operations of the
vending machine and must not be accessible to customers. Vending
machines must be posted with a sign stating that the machine is
equipped with a lock-out device and identifying the person(s) to contact
in order to purchase cigarettes from the machine.
C.
All cigarette vending machines must display a conspicuous sign stating
that it is illegal for minors to purchase cigarettes. The sign shall be in
conformance with MGL c. 270, § 7, and shall be placed conspicuously
at the cash register or within two feet of the cash register.
D.
A. One hundred dollars for the first offense.
B. Two hundred dollars for the second offense.
C. Three hundred dollars for the third offense or more.
§ 256-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 256-4
1:428
§ 257-1. Intent; permits.
§ 257-2. Findings.
§ 257-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have their respective
meanings:
CITY — The City of Chicopee.
PROTECTED TREE — Any tree which has been determined by the Tree
Warden to be of high value because of its type, size, age or other
professional criteria and which has been so designated.
STREET OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department of
Public Works that authorizes activity on City property, including the removal
or planting of a tree on City property.
TREE — Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk
diameter of 2 inches or greater measured at a point 6 inches above the
ground level and which normally obtains a height of at least 10 feet at
maturity. Certain species (defined by the City) may also be protected
regardless of the size.
TREE WARDEN — The agent of the City having primary enforcement
responsibilities under this chapter and MGL c. 87, and charged with the
responsibility for approvals required pursuant to this chapter.
It is the intent of these regulations to provide standards for the
preservation and protection of trees for the purpose of making the City
of Chicopee (hereafter called the "City") a more attractive place to
live, protecting the watercourses and ecology, providing a healthy living
environment, and better maintaining control of flooding, noise, glare
and soil erosion.
A.
Any activity requiring the removal or planting of trees on City property
and all clearing operations within the public right-of-way requires a
permit before any work begins.
B.
Trees provide beneficial oxygen while reducing the levels of harmful
carbon dioxide. They reduce air pollution, purify water and stabilize
the soil. Trees provide wildlife habitat and shade, cool the land, reduce
noise and provide an aesthetic value to the land.
A.
The protection of trees throughout this City is vital to the survival of
our residents and protection is necessary for every tree in the City.
B.
This chapter also provides for the health, safety and general welfare of
the residents by allowing appropriate shade and ornamental trees to be
planted within the public right-of-way for the purposes noted above.
C.
§ 256-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-4
1:429
§ 257-4. Applicability.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply to any activity on City
property and any activity that requires the issuance of a street occupancy
permit. No street occupancy permit shall be issued by the City without
it being determined that the proposed activity is in conformance with the
provisions of these regulations.
§ 257-5. Powers of Tree Warden.
This chapter shall not abridge the powers of the Tree Warden as provided
by MGL c. 87. The Tree Warden may expend all money appropriated by the
City for the setting out and maintenance of trees, shrubs and growths within
the public way as provided by MGL c. 87.
§ 257-6. Planting within public right-of-way; planting on private
property.
Planting within public right-of-way.
Any property owner may petition the Tree Warden for permission
to plant a tree within a public right-of-way. It is understood that
some rights-of-way are not suitable for the planting of trees and
that some species of trees are not suitable for public rights-of-way.
For this reason, it is understood that the permit is discretionary on
the part of the Tree Warden and is not to be construed as a right.
(1)
The Tree Warden may grant permission for planting on public
property subject to the following:
All work in a public right-of-way shall be conducted to the
specifications of the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works and the Tree Warden.
(a)
All costs incurred, including related work, regardless of
contractor, shall be the responsibility of the petitioner.
(b)
The petitioner shall work with the Tree Warden to select an
appropriate tree and location that will not interfere with buried
or above ground utilities; will minimize root damage to streets
and sidewalks; and will not become a nuisance, i.e., trees that
shed branches or form fruit or nuts.
(c)
No work can commence within the public right-of-way until a
street occupancy permit is approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Tree Warden.
(d)
(2)
A.
Planting trees on private property. Where the building on the
petitioner's property is so located to provide a front yard which can
accommodate tree planting, no utilities would be endangered and other
limiting conditions do not exist, the street tree may be planted within
the yard and no permit would be issued for installation. Every effort
B.
§ 257-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 257-6
1:430
§ 257-7. Removal of healthy trees.
should be made to select the proper type and size of tree for the
existing condition within the private property.
Trees on public property belong to all residents of Chicopee and
provide a service that benefits all residents of Chicopee and may be
assigned a monetary value. The first priority of the City is to preserve
and protect all trees on City property. Any decision allowing the
removal of a healthy public shade tree will provide for equitable
replacement to ensure the residents of Chicopee the continuing
aesthetic, environmental and economic benefit of that tree. Any tree
that is designated a protected tree will not be removed under this
process.
A.
The Tree Warden may consider the removal and subsequent
replacement of a healthy tree subject to the following:
Petitions for the removal and replacement of trees shall be filed
with the Tree Warden and acted upon by the Tree Warden and the
Planning Board in a public hearing as provided by MGL c. 87.
(1)
Petitions for the removal and tree replacement must demonstrate
that the removal and replacement of a tree will be of greater
benefit to the inhabitants of the City than the existing tree.
(2)
Trees that are removed in accordance with this § 257-7 must be
replaced in accordance with the following schedule:
Size of Tree Removed Replacement Required
Less than 12" diameter 1 tree
Greater than 12" diameter 2 trees
(3)
The petitioner shall work with the Tree Warden to select the
appropriate trees and locations that will not interfere with buried
or above ground utilities; will minimize root damage to streets and
sidewalks; and will not become a nuisance, i.e., trees that shed
branches or form fruit or nuts. A replacement tree is not required
to be located on the section of public right-of-way from which it was
removed. The petitioner shall provide the Planning Board and the
Tree Warden with a suitable guaranty that the replacement trees
will be provided prior to the removal of the live tree in question.
(4)
All costs incurred, including related work, regardless of contractor,
shall be the responsibility of the petitioner unless otherwise stated
in a written agreement with the City.
(5)
All work in a public right-of-way shall be conducted to the
specifications of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works and the Tree Warden. A street occupancy permit must be
issued prior to the commencement of any work.
(6)
B.
§ 257-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-8
1:431
§ 257-8. Removal of unhealthy trees.
Nothing in this chapter shall abridge the powers of the Tree Warden to act
in the interest of public safety regarding the removal of unhealthy trees. The
Tree Warden may, without a public hearing, remove a tree which, because
of its condition and location, is deemed to endanger the health and/or safety
of the general public. Requests/petitions for removal of unhealthy trees
shall be made to the Department of Public Works. The discretion and sound
judgment of the Tree Warden alone determines whether a tree shall be
removed after such request for removal has been made.
§ 257-9. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Tree Warden to enforce this chapter. The Tree
Warden or the Superintendent of Public Works shall have the authority to
revoke, suspend or void the street occupancy permit and shall have the
authority to suspend all work on a site or any portion thereof and levy fines
as provided by § 257-10.
§ 257-10. Violation and penalties.
No person shall remove any wood, trees, bushes or other flora from any
City property without the express written consent of the Tree Warden and
Superintendent of Public Works. Any person, firm or corporation violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of $300. Each day's continuance of a
violation and each tree removed shall be considered a separate offense. Any
fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to replace the City tree
population.
Chapter 260
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Commission — See Ch. 16, Art. IX.
City vehicles — See Ch. 95.
Motor vehicles on City property — See Ch. 198
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 250.
Unregistered and abandoned vehicles — See
Ch. 262.
§ 257-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 257-10
1:432
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 260-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACTUAL SERVICE DELIVERY — Actually engaged in or performing
services, including but not limited to trades, repairs and/or loading or
unloading of goods, supplies, merchandise or any other items at the
premises of a resident of the City of Chicopee.
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or
alighting from and the parking of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by other markings or signs.
EMERGENCY — Any situation in which the life, safety, welfare or property
of a resident of the City of Chicopee is immediately endangered.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol),
police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and
municipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are
responding to an emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Department.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners, properly identified as such,
accompanying the remains of a human body.
HANDICAPPED PARKING ZONE — Any on- or off-street municipal or other
parking space posted "Handicapped Parking Only" and/or bearing the
international symbol for the handicapped or statements of similar import
and authorized by its listing in § 260-68 of this chapter.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
OFFICER — Any officer of the Chicopee Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for the violation
of traffic regulations.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by
human power, except bicycles or tricycles.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-1
1:433
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-ofway.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is designed as and
solely for recreational purposes.
RESIDENT — Any individual or business which is located in the City of
Chicopee.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
ROTARY TRAFFIC — The counterclockwise operation of a vehicle around an
object or structure.
SAFETY ZONE — Any area or space set aside within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which has been indicated by signs, lines or
markings, having the written approval of the Department of Public Works,
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation
of commercial and transient vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway set aside for pedestrian
travel.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel.
STREET MARKING, OFFICIAL — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports
to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Board of
Aldermen and which has the written approval of the Department of Public
Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
required to park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars
or other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or
highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL AREA — Any area along any way, other than an
intersecting way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control
signs.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Public Works
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside within a roadway which is
not intended for use by vehicular traffic.
§ 260-1 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-1
1:434
TRAFFIC SIGNALS, OFFICIAL — All signals, conforming to the standards
as prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of
directing or warning traffic.
TRAFFIC SIGNS, OFFICIAL — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with this chapter, and which conform to the
standards prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding,
directing, warning or regulating traffic.
U-TURN — The turning of a vehicle by means of continuous left turn
whereby the direction of such vehicle is reversed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 260-2. Enforcement; direction of traffic.
It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. Such officers are hereby authorized to direct
all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signals, in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that in the event
of a fire or other emergency, officers of the Police and Fire Departments
may direct traffic to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, as conditions
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
§ 260-3. Temporary street closing.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to close, temporarily, any street
or highway in an impending or existing emergency or for any lawful
assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided that there is reasonable
justification for the closing of such street.
§ 260-4. Drivers to report accidents.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury
or death of any person or property damage to an apparent total extent of
$100 or more shall, within 24 hours, make a full and complete report, in
writing, of such accident to the police headquarters in this City. A driver
who has been incapacitated as a result of such accident and to such extent
as to make reporting impossible or unfavorable to his recovery shall not
be required to report such accident until he has recovered sufficiently to
be able to do so. The report shall be made on a form furnished by the
Police Department, copies of which shall be available at the police station.
Compliance with this section, however, shall not relieve such driver from
the additional responsibility of reporting to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
any accident in which a person is killed or injured.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:435
§ 260-5. Owner responsible for violations.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any
provisions of this chapter and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations.
§ 260-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 260-7. Provisions to be in effect separate from one another.
These rules are adopted with the intent that each of them shall have force
and effect separately and independently of every other, except insofar as, by
express reference or necessary implication, any rule or any part of a rule is
made dependent upon another rule or part thereof.
§ 260-8. Effect on prior provisions. [Amended 9-1-2009]
All official signs, lights, markings, signal systems or devices erected or
installed under prior rules or regulations and necessary to the enforcement
of these regulations shall be deemed to have been lawfully erected or
installed hereunder, provided that the same were erected or installed with
the permission and approval of the Department of Public Works of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and insofar as the same are necessary as
aforesaid for the enforcement of these regulations, they shall be deemed
continuing hereunder, but in all other respects all prior rules, orders and
regulations made by the City Council for the regulation of vehicles are
hereby expressly repealed. This repeal, however, shall not affect any
punishment or penalty imposed or any complaint or prosecution pending
at the time of the passage hereof for any offense committed under said
prior rules, orders or regulations hereby repealed, nor shall said repeal be
effective unless and until these rules and regulations have been approved
and published as required by law.
Any person violating any provisions of any rule, regulation or order
regulating the parking of motor vehicles made by any body authorized
to make the same shall be dealt with as provided by MGL c. 90,
§ 20A 1/2, except that if it is an offense subject to this chapter, timely
payment of a fine of $15 shall operate as a final disposition of the
case; provided, however, that if said offense shall be a violation of the
Handicap Parking Ordinance, emergency winter parking regulations or
Fire Lane Ordinance,62 as provided by this chapter, timely payment of a
fine of $50 shall operate as a final disposition of the case.
A.
However, if timely payment is not made as provided for in the notice
prescribed by MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2, the Parking Clerk shall assess a
fine of $40, if the Parking Clerk has not reported the failure to appear
to the Registrar, and $60 if the Registrar has been notified.
B.
62.Editor's Note: See §§ 260-27, Parking for handicapped, 260-29, Winter parking
regulations, and 260-26, Fire lanes, respectively.
§ 260-5 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-9
1:436
§ 260-9. Construal of provisions. [Amended 9-1-2009]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and
orders is, for any reason, unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portion of these rules and orders. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed these regulations and
each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of
the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or
phrases is declared unconstitutional.
§ 260-10. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to operators actually engaged
in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under construction or
repair, to officers when engaged in the performance of public duties nor
to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency and in
performance of public duties when the nature of the work of any of these
necessitates a departure from any part of this chapter. These exemptions
shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences
of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:437

ARTICLE II
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
§ 260-11. Authorization to place signs and signals; standards.
§ 260-12. Unauthorized signs, signals and markings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon
or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign,
signal, marking or device or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic or which hides from view any official sign or signal. The Chief of
Police is hereby empowered to remove every such prohibited sign, signal,
marking or device or cause it to be removed without notice.
§ 260-13. Interference with signs, signals and markings.
Any person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes
with any official traffic sign, signal or marking shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding $20 for each offense.
§ 260-14. Obedience to signs, signals and markers.
No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instruction of any official traffic
control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
The City Council is hereby authorized and, as to those signs and signals
required hereunder, it shall be its duty to place and maintain or cause to
be placed and maintained all official traffic signs, signals, markings and
safety zones. All signs, signals, markings and safety zones shall conform
to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Public Works of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
Sections 260-3, 260-30, 260-17K and 260-18 to 260-23, inclusive,
relating to parking, and §§ 260-45 and 260-46, relating to turning
movements, shall be effective only during such time as official signs
are erected and maintained in each block designating the provisions
of such sections and located so as to be easily visible to approaching
drivers.
B.
Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during such
time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained
at each of the exits for each one-way street so that at least one sign will
be clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet to drivers approaching
such an exit.
C.
Regulations relating to commercial vehicle parking shall be effective
only during such time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected
and maintained at each of the main arterial entrances to the City.
D.
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-15
1:439
§ 260-15. Experimental signs, signals and markers. [Amended
9-1-2009]
For the purposes of trial, the City Council may make temporary rules
regulating traffic or test under actual conditions traffic signs, markings or
other devices. No such experimental rule regulating traffic shall remain in
effect for a period of time longer than 30 days.
§ 260-15 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-15
1:440
ARTICLE III
Zones of Quiet
§ 260-16. Establishment; sounding of warning devices.
All territory within 300 feet of the premises of each hospital, each
nursing home or any medical health care facility where overnight stays
are required by competent medical personnel, in the City of Chicopee,
is hereby declared, by the amendment of this ordinance, to be a zone of
quiet. [Amended 2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-8]
A.
The Chief of Police may temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon
any street where a person is seriously ill, if requested to do so by the
written statement of at least two registered physicians certifying to
its necessity. Said temporary zone of quiet shall embrace all territory
within a radius of 200 feet of the building occupied by the person
named in the request of said physicians. Said temporary zones of quiet
shall be designated by the police by placing at a conspicuous place in
the street a sign or marker bearing the words "Zone of Quiet."
B.
No person operating any type of motor vehicle within any designated
zone of quiet shall sound the horn or use other warning devices, cause
the motor to run at very high speeds so as to cause loud noises or
to cause his or her vehicles to spin the wheels at a high speed (burn
rubber). The only exceptions are emergency vehicles.
C.
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-16
1:441

ARTICLE IV
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 260-17. General prohibitions.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places, and
vehicles found parked in violation of the provisions of this section may be
moved by or under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the
owner to a place where parking is permitted.
§ 260-18. Angle parking.
Within an intersection, except within those intersections where the
installation of parking meters has been specifically approved by the
Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
B. Upon any sidewalk.
Upon a way within five feet of a marked crosswalk. [Amended
4-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-85]
C.
D. Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district.
Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on the
right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge of
the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as oneway
streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked in the
direction in which said vehicle is moving and with both wheels within
12 inches of the curb. This shall not apply to streets or parts of streets
where angle parking is required by these regulations.
E.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
F.
G. Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
H. Upon or in front of any private road or driveway.
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except alleys.
I.
Within 15 feet of the wall of a fire station or directly across the street
from such fire station, provided that signs are erected acquainting the
driver of such restriction.
J.
K. On a bridge and the approach thereto.
L. Within five feet of either side of a driveway.
On City-owned tree belts, medians and traffic islands. [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No. 08-37; amended 4-19-2016 by Ord. No.
16-15]
M.
§ 260-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-18
1:443
§ 260-19. Bus stops.
§ 260-20. Taxicab stands.
§ 260-21. Service zones.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in any service zone for a
period of time longer than 15 minutes, except while actually engaged in
loading or unloading, provided that such loading and unloading does not
exceed a period of time longer than 1/2 hour.
§ 260-22. Parking prohibited. [Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-02]
No driver shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, except that passenger
vehicles may stop for not more than five minutes continuously for the
receiving or discharging of passengers, at any curb adjacent to the
reservation side of a parkway, the entrances of a school, church, theater,
hotel, hospital, railroad station, railway station, public building or any place
of public assemblage, provided that this regulation shall not apply to the
service entrances to any such building. Nonmotorized vehicles (e.g., boats,
trailers, campers) may not park on public streets for more than 48 hours.
The City Council shall determine the streets upon which diagonal
parking will be permitted and shall cause said streets to be designated
by signs and the surfaces thereof to be marked as directed by the Chief
of Police.
A.
Diagonal parking is permitted upon certain sections of a number of
streets as designated in § 260-60, hereto appended, to which reference
is made and which § 260-60 relative to diagonal parking is herewith
specifically incorporated in this section. Where such diagonal parking
is permitted, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12 inches
of the curb and at the angle to the curb indicated by official marks and
signs. The vehicle shall be parked so that all four wheels thereof shall
be placed wholly within the area indicated for parking and headed to
the curb.
B.
A. No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop.
No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at
any place other than a bus stop when a nearby bus stop is available for
use.
B.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street
within a business district in any taxicab stand.
A.
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district
at any place other than the taxicab stand or stands designated for the
use of his taxicab or taxicabs.
B.
§ 260-18 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-23
1:444
§ 260-23. Safety zones.
No person shall park a vehicle within 20 feet of either end of a safety zone
which is located within 30 feet of the curb or edge of the roadway.
§ 260-24. Location of bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones shall be
specified by the City Council, and, in the case of taxicab stands, the City
Council shall designate who may use them as such.
§ 260-25. Parking vehicles for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any
vehicle displayed for sale.
§ 260-26. Fire lanes.
§ 260-27. Parking for handicapped.
§ 260-28. Parking of commercial vehicles. [Amended 2-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-6; 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 10-37; 9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-45]
No person shall park or leave a vehicle within the limits of private ways
furnishing means of access for fire apparatus to any building and the
City Council is authorized, with the concurrence of the Chief of the Fire
Department, to establish fire lanes on governmental property devoted
to governmental use for the purpose of protecting access there for fire
protection purposes. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
The fine for such unlawful act shall be $50, and the towing of said
vehicle shall be at the owner's expense. Signs displaying the fine and
towing will be properly posted in designated fire lanes and enforcement
of the same shall be by the police. [Amended 3-19-1996 by Ord. No.
96-13]
B.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street or parts thereof, or in any
municipal off-street parking area or parts thereof, as listed in § 260-68
of this chapter, except those vehicles which bear the distinctive "HP"
or "DV" number plates or plates with the international symbol for the
handicapped or a paratransit vehicle equipped for the handicapped
and bearing the international symbol for the handicapped. [Amended
5-17-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
A.
Any person convicted of a violation of this section, except as may be
otherwise provided, shall have his or her vehicle towed as well as a fine
of $100 for each offense. [Amended 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 05-118]
B.
No driver shall park or stand any motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle
attachment (excluding recreational vehicles) having a gross vehicle
A.
§ 260-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-28
1:445
§ 260-29. Severe weather parking regulations. [Amended 3-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-14; 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-62]
weight of 26,001 pounds or more or exceeding 24 feet in length for
more than one hour on any day, or at any time on Sunday, on any part
of any street, way, highway, road or parkway under the control of the
City of Chicopee where parking or standing a vehicle is not otherwise
prohibited, provided that this regulation shall not apply during actual
service or delivery or in the case of an emergency. Motor vehicles,
regardless of size, owned or operated by the City of Chicopee, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the United States of America are
hereby exempt from these regulations. Each day in which a motor
vehicle is in violation of this provision shall constitute a separate
offense.
No driver shall park or stand any motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle
attachment (excluding recreational vehicles) having a gross vehicle
weight of 26,001 pounds or more or exceeding 24 feet in length on
private property in any residential zone for more than three calendar
days during any calendar month. Motor vehicles, regardless of size,
owned or operated by the City of Chicopee, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or the United States of America are hereby exempt from
these regulations. Each day in which a motor vehicle is in violation of
this provision shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
More than three unpaid violations within a twelve-month period will
cause the vehicle(s) to be towed and impounded at the owner's expense.
C.
Violations of this section shall be as follows: [Added 10-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-31
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second offense: $100.
(3) Third offense: $200.
D.
Severe weather parking regulations. No person shall park or allow or
permit or suffer a vehicle in his name to be parked on the streets
listed in § 260-69 while severe weather parking regulations, provided in
§ 260-29B, are in force and effect.
A.
Severe weather parking regulations shall be in effect only when
announced by the Mayor, at the request of the Superintendent of
Streets. While in effect, parking shall be allowed only on the even side
of the street in even-numbered years and only on the odd side of the
street in odd-numbered years, 24 hours a day. This section is applicable
to all streets except those listed in § 260-69.
B.
Severe weather parking regulations shall be deemed to have been
announced when publicized by a daily newspaper or radio or television
station, notifying the public that severe weather conditions have been
C.
§ 260-28 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-29
1:446
§ 260-30. Temporary restrictions.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking
on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending or existing
emergency or for a lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession,
provided that there is reasonable justification for such prohibition. Vehicles
parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be moved by
or under the direction of an officer.
§ 260-30.1. Standing prohibited. [Added 6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-38]
forecasted and may exist and that emergency winter parking
regulations are in effect. Said declaration shall remain in force as long
as conditions warrant such retention and shall be lifted only by the
Mayor, by a consensus of the following departments: Fire Chief, Police
Chief or Superintendent of Streets, and publicized as above stated.
"Severe weather" means any weather condition and/or including, but
not limited to, snow, ice, hail, excessive wind or rain which may, in the
judgment of the Superintendent of Streets, cause roads and ways in the
City to become or continue to be unsafe for travel and dangerous to the
public.
Nothing in Subsections B and C shall be construed to affect any other
ordinance, rule or regulation currently in existence on any given street.
Regardless of the year, parking will be allowed on the unrestricted side
of any street where parking is limited by law to one side or the other.
D.
Any person who violates a provision of the severe weather parking
regulations set forth in this section shall be towed and subjected to a
fine of $15.
E.
On the entire length of Thaddeus Street, trucks or any vehicles idling
or found standing for more than five minutes will be subject to the
following fines for each violation:
(1) First offense: $50.
(2) Second offense: $100.
(3) Third offense: $200.
A.
Standing is prohibited on both sides of Newbury Street at the
intersection of Gilbert Avenue for a distance of 25 feet. [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No. 00-53]
B.
§ 260-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-30.1
1:447

ARTICLE V
One-Way Streets
§ 260-31. One-way streets designated.
The streets or portions thereof designated in § 260-70, hereto appended and
specifically incorporated in this section, are declared to be one-way streets,
and all vehicular traffic shall move on those streets or portions thereof in
the direction designated in said § 260-70.
§ 260-32. Rotary traffic.
Within the area set forth in § 260-71, vehicular traffic shall move only in
a rotary counterclockwise direction, except when otherwise directed by an
officer.
§ 260-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-32
1:449

ARTICLE VI
Operation of Vehicles
§ 260-33. Overtaking of other vehicles.
§ 260-34. Obstructing traffic.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle proceeding
in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead on
the right side of the roadway to permit the overtaking to be completed
without impeding the safe operation of any vehicle ahead.
A.
The driver of a vehicle, when about to be overtaken and passed by
another vehicle approaching from the rear, shall give way to the right
in favor of the overtaking vehicle, on suitable and audible signal being
given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the
speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
B.
No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily
the normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are
hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this
section to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until such traffic as
has been delayed has passed.
A.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the
vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
B.
No person shall in any way obstruct the normal movement of traffic
upon any street or highway. This section shall be enforceable pursuant
to MGL c. 272, § 59, and each violation of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of $50 for each offense. [Added 3-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-09]
C.
The following streets shall be marked with boxes painted in white
and a "Do not block the box" sign indicating the area of the marked
street that shall remain open to traffic entering from the intersecting
street. Any person who violates this section shall be fined $100. [Added
10-21-2003 by Ord. No. 03-51]
D.
§ 260-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-34
1:451
§ 260-35. Following too closely.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and
the traffic upon and condition of the street or highway.
§ 260-36. Clinging to moving vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, coaster,
sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or such
conveyance to any other moving vehicle upon any roadway.
Street To Be Open Side At Intersection of
Front Street [Added
12-20-2005 by Ord. No.
05-178; amended
10-20-2015 by Ord. No.
15-59]
South Wheatland Avenue
Granby Road [Added
5-15-2007 by Ord. No.
07-41]
North Entrance to 7-Eleven (opposite
1195 Granby Road)
Meadow Street [Added
6-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-8]
— In front of 5 Meadow Street
parking lot
Montgomery Street
[Added 9-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-50]
— Northbound lane in front of 508
Montgomery Street beginning
at a point at the southern curb
cut that forms the existing
driveway opening on the east
side of the road and ending at a
point approximately 18 feet in a
northerly direction from that
point.
Montgomery Street
[Added 2-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-11]
East Entrance to Big Y/BJ's plaza
Montgomery Street
[Added 2-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
East Entrance to Sunoco gas station
Montgomery West Entrance to CVS pharmacy
Montgomery [Added
3-16-2004 by Ord. No.
04-61]
South Entrance to Wells Avenue
St. James Avenue [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-52]
— At the intersection of
Beauchamp Terrace and St.
James Avenue
§ 260-34 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-37
1:452
§ 260-37. Care in starting, stopping, turning or backing.
The driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct
line or backing, shall first see that such movement can be made in safety. If
the operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning
movement, the driver of such vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal,
as required by statute law.
§ 260-37.1. Engine brakes prohibited. [Added 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
16-2; amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-40]
The use of engine brakes shall be prohibited along the entire length of
Westover Road, McKinstry Avenue, and Grattan Street except for
emergency. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
$300, enforced by the Police Department.
§ 260-38. Emerging from alleys or private driveways.
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway.
§ 260-39. Obedience to traffic control signals.
Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and
every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance shall comply
therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic regulating sign, other than a stop sign, signal or device, or except
as provided in § 260-51B of this chapter. In no case shall a driver enter or
proceed through an intersection without due regard to the safety of other
persons within the intersection, regardless of what indications may be given
by traffic control signals.
Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or crossing
traffic. Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to
comply with a change in the signal to a red or red and yellow indication.
A.
Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic control signal by
rapid intermittent flashes, and its use has been specifically authorized
by the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
drivers shall stop before entering the nearer line or crosswalk of the
street intersection, or at a stop line when marked, and the right to
proceed shall then be governed by provisions of MGL c. 89, § 8.
B.
Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal
may proceed through the intersection, but shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection
at the time such signal was exhibited. Drivers of vehicles making a right
C.
§ 260-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-39
1:453
§ 260-40. Obedience to stop signs.
or left turn shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing with the
flow of traffic.
Flashing yellow. A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a
hazard, and drivers may proceed only with caution.
D.
Red.
Traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering
the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to
proceed is shown, except as allowed by MGL c. 89, § 8.
(1)
No driver of a vehicle facing a circular red signal indication shall
make a right turn where official traffic signs are installed and
maintained prohibiting such turn at the intersections as listed in
§ 260-72 of this chapter.
(2)
E.
Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated
together, drivers shall not enter the intersection, and during such time
the intersection shall be reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
F.
Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right green arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing said signal may turn right. When a left green
arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may turn left. When a
vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may go
straight ahead. When a green arrow is exhibited together with a red or
a yellow lens, drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement
permitted by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and
pedestrians proceeding from another direction on a green indication.
G.
Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not
proceed, and any driver approaching the intersection or a marked stop
line shall stop at such point unless so close to the intersection that a
stop cannot be made in safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow
is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to
make the movement permitted by such arrow.
H.
In accordance with the foregoing, the intersections listed in § 260-74
of this chapter are hereby declared to constitute traffic signal
intersections, and said § 260-74 is hereby specifically incorporated in
this section.
I.
Every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance approaching
an intersection of ways where there exists facing him an official sign
bearing the word "stop" and authorized by this section, said sign having
apart from this regulation the written approval of the Department of
Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and such approval
being in effect, shall, before proceeding through the intersection, bring
A.
§ 260-39 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-40
1:454
§ 260-41. Roadway divisions.
Upon such roadway as are divided by a parkway, grass plot, reservation,
viaduct, subway or by any structure or area, drivers shall keep to the right
of such a division except when otherwise directed by an officer, signs,
signals or markings.
§ 260-42. Underpasses, overpasses and intersections with islands.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been
separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at any
intersection of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers of vehicles
shall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals or markings.
§ 260-43. Driving on roads under construction or repair.
No operator shall enter upon the road surface of any street or highway
or section thereof when, by reasons of construction, surface treatment,
maintenance or the like or because of some unprotected hazard, such road
surface is closed to travel and one or more signs, lights or signals have
been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the street
or highway is not to be used or when so advised by an officer, watchman,
member of a street or highway crew or employee of the City, either audibly
or by signals.
§ 260-44. Driving on sidewalks.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
such vehicle, railway car or other conveyance to a complete stop at
such point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line or, if a point is not
so marked, then at a place between said stop sign and the nearer line
of the street intersection. In the case of a line of two or more vehicles
approaching such stop sign, the drivers of the second and third vehicles
in line in any group shall not be required to stop more than once before
proceeding through the intersection.
This section shall not apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by an
officer or by a lawful traffic regulating sign, signal or device, or except
as provided in § 260-51C of this chapter.
B.
In accordance with the foregoing, the streets listed in §§ 260-73 and
260-73.1 of this chapter are hereby declared to constitute isolated
stop streets, and said §§ 260-73 and 260-73.1 are hereby specifically
incorporated in this section. [Amended 9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-97]
C.
§ 260-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-45
1:455
§ 260-45. Prohibited U-turns.
No operator shall back or turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the direction
opposite to that in which said vehicle is headed or traveling on the streets
listed in § 260-76.
§ 260-46. Prohibited turns.
§ 260-47. Driving through safety zones or controlled areas.
§ 260-48. Riding in certain areas of vehicles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of a vehicle
not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is
in motion. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
§ 260-49. Commercial vehicles excluded.
Right turns. No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn at the
intersections listed in § 260-77 and in the direction specified.
A.
Left turns. No driver of a vehicle shall make a left turn at the
intersections listed in § 260-77 and in the direction specified.
B.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, except on signal from a
police officer, to drive the same over or through a safety zone.
A.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle entering Westover
Industrial Air Park West, except on a signal from a security police,
guard or watchman, to drive the same through a safety zone or
controlled area. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding $20 for each offense.
B.
Commercial motor vehicles having a carrying capacity of more than two
tons are excluded from the streets listed in § 260-79, except when said
commercial motor vehicles are delivering goods to or taking goods from
points on these said streets.
A.
This section shall not apply to heavy commercial vehicles going to
or coming from places upon said streets for the purpose of making
deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise to or similar collections
from abutting land or buildings or adjoining streets or ways to which
access cannot otherwise be gained; or to vehicles used in connection
with the construction, maintenance and repair of said streets or public
utilities therein; or to federal, state, municipal or public service
corporation owned vehicles.
B.
§ 260-45 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-49
1:456
ARTICLE VII
Funerals and Other Processions
§ 260-50. Identification of funerals.
A funeral composed entirely or partly of a procession of vehicles shall be
identified as such by means of black pennants bearing a purple symbol
attached to both the first and last vehicles.
§ 260-51. Rights and duties of drivers.
It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession to
keep as near to the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and to follow
the vehicle ahead as closely as is practicable and safe.
A.
At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the driver
of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one
required to stop for a red or red and yellow indication.
B.
At an intersection where a lawful stop sign exists, the driver of the first
vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required
to stop before proceeding through the intersection.
C.
§ 260-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-51
1:457

ARTICLE VIII
Tow-Away Zones
§ 260-52. Authorization to tow vehicles. [Amended 9-1-2009]
§ 260-53. Fees. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council hereby imposes upon the owner of any vehicle moved or
towed to a convenient place under the provisions of this article the following
fees:
§ 260-54. Liability for damage.
The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising out of
negligence cause to a vehicle in the course of removal and storage.
§ 260-55. Towing zones.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D, as amended,
the City Council of the City of Chicopee hereby enacts the following
regulations authorizing the removal to a convenient place of vehicles
parked or standing in such manner or in such areas as are hereinafter
described on any way under the control of the City of Chicopee.
Vehicles specifically exempt by Chapter 322 of the Acts of 1961 shall
not, however, be subject to such removal.
A.
The moving or towing of vehicles under the provisions of this article
and under Article IV, § 260-28, Parking of commercial vehicles, with
gross vehicular weight of more than 6,000 pounds shall be by and at
the direction of the Chief of Police or such other officers that the Chief
of Police may designate. [Amended 2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5]
B.
A. Removal or towing fee: not to exceed $12.
Storage fees:
(1) Not to exceed $2 for any twenty-four-hour period.
(2) Not to exceed $1.50 for any period less than 24 hours.
B.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following places.
Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section, except those
specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place
under the direction of an officer of the Police Department, and the
owner of the vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to the
cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in § 260-53 of this
article.
Upon any way in such a manner as to impede the removal or
plowing of snow or ice.
(1)
(2) Upon any sidewalk.
A.
§ 260-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-55
1:459
§ 260-56. Posting of signs required.
The provisions of § 260-55B shall be effective only during such time as
a sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend "Tow-Away
Zone" are installed, erected, maintained and located so as to be visible to
approaching drivers, said signs to be appended above or incorporated into
the legend of parking prohibition signs.
§ 260-57. Maintenance of records.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or removed
under the provisions of this article. Such record shall be retained for two
years and shall contain the following information:
Upon a way within five feet of a marked crosswalk. [Amended
4-21-2009 by Ord. No. 09-86]
(3)
(4) Upon any way within 20 feet of an intersecting way, except alleys.
(5) Upon a way within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of the way.
(6)
(7) In front of a public or private driveway.
Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
(8)
(9) Upon any treebelt or median strip.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park on any of the ways or parts
of ways hereinafter described and during the periods of time set forth.
Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this subsection, except
those specifically exempted by law, shall be removed to a convenient
place under the direction of an officer of the Police Department, and the
owner of the vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable to the
cost of such removal and storage, if any, as set forth in § 260-53 of this
article.
(1) In front of any public building, theater, church or hotel.
(2) In any bus stop or stand.
(3) In any taxi stand.
B.
The owner of any vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions
of this section shall also be subject to the penalties provided in MGL c.
90, § 20A.
C.
A. The registration of the vehicle.
§ 260-55 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-57
1:460
The location from which it was towed and the time and date of the tow
order.
B.
C. The location to which it was moved.
D. The fee charged for towing.
E. The name of the towing contractor, if any.
F. The name and rank of the officer who authorized the towing.
§ 260-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-57
1:461

ARTICLE IX
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 260-58. Adoption of regulations.
Chapter 409 of the Acts of 1962 (MGL c. 90, § 18A) is adopted by the City
of Chicopee and so constitutes the pedestrian regulations.
§ 260-59. Pedestrian traffic.
The court way between City Hall and City Hall Annex shall be blocked off by
the installation of post barriers with signs indicating pedestrian traffic only
at both ends of the court way.
§ 260-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-59
1:463

ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 260-60. Schedule I: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 260-18, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Northern Drive South -- --
Riverview Terrace
[Added 9-3-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-49]
-- -- In front of #5-7, #10 and
#16
Southern Drive South -- --
§ 260-61. Buses and school buses; Schedule II: Bus Stops; Schedule
IIA: Bus Parking Prohibited; Schedule IIB: School Bus Loading
Zones; Schedule IIC: Bus Parking Areas.
Schedule II: Bus Stops. In accordance with the provisions of § 260-24,
the following locations shall be designated as bus stops: [Amended
2-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-6; 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-2;
1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 13-3; 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 15-43;
8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 15-44; 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-51;
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-71; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-72;
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-73; 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-16;
5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-17; 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-18;
5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-19; 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. 18-20;
6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-24; 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-33; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-34;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-35; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-36;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-37; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-38;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-39; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No.
18-40;10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-41; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-42;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-43;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-44; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-45;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-46; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-47;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-48; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-49;
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-50; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-51]
PVTA Bus Stops
ID Bus Stop Description Address
365 New Ludlow / Loretta 2012 Memorial Drive
383 Britton / Hudson 400 Britton Street
A.
§ 260-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-61
1:465
PVTA Bus Stops
ID Bus Stop Description Address
501 Chicopee / Emerson 1083 Chicopee Street
510 Chicopee / Baptist 989 Chicopee Street
518 Chicopee / Charbonneau 931 Chicopee Street
524 Chicopee / Blanche 837 Chicopee Street
530 Chicopee / State Highway
116
751 Chicopee Street
538 Meadow / Chicopee 61 Meadow Street
539 Chicopee / Hope 632 Chicopee Street
545 Meadow / Alden 108 Meadow Street
547 Grattan Street and
Chicopee Street
583 Chicopee Street
548 Chicopee / Elizabeth 585 1/2 Chicopee Street
549 Grattan / Philathea 1140 Grattan Street
550 Grattan / Philathea 1149 Grattan Street
552 Chicopee / Warregan 553 Chicopee Street
553 Chicopee / Warregan 542 Chicopee Street
558 Chicopee / Ducharme 519 Chicopee Street
559 Meadow / Charpentier 251 Meadow Street
560 Chicopee / Narragansett 522 Chicopee Street
563 Meadow / Thomas 299 Meadow Street
568 Meadow / Ducharme 356 Meadow Street
569 Chicopee / Lawndale 477 Chicopee Street
572 Chicopee / Bonner 462 Chicopee Street
574 Grattan / Dallaire 786 Grattan Street
575 Meadow / Dorrance 411 Meadow Street
576 Meadow / Lawndale 422 Meadow Street
577 Grattan / Mary 757 Grattan Street
578 Chicopee / Cora 430 Chicopee Street
579 Granby / Stanley 1238 Granby Road
582 Chicopee / Daley 422 Chicopee Street
586 Grattan / Providence 709 Grattan Street
587 Grattan / Providence 688 Grattan Street
593 Chicopee / Dillon 415 Chicopee Street
§ 260-61 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-61
1:466
PVTA Bus Stops
ID Bus Stop Description Address
595 Montgomery / Unknown 474 Montgomery Street
596 Meadow / McKinstry 536 Meadow Street
597 Montgomery / Unknown 463 Montgomery Street
598 Chicopee / Jones Ferry 369 Chicopee Street
603 Chicopee / Jones Ferry 362 Chicopee Street
604 Memorial / (Park Inn 628) 450 Memorial Drive
605 Meadow / Chicomansett 577 Meadow Street
606 Grattan / Trilby 587 Grattan Street
608 Grattan / Hobson 480 Grattan Street
610 Chicopee / Elmer 329 Chicopee Street
611 Chicopee / Marshall 320 Chicopee Street
612 State Highway 141 /
Grattan
397 Grattan Street
613 Meeting House / Meadow 258 Meeting House Road
614 Meeting House / Meadow 275 Meeting House Road
615 Meeting House / Elcon 196 Meeting House Road
617 Meeting House / Elcon 183 Meeting House Road
618 Meeting House / Grocki 140 Meeting House Road
619 Meeting House / Grocki 141 Meeting House Road
620 Meeting House / Elmer 62 Meeting House Road
621 Meeting House 43 Meeting House Road
630 Montgomery / Willette 190 Montgomery Street
631 Chicopee / Oldfield 266 Chicopee Street
634 Chicopee / Oldfield 263 Chicopee Street
635 Grattan / Naomi 228 Grattan Street
636 Grattan / Naomi 229 Grattan Street
639 Chicopee / Lorraine 228 Chicopee Street
641 Chicopee / Poplar 204 Chicopee Street
642 Chicopee / Poplar 205 Chicopee Street
645 Montgomery / Ramp 62 Montgomery Street
646 Chicopee / Ramp 171 Chicopee Street
647 Chicopee / Ramp 172 Chicopee Street
648 Montgomery / Memorial 30 Montgomery Street
§ 260-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-61
1:467
PVTA Bus Stops
ID Bus Stop Description Address
650 Grattan / Montgomery 30 Grattan Street
651 Grattan / Montgomery 33 Grattan Street
663 Main / Grove 61 Main Street
664 Main / Canterbury 165 East Main Street
666 Court House Plaza 66 Main Street
673 Belcher / Maple 21 Belcher Street
676 State Highway 116 /
Sitarz
112 Chicopee Street
679 Grove / Court 48 Grove Street
681 Grove / Court 51 Grove Street
682 Old Chicopee / State
Highway 116
113 Chicopee Street
687 Broadway / Ramp 90 Broadway
692 Broadway / Paine 49-52 Broadway
697 Grove / Oak 114 Grove Street
702 Broadway / Summer 153 Broadway Street
703 Grove / Front 185 Grove Street
706 Broadway / Pine 180 Broadway
709 Broadway / Pine 195 Broadway
714 Front / Ellerton (opposite) 879 Front Street
715 Front / Ellerton 878 Front Street
— Broadway / Grove 386 Broadway
725 Broadway / Monroe 321 Broadway
726 Front / Wheatland
(opposite)
793 Front Street
727 Front / Springfield 265 Front Street
731 Chicopee Center 20 Cabot Street
733 Front / Grape 353 Front Street
735 Front / Orchard (opposite) 479 Front Street
737 Center Street and
Exchange
9 Springfield Street
738 Front / Cyman 581 Front Street
739 Front / Academy
(opposite)
657 Front Street
§ 260-61 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-61
1:468
PVTA Bus Stops
ID Bus Stop Description Address
746 Center / School 57 Center Street
747 Springfield / Pearl 107 Springfield Street
748 Broadway / Theodore 409 Broadway
749 Broadway / Theodore 412 Broadway
752 Springfield / Howard 104 Springfield Street
756 Cabot / Park 118 Cabot Street
761 Center / Union 135 Center Street
766 Springfield / South 199 Springfield Street
768 Springfield / Chapin 204 Springfield Street
773 Center / South 196 Center Street
775 Broadway / Western 521 Broadway
776 Broadway / Western 528 Broadway
779 Springfield / Gaylord 245 Springfield Street
781 Center / Hampden 221 Center Street
789 Springfield / Stearns 275 Springfield Street
790 Broadway / William 587 Broadway
798 Broadway / Abbey
Memorial
619 Broadway
799 Springfield / Casino 334 Springfield Street
805 Springfield / Henry Harris 351 Springfield Street
814 Springfield / Lemuel 377 Springfield Street
818 Springfield / Marion 384 Springfield Street
844 Springfield / Franklin 445 Springfield Street
845 Springfield / Franklin 446 Springfield Street
846 Center / Route 91 421 Center Street
849 Center / Route 91 428 Center Street
870 Springfield / Atwater 542 Springfield Street
873 Springfield / Mellen 529 Springfield Street
888 Springfield / Davenport 596 Springfield Street
893 Springfield / Davenport 621 Springfield Street
898 Center Street (opposite
628)
617 Center Street
899 Center / Health Clinic 626 Center Street
§ 260-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-61
1:469
PVTA Bus Stops
ID Bus Stop Description Address
927 Center / Plainfield
(opposite)
705 Center Street
932 Center / Plainfield 698 Center Street
1997 Court Street No. 2 Between District Court
driveways on Court Street
1998 Grove/Front South of 170 Grove Street
6032 Front / Grape 362 Front Street
6315 Carew / Prentcie 315 Carew Street
6350 Front / Orchard 480 Front Street
6351 Front / Cyman 590 Front Street
6352 Front / Academy 652 Front Street
6353 Front / Grove 966 Front Street
6441 Chicopee / Lorraine 233 Chicopee Street
6442 Chicopee / Forest 703 Chicopee Street
6444 Chicopee / Baptist 996 Chicopee Street
6445 Chicopee / Bolduc 936 Chicopee Street
6446 Chicopee / Adams 880 Chicopee Street
6447 Chicopee / Perrault 752 Chicopee Street
6448 Chicopee / Forest 674 Chicopee Street
6449 Chicopee / Lawndale 478 Chicopee Street
6450 Chicopee / Jones Ferry 372 Chicopee Street
6451 Meadow / Meeting House 667 Meadow Street
6452 Meadow / Caroline 157 Meadow Street
6453 Meadow / Elizabeth 176 Meadow Street
6454 Meadow / Thomas 302 Meadow Street
6455 Meadow / Meeting House 666 Meadow Street
6473 Meadow / St. Anthony 238 Meadow Street
6504 Front / CHS 810 Front Street
6633 Court Court Street No. 2
between 100 and 200 feet
north of the Fire
Department driveway
Schedule IIA: Bus Parking Prohibited. In accordance with the provisions
of § 260-24, the following locations shall be designated as areas where
bus parking is prohibited:
B.
§ 260-61 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-61
1:470
§ 260-62. Schedule III: Taxicab Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 260-24, the following locations shall
be designated as taxicab stands:
Name of Street Side Location
Center Street East From a point 60 feet south of
Exchange Street to a point 55 feet
south thereof
§ 260-63. Schedule IV: Service Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 260-24, the following locations shall
be designated as service zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Bemis Avenue Both Entire length, Bliss, Sunnymeade,
Goodhue, Elliot, Cornell, Palmer
Schedule IIB: School Bus Loading Zones. In accordance with the
provisions of § 260-24, the following locations shall be designated as
school bus loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Bonneville Avenue East From the intersection of Front Street
for a distance of 100 feet
Front Street South Between Bonneville Avenue and Szot
Park entrance
Trilby Avenue
[Added 4-18-1995
by Ord. No. 95-15]
North From Grattan Street for a distance of
250 feet to the end of the school
fence
C.
Schedule IIC: Bus Parking Areas. In accordance with the provisions of
§ 260-24, the following locations shall be designated as bus parking
areas:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Southwick Street North 2:00 p.m. to
2:30 p.m./Any
day
Entire length
Springfield Street
[Added 6-18-2013
by Ord. No. 13-15]
West 1:30 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Between Howard
Street and Pleasant
Street
D.
§ 260-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-63
1:471
Name of Street Side Location
Springfield Street West From the alley at 58 Springfield
Street to a point 30 feet north
thereof
§ 260-64. Schedule V: Loading Zones.
The following locations shall be designated as loading zones and parking
shall be prohibited:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cabot Street -- All 61 Cabot Street
Center Street West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
From Chestnut Street to
a point 50 feet south
thereof
East Street West All From Rochester Street to
Carew Street
East Street Avenue -- 5:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.
On the easterly side of
the intersection of East
Street for a distance of 30
feet
Forest Street North All From Chicopee Street to
a point 50 feet west
thereof
Front Street -- 15 mins./All 325 Front Street
Percy Street
[Repealed
12-7-1996 by Ord.
No. 97-3]
Thaddeus Street
[Added 6-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-44]
Ward 8
side
5:30 a.m. to
4:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday
Starting at a point 10 feet
from the end of Arnold's
Meats' property for a
distance of 150 feet
§ 260-65. Schedule VI: No Parking Any Time.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the following streets or
highways, or parts thereof:
§ 260-63 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:472
Name of Street Side Location
Abbey Street [Added
12-4-2018 by Ord. No.
18-58]
Within 20 feet to the west of the
driveway to 27 Tremont Street and
within 5 feet to the east of the
driveway to 27 Tremont Street
Abbey Street [Added
4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-10; repealed
12-4-2018 by Ord. No.
18-59]
Abbey Street [Added
4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-11]
South In front of House No. 33 for a
distance of 52 feet
Academy Street [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-70]
Both Entire length
Academy Street
[Repealed 10-18-2016
by Ord. No. 16-67]
Academy Street [Added
12-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-66; repealed
10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-69]
Adams Street South Entire length
Alden Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-53]
Right Entire length
Alvord Avenue [Added
1-15-2013 by Ord. No.
13-4]
Even/
North
Entire length
Alvord Avenue South From a point 230 feet east of
Broadway east around the curve for
a distance of 112 feet
Applewood Drive East From Pendleton Avenue to Partridge
Lane
Arcade Street [Added
9-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-40]
East Before the intersection of Trilby
Avenue, 42 feet south of the
intersection to corner
Arcade Street West From Worthington Street to Columba
Street
Archie Street South At the intersection of Wheatland
Avenue from the P.C. to a point 60
feet west thereof
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:473
Name of Street Side Location
Arlington Street South From Broadway to a point 25 feet
east thereof
Artisan Street [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No.
01-75; repealed
4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-14]
Artisan Street [Added
4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-15]
North From the corner of Chicopee Street
for a distance of 50 feet or a point
immediately following the walkway
to the street to the corner
Artisan Street [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No.
01-75]
South From the corner of Chicopee Street
for a distance of 75 feet
Ash Street [Added
9-19-1996 by Ord. No.
96-82]
Both Entire length
Ashgrove Street [Added
6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
98-34]
South For a distance of 60 feet from the
intersection of Grattan Street
Asinof Avenue [Added
6-26-2003 by Ord. No.
03-26]
-- 20 feet from its intersection with
Springfield Street
Atkins Street [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-30]
North From the corner of Atkins Street and
Prospect Street for a distance of 50
feet
Atkins Street [Added
9-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-62]
North From driveway to corner of north
side, approximately 75 feet
Atkins Street [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-29]
South From the corner of Atkins Street and
Prospect Street for a distance of 50
feet
Auburn Street North Entire length
Auburn Street South From Grape Street to a point 100
yards east thereof
Austin Street [Added
9-19-2002 by Ord. No.
02-51]
South From house #91 to house #115
Baltic Avenue [Added
9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-98]
Both 50 feet from Baltic Avenue to Grattan
Street
Baltic Avenue North From Grattan Street to Fair Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:474
Name of Street Side Location
Baptist Avenue [Added
9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
13-16]
Both Entire length
Baril Lane [Added
1-15-2019 by Ord. No.
19-3]
South 50 feet from the intersection of
Granby Road
Basil Road [Added
7-1-2008 by Ord. No.
08-31]
-- For a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection of Burnett Road
Beauchamp Terrace East From East Street to a point 400 feet
therefrom
Beauchamp Terrace North From East Street to a point 160 feet
west thereof
Beauchamp Terrace South From East Street to a point 135 feet
west thereof
Beaudry Avenue North From Montcalm Street to Memorial
Drive
Beaudry Avenue South For a distance of 20 feet in both
directions on either side of the
entrance to the Fairhaven parking lot
directly behind the apartment
building
Belcher Street East From East Main Street to Maple
Street
Belcher Street [Added
9-22-1996 by Ord. No.
94-59A]
West 20 feet from the intersection of East
Main Street (no parking here to
corner)
Belcher Street West From Walnut Street to a point 90 feet
therefrom
Bellevue Avenue North 50 feet from end of street east and
west
Bemis Street Both From a point 10 feet from the
entrance to Birch Manor Park to a
point 10 feet from the entrance to
Birch Manor Park
Bemis Street Both From Skeele Street to Nash Field
Bemis Street [Added
2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
16-6]
East From the entrance to Birch Bark
Place to the corner of Chicopee
Street
Bemis Street [Added
12-20-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-177]
North For a distance of 75 feet from the
corner of Chicopee Street
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:475
Name of Street Side Location
Beverley Street Both From Chicopee Street to a point 100
feet therefrom
Blanan Drive [Added
10-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-27; amended
9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
13-19]
South For a distance of 45 feet from the
intersection of Burnett Road (no
parking here to corner)
Blanan Drive [Added
9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
13-18]
South For a distance of 150 feet from the
intersection of Blanan Drive and
Burnett Road
Bliss Street South From Wheatland Avenue to Bemis
Avenue
Britton Street [Added
6-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-27]
-- In front of 308 Britton Street
Britton Street [Added
2-21-2012 by Ord. No.
12-02]
North At 400 Britton Street for a distance
of 50 feet to include pedestrian
crossing area (parking prohibited
between signs)
Britton Street North From Memorial Drive to a point 99
feet west thereof
Britton Street [Added
5-15-2012 by Ord. No.
12-18]
NorthwestIn front of 400 Britton Street from
crosswalk additional 105 feet across
the front of Fairhaven Apartments for
a total of 155 feet (no parking
between signs)
Britton Street South From College Street to a point 99
feet west of Memorial Drive
Britton Street South From College Street to Royal Street
Broadway [Added
1-20-1998 by Ord. No.
98-7]
Both At the intersection of Abbey
Memorial Drive and Phillipa Avenue
in the northerly direction for
approximately 700 feet ending at the
intersection of Williams Street
Broadway East From a point 25 feet north of
Cochran Street to a point 50 feet
south of Cochran Street
Broadway East From St. James Avenue to Hendricks
Street
Broadway East From St. James Avenue to Theodore
Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:476
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway [Added
3-18-1997 by Ord. No.
97-14]
East From the intersection of Broadway
and Monroe to a point 100 feet
southerly
Broadway North From Cochran Street to a point 20
feet therefrom
Broadway [Added
1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
09-67]
West In front of 70 Broadway
Broadway [Added
1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
09-68]
West In front of 98 and 99 Broadway
Broadway [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-18]
West South for 112 feet; sign between 414
and 424 Broadway, on property line
Broadway West From Grove Street to a point 563.91
feet south thereof
Broadway [Added
6-21-2005 by Ord. No.
05-159]
West From the traffic lights by First
Central Baptist Church to the
parking lot entrance
Broadway [Added
10-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-49]
West From Pine Street to Grove Street
Broadway [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No.
00-38]
-- In front of 297 Broadway
Broadway [Added
6-26-2003 by Ord. No.
03-22]
-- In front of 458 Broadway for a
distance of 50 feet from Goodhue
Avenue
Broadway [Added
12-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-108]
-- At the intersection of Broadway and
Medford Street (parking prohibited
here to corner)
Broadway [Added
12-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-109]
-- At the intersection of Broadway and
Sunnymeade Avenue (parking
prohibited here to corner)
Bromont Street Both Entire length
Buckley Boulevard
[Added 10-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-11D]
Both Entire length
Buckley Boulevard East From Prospect Street to a point 320
feet north thereof
Buckley Boulevard West From Prospect Street to a point 330
feet north thereof
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:477
Name of Street Side Location
Bullens Street East Entire length
Burnett Road [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-22]
North From Blanan Drive to Robak Drive
Burnett Road [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-23]
North From New Lombard Road to Basil
Road
Burnett Road South From the Massachusetts Turnpike
access to New Lombard Road
Burnett Road [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-21]
South From New Lombard Road to Blanan
Drive
Burnett Road [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-21]
South From Robak Drive to Basil Road
Burnett Road [Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No.
16-19]
South Entire length, in front of A.M.F.
Burton Street [Amended
11-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-99]
South From 26 Burton Street for a distance
of 130 feet to the corner of Beston
Street
Butler Avenue [Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No.
16-23]
West 28 feet from East Street (to fire
hydrant)
Cabot Street [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-31]
Between the entrance and exit to the
parking lot at 144 Cabot Street
Cabot Street Both Between Exchange Street and Front
Street
Cabot Street North From curbline of Center Street to a
point 175 feet east thereof
Cabot Street North From Park Street to Dwight Street
Cabot Street South From a point opposite Dwight Street
to School Street
Cadieux Drive [Added
2-5-2002 by Ord. No.
02-01; repealed
4-16-2002 by Ord. No.
02-23]
Call Street [Added
9-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-41]
Both From the intersection of Skeele
Street and Call Street to Nash Park
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:478
Name of Street Side Location
Carew Street East From East Street to Prentice Street
Carew Street [Added
3-4-2008 by Ord. No.
08-99]
West Between 328 and 340 Carew Street
Carew Street West From East Street to Quebec Street
Carlton Avenue Both Between Bemis Avenue and
Wheatland Avenue
Casino Avenue [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-43]
East From Hampden Street for a distance
of approximately 120 feet
Casino Avenue South From Springfield Street to Nonotuck
Avenue
Catherine Street Both From Chicopee Street to a point 50
feet therefrom
Celia Street [Added
6-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-02]
Both From Dare Way to James Street
Center Street [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord. No.
14-24]
-- From 694 Center Street, northerly
end, in a southerly direction not
exceed past the crosswalk at 628
Center Street
Center Street [Added
1-15-2019 by Ord. No.
19-4]
-- 25 feet after the intersection of
Nonotuck Avenue
Center Street Both From east curbline of Exchange
Street to a point 35 feet south
thereof
Center Street [Added
9-18-2012 by Ord. No.
12-25]
Both At Plainfield Street, in a southerly
direction to the Springfield line
(parking, stopping and standing
prohibited)
Center Street East From South Street to a point 200 feet
south thereof
Center Street East From Union Street to a point 50 feet
therefrom
Center Street [Added
6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-43]
North From Chestnut Street northerly a
distance of 20 feet from the
intersection of Chestnut Street
Center Street North From a point 30 feet west of west
curbline of Nonotuck Street to a
point 90 feet east of west curbline of
Nonotuck Street
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:479
Name of Street Side Location
Center Street North From west curbline of School Street
to a point 30 feet west thereof
Center Street South From a point 110 feet west of west
curbline of Nonotuck Street to a
point 60 feet east of west curbline of
Nonotuck Street
Center Street West From north curbline of Exchange
Street to a point 65 feet north
thereof
Center Street West From a point 20 feet south of
Plainfield Street to a point 2,583 feet
north of Plainfield Street (I-391
limits)
Champagne Avenue
[Added 9-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-81]
Odd From Granby Road to the
intersection of Daniel Drive (runs
along the property owned by the
Knights of Columbus and 67
Champagne Avenue)
Chapin Street North From Nonotuck Avenue to a point
100 feet west thereof
Chase Place Both Entire length
Cherryvale Street Both From New Ludlow Road to a point
500 feet south thereof
Chicopee Street [Added
1-20-1998 by Ord. No.
98-5]
-- Near Chapin School, 20 feet on both
sides of the crosswalk on the school
side
Chicopee Street
[Repealed 5-16-2017
by Ord. No. 17-13]
Chicopee Street [Added
9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-44]
-- For a distance of 25 feet from the
driveway at 570-572 Chicopee Street
in a southward direction
Chicopee Street [Added
2-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-8]
-- In front of 824 Chicopee Street;
parking prohibited between signs
Chicopee Street [Added
2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
16-7]
-- In front of 826 Chicopee Street;
parking prohibited between signs
Chicopee Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-56]
-- From the corner of St. Anthony
Street southerly to the driveway of
Willimansett Nursing Home for a
distance of 75 feet
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:480
Name of Street Side Location
Chicopee Street East From Grattan Street to Elizabeth
Street
Chicopee Street [Added
10-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-42]
East From Pole No. 138 to the corner of
Grattan Street
Chicopee Street
[Repealed 10-18-2011
by Ord. No. 11-48]
Chicopee Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-57]
South In the area of Birch Park Place for a
distance of 30 feet to the intersection
of Call Street
Chicopee Street [Added
11-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-51]
South In the area of 582 Chicopee Street,
25 feet to the corner of Ferry Street
and Chicopee Street
Chicopee Street [Added
6-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-57]
West From Artisan Street to Warregan
Street
Chicopee Street West From Erline Street north to the
Willimansett-Holyoke Bridge
Chicopee Street [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-75]
West For a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection of Warregan Street
Chicopee Street West From Whitman Street to a point 25
feet therefrom
Church Street Northwest
From Main Street to Grove Street
Church Street
[Repealed 9-18-2012
by Ord. No. 12-21]
Church Street [Added
9-18-2012 by Ord. No.
12-22]
Southeast Beginning at a point 470 feet from
the easterly line of Walnut Street
easterly to Broadway
Circle Drive [Added
9-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-15]
Odd Entire length
Clarendon Avenue
[Added 4-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-7]
Both 25 feet from the intersection of
Meadow Street
Clinton Street [Added
2-20-2001 by Ord. No.
01-04]
-- Abutting school property from South
Street to Chapin Street
Coburn Street West Entire length
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:481
Name of Street Side Location
Cochran Street [Added
2-1-2000 by Ord. No.
00-3]
Even From Broadway to Muzzy Street
Cochran Street North From Muzzy Street to Southwick
Street
Cochran Street South From Southwick Street to Waite
Avenue
College Street -- From James Street to Prospect Street
College Street North From Britton Street to a point 480
feet east thereof
College Street West From James Street to a point 200
feet north thereof
Columba Street [Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No.
16-20]
-- From pole No. 28 to Granby Road;
parking prohibited from here to
corner
Columba Street [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-44]
South From Granby Road to Thaddeus
Street
Columba Street [Added
9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
05-167]
South From Thaddeus Street to Grattan
Street
Columba Street [Added
11-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-106]
South From Ward Street to Montgomery
Street
Concord Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-50; repealed
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-57]
Concord Street [Added
10-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-44]
East Entire length of street
Concord Street [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-58]
West 25 feet from the intersection of Mary
Street to the corner
Cortland Street North From St. James Avenue to Medford
Street
Crawford Avenue Both Entire length
Crestwood Street
[Added 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-48]
East 50 feet to the intersection of East
Main Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:482
Name of Street Side Location
Crestwood Street -- From the corner of East Street for a
distance of 20 feet
Crestwood Street North From East Street to a point 150 feet
east of East Street
Crestwood Street
[Added 12-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-57]
North From Wildermere Street to the
driveway of 170 Crestwood Street
Crestwood Street
[Added 9-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 03-47]
West 50 feet to the intersection of East
Main Street
Cyman Drive (Between
Stanislaus School and
Church)
East From Front Street to a point 50 feet
south thereof
Cyman Drive East From Front Street entrance to Front
Street exit
Cyman Drive North From the P.C. to a point 65 feet west
thereof
Cyman Drive West At intersection of Front Street,
easterly portion, 60 feet to corner
Cyran Street Both From Irene Street to a point
approximately 200 feet west thereof
Dale Street East From Stebbins Street to Plymouth
Street
Dale Street West From Dallaire Avenue to a point 100
feet south thereof
Dale Street West From Grattan Street to McKinstry
Avenue
Dale Street [Added
9-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-54]
West From the intersection of Rolf Avenue
to the intersection of Hamel Street
Dallaire Street [Added
11-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-173]
North For 30 feet starting from Pole No. 1
Davenport Street
[Added 9-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-77]
-- From the intersection of Springfield
Street for a distance of 50 feet (no
parking here to corner)
Debra Drive [Added
12-4-2018 by Ord. No.
18-55
-- From 100 Debra Drive to 54 Debra
Drive
Debra Drive [Added
12-4-2018 by Ord. No.
18-60]
-- From the beginning to the right of
the driveway at 77 Debra Drive 125
feet to the property line
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:483
Name of Street Side Location
Delaney Avenue [Added
2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
16-4]
-- 190 Delaney Avenue; the frontage
along Delaney Avenue
Dennis Place East Entire length
Depot Street Both From Exchange Street to a point 75
feet north thereof
Depot Street Both From Exchange Street to Delta Park
Dewey Street [Added
2-20-2018 by Ord. No.
18-1; repealed
6-19-2018 by Ord. No.
18-23]
Donlyn Drive -- From the intersection of Fairview
Avenue easterly and westerly for a
distance of 50 feet
Dorothy Street East From Prospect Street to a point 150
feet north thereof
Dorrance Street North From Meadow Street west to the first
house
Dorrance Street South From Meadow Street to a point 100
feet therefrom
Doverbrook Road East From Pendleton Avenue to off-street
parking spaces at Meadowlark Lane
Doverbrook Road
[Added 8-7-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-71;
amended 6-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-32]
East From the tennis courts and garages
going in a southerly direction for a
distance of approximately 200 feet to
the end of the garages
Doverbrook Road West/
South
From Pheasant Way to Applewood
Drive
Ducharme Avenue South From Chicopee Street to a point 10
feet therefrom
Ducharme Avenue South From Chicopee Street to a point 100
feet therefrom
Duprat Street -- --
Dwight Street [Added
4-15-2008 by Ord. No.
08-03]
North From Cabot Street approximately
150 feet to the end of Fire
Department property
East Main Street North From a point opposite Maple Court
to a point opposite Rose Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:484
Name of Street Side Location
East Main Street North From the Springfield City line to the
Oxford Country Club at 651 East
Main Street (intersection of Carew
Street)
East Main Street [Added
11-20-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-97; repealed
4-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-9]
East Main Street [Added
4-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-8]
South From the intersection with Broadway
to Belcher Street
East Meadow Street West Entire length
East Street -- From the corner of Crestwood Street
for a distance of 20 feet
East Street -- From Hilton Street to a point 50 feet
northwest thereof
East Street -- From the corner of Muzzy Street for
a distance of 50 feet
East Street -- From a point 30 feet from Waite
Avenue to a point 30 feet from Waite
Avenue
East Street Both From Carew Street to a point 100
feet north thereof
East Street East From a point 220 feet south of
Crestwood Street to a point 185 feet
north of Crestwood Street
East Street North Between Hilton Street and East
Street Avenue
East Street [Added
3-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-09]
North From Southwick Street to Muzzy
Street
East Street South From Beauchamp Terrace to Mount
Royal Street
East Street South From the intersection of Belcher
Street south for a distance of 394
feet
East Street South From a point 25 feet easterly of first
entrance to MacArthur Terrace; 25
feet westerly of second entrance to
MacArthur Terrace
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:485
Name of Street Side Location
East Street [Added
2-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-08]
South From Muzzy Street to Southwick
Street
East Street West From Mt. Royal Street to a point 210
feet north of Beauchamp Terrace
East Street West From Rochester Street to Carew
Street
East Street Avenue Both Entire length
Edbert Street [Amended
9-21-2010 by Ord. No.
10-39]
-- From the corner of Edbert Street and
Memorial Drive to 19 Edbert Street
Edward Street South At the intersection of Grattan Street,
100 feet to corner
Eldridge Street Both From Newbury Street
Ellerton Street
[Repealed 4-17-2012
by Ord. No. 12-11]
Ellerton Street [Added
4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
12-12]
North From Front Street to Otis Street
Ellerton Street [Added
4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
12-13]
South From house No. 65 to Otis Street
Elm Street South From Grape Street to Bell Street
Elm Street South From Grape Street to Le Clair
Terrace
Emerson Street
[Repealed 6-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-33]
Emerson Street [Added
6-20-2017 by Ord. No.
17-34]
North Five feet north of the first driveway
to the corner
Emerson Street [Added
6-19-2007 by Ord. No.
07-52]
South For a distance of five feet on each
side of driveway in front of house No.
9
Emerson Street [Added
5-21-2002 by Ord. No.
02-27; repealed
6-19-2007 by Ord. No.
07-53]
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:486
Name of Street Side Location
Emery Street [Added
9-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-63]
West From driveway to corner of street,
approximately 75 feet
Emmet Street [Added
11-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-56]
South Entire length
Erline Street Both From Chicopee Street to a point 40
feet west thereof
Everett Street [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-24]
Odd For approximately 100 feet from
Britton Street to No. 21 Everett
Street
Exchange Street [Added
9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-43]
-- From the corner of Chestnut for 50
feet on easterly side (parking
prohibited here to corner)
Exchange Street Both From west curbline of Cabot Street
to a point 45 feet west thereof
Factory Place North Entire length
Fairview Avenue North From Academy Street to a point 75
feet west thereof
Farmington Street North From North Chicopee Street to a
point 60 feet therefrom
Ferry Street North From Chicopee Street to a point 130
feet west thereof
Ferry Street South From Chicopee Street to a distance
of 50 feet
Ferry Street [Added
11-20-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-95]
South From Chicopee Street to Skeele
Street
Fifth Avenue [Added
9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
13-17]
West In front of 66 Fifth Avenue, going
north from driveway 25 feet
Florence Street [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-85]
-- Approaching Chicopee Street (no
parking here to corner)
Front Street [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-43]
-- At the intersection of Academy Street
for a distance of 50 feet from
Academy Street in an easterly
direction
Front Street [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
12-20]
-- From the Annex parking lot entrance
westerly 65 feet (no parking between
signs)
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:487
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street [Added
10-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-90]
-- For a distance of 15 feet on each side
of exit driveway from Boston Barn
property
Front Street [Added
7-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-34]
-- From the southwest corner of
Bonneville Avenue for a distance of
30 feet
Front Street [Added
2-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-05]
-- Beginning at the easterly side of the
Chicopee Electric Light customerparking
driveway, easterly for 30 feet
Front Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-51]
-- Both sides of the exit from the
Chicopee Public Library for a
distance of 20 feet on each side of
the driveway
Front Street [Added
3-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-16]
-- Between City Hall Annex parking lot
and existing next door driveway
Front Street [Added
11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-26]
-- From the Front Street City Hall
Parking Lot, easterly to the
crosswalk in front of No. 279
Front Street [Added
5-22-1997 by Ord. No.
97-27]
Both From the intersection of Grove Street
for a distance of 390 feet
Front Street Both From Springfield Street to Cabot
Street
Front Street North From the east edge of the Central
Maintenance Garage to a distance of
20 feet east
Front Street [Added
2-19-2013 by Ord. No.
13-5]
North In a westerly direction, across from
274 Front Street City Hall Annex,
from crosswalk to parking lot
Front Street South At intersection of Cyman Drive west,
40 feet to corner
Front Street [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord. No.
04-92]
South From Wheatland Avenue to Ellerton
Street
Frontenac Street [Added
11-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-101]
East 75 feet to corner of Beauchamp
Terrace
Fuller Road Both Entire length
Fuller Street North From a point 200 feet east of
Sheridan Street to a point 235 feet
west of Sheridan Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:488
Name of Street Side Location
Fuller Street South From a point 215 feet east of
Sheridan Street to a point 185 feet
west of Sheridan Street
Gagne Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-58]
Odd For a distance of 45 feet from
Meadow Street
Gaspee Street [Added
4-15-2008 by Ord. No.
08-02]
Both Entire length
Gaylord Court
[Repealed 9-18-2012
by Ord. No. 12-23]
Gaylord Court [Added
9-18-2012 by Ord. No.
12-24]
East Entire length
Gaylord Street [Added
6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-41]
-- For a distance of 80 feet in front of
25 Gaylord Street (between the
signs)
Gaylord Street North From Grant Street to a point 526 feet
west thereof
Gaylord Street South From Springfield Street to Grant
Street
Gilbert Avenue East From the intersection of Newbury
Street for a distance of 30 feet
Gilbert Avenue West From the intersection of Newbury
Street for a distance of 165 feet
Gill Street -- At the end adjacent to Sara Jane Park
Gill Street [Added
12-6-2011 by Ord. No.
11-57]
Both In front of 127 and 128 Gill Street,
five feet from the driveway to the end
(no parking beyond this point)
Gladdu Avenue East From Britton Street to a point 100
feet north thereof
Gladdu Avenue West From a point 25 feet north of Britton
Street to the driveway leading into
the parking lot
Goodhue Avenue -- From the intersection of Wheatland
Avenue, southerly portion, to a point
100 feet west thereof
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:489
Name of Street Side Location
Granby Road Both From a point 25 feet south of the
southwest corner of Bay State Road
to a point 300 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Montgomery
Street
Granby Road Both From Chicopee Street to 70 Granby
Road
Granby Road East From a point 230 feet south of
Grattan Street to a point 290 feet
north of Grattan Street
Granby Road [Added
10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-51]
East From Simonich Drive to Swol Street
Granby Road [Added
5-15-2012 by Ord. No.
12-17]
North From Nelson Street to Beesley
Avenue
Granby Road West From a point 240 feet south of
Grattan Street to a point 200 feet
north of Grattan Street
Grandview Street
[Amended 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-31]
Both Entire length
Grant Street East Entire length
Grant Street [Added
12-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-17]
West From the intersection of Fairview
Avenue for a distance of 50 feet
south
Grape Street East From Fairview Avenue to Auburn
Street
Grape Street East From Front Street to the railroad
tracks
Grape Street [Added
10-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-60]
South 10 feet from the entrance to the
canal walk
Grape Street West From Springfield Street to Auburn
Street
Grattan Street [Added
9-1-2015 by Ord. No.
15-48]
-- From Trilby Avenue (in front of St.
Joan of Arc) for a distance of 25 feet
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:490
Name of Street Side Location
Grattan Street -- In front of 709-711 Grattan Street on
the odd side of the street
approximately 57 feet before the
intersection of Providence Street, 8
feet before the current crosswalk at
703 Grattan Street
Grattan Street Both From Montgomery Street to a point
200 feet west thereof
Grattan Street [Added
7-7-1998 by Ord. No.
98-44]
Both From the intersection of Trilby
Avenue for a distance of 20 feet
Grattan Street [Added
9-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-66]
East From the corner of Chapel Street
northerly to C.E.L.D. pole No. 59
Grattan Street [Added
3-4-2008 by Ord. No.
08-100]
East From the rear driveway facing
Grattan Street at 15 Chapel Street to
the corner of Chapel Street
Grattan Street [Added
11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-16]
East From crosswalk near Lucky Strike to
corner of Providence Street
Grattan Street [Added
9-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-65]
East From the corner of McKinstry
Avenue northerly to the Route 391
interchange
Grattan Street [Added
7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04-70]
Even On the lower side of 186-194 Grattan
Street to Ward Street
Grattan Street South From Kaveny Street to a point 40
feet therefrom
Grattan Street South From Mary Street to Marcelle Street
Grattan Street South From McKinstry Avenue to a point 40
feet west thereof
Grattan Street [Added
10-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-92]
West From the junction of McKinstry
Avenue south for a distance of 220
feet
Green Street Both From James Street to a point 100
feet therefrom
Green Street West From James Street to a point 100
feet north thereof
Greenwood Drive East From Lynnwood Drive to Applewood
Drive
Grove Street East From Church Street to a point 150
feet south thereof
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:491
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Street [Added
10-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-50]
North From Church Street to Grove Avenue
Grove Street [Added
10-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-51]
North From Grove Avenue to Broadway
Grove Street [Added
10-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-52]
South From the driveway of No. 366
easterly to Broadway
Grove Street West From Oak Street to Front Street
Hafey Street [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-52]
East For a distance of 200 feet from the
intersection of Fairview Avenue
Hamilton Street [Added
10-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-34]
East From Cochran Street to Page Court
(tow zone)
Hamilton Street [Added
10-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-33]
East For 20 feet north from Page Court
(tow zone)
Hamilton Street West Entire length
Hampden Street [Added
11-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-49]
-- Between Pole No. 40 and Pole No. 39
Hampshire Street North From North Chicopee Street for a
distance of 125 feet
Harding Street -- At the end of Harding Street in front
of Sara Jane Park
Harrison Avenue [Added
10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-55]
South From Wheatland Avenue for a
distance of 30 feet
Hastings Street [Added
2-18-1997 by Ord. No.
97-9]
-- In front of 46 Hastings Street from
CELD Pole #1 to the corner of Pine
Street
Haus Avenue [Added
3-19-2002 by Ord. No.
02-16]
Both Entire length
Hawthorne Street
[Added 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-81]
North From park property (Garrity Park)
for a distance of 80 feet
Hendrick Street North From border of the esplanade
Hendrick Street South From Broadway to Huntington Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:492
Name of Street Side Location
Henry Harris Street
[Added 6-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-32]
West Entire length
High Street Both From Walnut Street to a point 20 feet
therefrom
Hilton Street [Repealed
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-49]
Hilton Street [Added
12-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-61]
East From East Main Street to Reed
Avenue
Hilton Street [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-48]
East 75 feet from East Street to driveway
Hilton Street [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-47]
East 25 feet from Reed Street south, even
with hydrant across the street
Hilton Street [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-46]
West From East Street to Reed Street
Hilton Street [Repealed
7-7-1998 by Ord. No.
98-46]
Homestead Avenue
[Added 9-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-83;
repealed 11-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-102]
Honeysuckle Drive
[Added 6-6-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-46]
-- On the right side entering Westover
Road to Pendleton Avenue (four signs
spaced equally)
Honeysuckle Drive East From Lynnwood Drive to Pendleton
Avenue
Horseshoe Drive South
/West
/North
From Applewood Drive to Partridge
Lane
Howard Street [Added
1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
09-66]
South From Pole No. 2 to School Street
Huntington Avenue East From Beauchamp Terrace to
Hendrick Street
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:493
Name of Street Side Location
Huntington Avenue
[Added 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-44]
West 75 feet to the intersection of
Beauchamp Terrace
Huntington Avenue
[Added 11-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-27]
West At end of driveway, in front of 2
Huntington Street
Ingham Street [Added
10-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-11B; amended
10-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-11H]
South For a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection of Prospect Street and
Ingham Street
Ivy Street [Added
12-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-38]
Northeast Starting at 39 Ivy Street near pole 4
and ending at 102 Penn Street near
front walk after hydrant (no parking
between signs)
Jackson Street [Added
10-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-35]
-- In front of 36 Jackson Street
Jackson Street Both From Sheridan Street to a point 145
feet therefrom
Jackson Street [Added
6-16-2009 by Ord. No.
09-01]
West Between CEL pole no. 2 and pole no.
3
Jacob Street East Entire length
James Street Both From a point 150 feet east of
Montcalm Street to a point 150 feet
west of Montcalm Street
James Street [Added
4-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-11]
South Between 688 James Street and 724
James Street
Jamrog Drive Both From Memorial Drive to a point
1,586 feet east thereof
Johnnycake Hollow Road East From a point 50 feet from Burnett
Road
Johnson Avenue South Entire length
Johnson Road [Added
4-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-15]
East A distance of 100 feet northerly and
southerly of the Job Corp's middle
entrance
John Street South Entire length
Jones Ferry Road Both From Chicopee Street to a point 490
feet west thereof
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:494
Name of Street Side Location
Kaveney Street
[Amended 4-17-2007
by Ord. No. 07-35]
South From the corner of Grattan Street for
a distance of 25 feet
Kaveney Street Southeasterly
For a distance of 50 feet
Keddy Boulevard Both From Memorial Drive to a point 300
feet therefrom
Keeler Avenue North From Montcalm Street for a distance
of 125 feet
Kimball Street West Entire length
Lafayette Street [Added
4-21-2009 by Ord. No.
09-84]
South 20 feet in from the crosswalk
Lafleur Drive Both From Nash Street to Norman Street
Lagadia Street South From Garrity Street westerly to the
end of Lagadia Street
Langevin Street South From Montcalm Street to a point 50
feet west thereof
Lauretta Street East From New Ludlow Road to a point
200 feet therefrom
Lavalle Avenue [Added
11-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-80]
North Entire length
Lawndale Street Both From Chicopee Street to a point 250
feet east thereof
Lawndale Street Both From Meadow Street to a point 250
feet west thereof
Lawrence Road East From Granby Road to a point 170
feet north thereof
Lawrence Road West From Granby Road to a point 135
feet north thereof
Leary Avenue North From Grattan Street to a point 50
feet therefrom
Leary Avenue [Repealed
4-19-2005 by Ord. No.
05-125]
Leclaire Terrace North From the easterly extension to a
point 49 feet therefrom
Leclaire Terrace South From the west end of the westerly
extension to a point 34 feet east
thereof
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:495
Name of Street Side Location
Lemay Street North Entire length
Lemay Street South From Mill Street to a point 60 feet
west thereof
Lemuel Avenue
[Amended 11–16-2010
by Ord. No. 10-45]
North From Stearns Terrace to Hampden
Street
Lemuel Avenue [Added
8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
10-32]
South From Highland Avenue to Hampden
Street
Leonard Street [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
06-01]
East Entire length
Leslie Street [Added
4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-13]
Both 25 feet from the intersection of
Chicopee Street to the corner
Lincoln Street Both From Broadway to a point 20 feet
south thereof
Linden Street Both From Maple Street to a point 50 feet
south thereof
Linden Street East From the northerly street line of
Maple Street to a point 100 feet
therefrom
Lord Terrace [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-86]
East From Tardy Road south to the end of
pavement
Lord Terrace [Added
9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
05-169]
At the south end south across the
end of the pavement
Lord Terrace South
[Added 6-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-65;
repealed 9-6-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-168]
Lower Prospect Street
[Added 6-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-04]
North From Yelle Street to Factory Street
Lynnwood Drive South
/West
From Honeysuckle Drive to
Greenwood Terrace
Madison Street [Added
6–15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-28]
-- In front of 32 and 46 Madison Street
(no parking this side of street)
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:496
Name of Street Side Location
Madison Street South From Broadway to a point 30 feet
east thereof
Main Street North From Broadway to a point 163 feet
west thereof
Main Street [Added
12-19-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-85]
South Westerly from the entrance of the
post office parking lot a distance of
20 feet
Maple Street Both From Linden Street to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Maple Street North From the easterly street line of
Linden Street to a point 50 feet
therefrom
Maple Street [Added
2-17-2015 by Ord. No.
15-14]
South Entire length
Marcelle Street North From Grattan Street for a distance of
200 feet west
Marion Street North From a point 173 feet from Hampden
Street to a point 150 feet therefrom
Marion Street North From the corner of Springfield Street
to the second driveway for an
approximate distance of 155 feet
Marion Street South From the corner of Hampden Street
for a distance of 40 feet
Marlborough Street Both From St. James Avenue to a point 75
feet therefrom
Mary Street [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-80]
South At the junction of Grattan Street for a
distance of 100 feet (no parking here
to corner)
McCarthy Avenue
[Added 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-14]
-- From fire hydrant towards College
Street (parking prohibited from here
to corner)
McKinley Avenue
[Added 6-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-34]
North From Franklin Street to Marion
Street
McKinley Avenue
[Added 11-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-79]
West Opposite driveway at 49 McKinley
Avenue
McKinstry Avenue
[Added 10-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-45]
Between house Nos. 646 and 656 for
a distance of 20 feet
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:497
Name of Street Side Location
McKinstry Avenue Both From the east side of Meadow Street
easterly for a distance of 160 feet
McKinstry Avenue
[Amended 11-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-79]
North From the corner of Granby Road and
McKinstry Avenue to property at 972
McKinstry Avenue for an
approximate distance of 200 feet
McKinstry Avenue South From the westerly curb line of
Granby Road to a point 75 feet west
thereof
McKinstry Avenue South From Grattan Street to Arcade Street
Meadowlark Lane Southeast From Doverbrook Road to Partridge
Lane
Meadow Street [Added
1-20-1998 by Ord. No.
98-4]
Near Chapin School, 20 feet on both
sides of the crosswalk on the school
side
Meadow Street [Added
2-17-2015 by Ord. No.
15-13]
Both From Meetinghouse Road to
Stedman Street
Meadow Street [Added
10-1-1996 by Ord. No.
96-87; amended
10-1-1996 by Ord. No.
96-88]
Both From Roy Street to Meetinghouse
Road
Meadow Street East Between signs at the driveway at 5
Meadow Street for a distance of
about 25 feet south (vicinity of the
park)
Meadow Street [Added
11-18-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-39]
East In front of 223-225 Meadow Street,
beginning at Gagne Street, for a
distance of 40 feet
Meadow Street West From Meetinghouse Road to the
General John J. Stefanik School fence
Meetinghouse Road -- From Chicopee Street
Meetinghouse Road South Entire length
Mellen Street [Added
7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
04-69]
Both At intersection with Newbury Street
for a distance of 50 feet
Mellen Street [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord. No.
14-25]
West
(Dana
Park)
From Newbury Street for a distance
of 30 feet
Melvin Street Both From Chicopee Street to a point 50
feet west thereof
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:498
Name of Street Side Location
Mercedes Street North From Montgomery Street to a point
300 feet therefrom
Mercedes Street [Added
6-21-2005 by Ord. No.
05-157]
South Entire length
Miller Street Both From Exchange Street to School
Street
Mill Street [Amended
5-15-2000 by Ord. No.
00-44]
West Entire length
Monroe Street
[Repealed 9-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-46]
Monroe Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-47]
North From a point 60 feet west of
Broadway to Broadway
Monroe Street [Added
6-19-2007 by Ord. No.
07-51]
North Seventy feet in from Broadway (for
home on 317 Broadway)
Montcalm Street Both From a point 150 feet north of the
swimming pool to a point 150 feet
south of the swimming pool
Montcalm Street East From Beaudry Avenue to a point 90
feet therefrom
Montcalm Street East From a point 370 feet south of James
Street to a point 175 feet north of
James Street
Montcalm Street West From a point 100 feet south of
Britton Street to a point 200 feet
north of Britton Street
Montcalm Street West From a point 370 feet south of James
Street to a point 190 feet north of
James Street
Montgomery Street
[Added 10-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-29]
-- From driveway at 201 Montgomery
Street in a northerly direction for a
distance of 45 feet (parking
prohibited between two signs)
Montgomery Street
[Added 9-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-47]
-- In front of 221 Montgomery Street
on the odd side of the street
approximately 21 feet before the
intersection of Lagadia Street,
parking prohibited here to corner
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:499
Name of Street Side Location
Montgomery Street East From bridge over the Chicopee River
to Sheridan Street
Montgomery Street
[Added 11-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-46]
East 120 feet north of Parenteau Drive to
the driveway at 664 Montgomery
Street
Montgomery Street
[Added 10-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-57]
East From Parenteau Drive southerly 360
feet
Montgomery Street
[Added 11-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-47]
West From fire hydrant in a northerly
direction beyond House No. 693
driveway
Montgomery Street
[Added 10-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-56]
West From Chicopee Comp High School
driveway southerly 300 feet
Montgomery Street West From bridge over the Chicopee River
to Wells Avenue
Montgomery Street
[Added 11-17-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-69]
West From Orange Street extending for a
distance of 15 feet in a southerly
direction
Montville Street East In front of 43 Montville Street to the
end of the street
Montville Street Southeast From Montgomery Street for a
distance of 75 feet
Moore Street [Added
11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-23]
-- In front of 23 Moore Street for a
distance of 50 feet from property line
to property line (no parking between
signs)
Moore Street West From Fairview Avenue to Bennett
Street
Mt. Carmel Street North From Rivers Avenue to a point 20
feet east thereof
Munger Road [Added
2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
98-10]
Both Entire length
Murphy Court [Added
10-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-94; repealed
2-20-2018 by Ord. No.
18-3]
Musiak Drive [Repealed
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-88; 3-18-1997
by Ord. No. 97-13]
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:500
Name of Street Side Location
Muzzy Street Both From Yale Street to Shelton Street
Muzzy Street East From East Street to Yale Street
Muzzy Street East From Yale Street to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Nadeau Street [Added
5-17-2016 by Ord. No.
16-25; repealed
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-54]
Nadeau Street [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No.
16-55]
Northeast 15 Nadeau Street – entire length
Nash Street North From a point 80 feet from Chicopee
Street to a point 20 feet therefrom
Newbury Street -- From both corners of Eldridge Street
to a point 30 feet therefrom
Newbury Street [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-53]
Both At the intersection of Gilbert Avenue
for a distance of 25 feet
New Lombard Street
[Added 2-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-182]
South For a distance of 700 feet from the
intersection of Burnett Road to
landfill entrance
New Ludlow Road Both From Lauretta Street to Memorial
Drive
New Ludlow Road North From Cherryvale Street to a point 50
feet east thereof
New Ludlow Road North From Memorial Drive to Loretta
Street
New Ludlow Road South From Montcalm Street to Memorial
Drive
Nonotuck Avenue
[Added 10-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-58]
-- Easterly direction for a distance of
100 feet
Nonotuck Avenue East From Gilmore Street to South Street
Nonotuck Avenue
[Added 8-2-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-32]
North For a distance of 60 feet in a
westerly direction from Lemuel
Street (parking prohibited here to
corner)
Nonotuck Avenue South From Center Street to Gilmore Street
Nonotuck Avenue West From South Street to Chapin Street
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:501
Name of Street Side Location
Nye Street South From North Chicopee Street to a
point 50 feet east thereof
Oakdale Street [Added
1-22-2008 by Ord. No.
08-95; amended
5-20-2008 by Ord. No.
08-09]
Both Entire length
Old Field Road Odd From Chicopee Street to Kurtz Street
Old Lyman Road West From Britton Street for a distance of
500 feet
Old Montgomery Street West From Prospect Street to
Massachusetts Avenue
Old Pendleton Avenue
[Added 1-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-1]
Even Entire length
Olivine Street North From Chicopee Street to a point 100
feet therefrom
Olmstead Avenue
[Added 11-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-102]
North Off Springfield Street, entire length
Olmstead Avenue
[Added 2-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-03]
South Between driveway 15 feet each way
Orange Street [Added
11-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-68]
South From Montgomery Street extending
for a distance of 15 feet in a westerly
direction
Orange Street [Added
10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-60]
West For a distance of 150 feet from the
junction of Montgomery Street
Orange Street
[Repealed 2-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-26]
Page Court North Entire length
Paine Avenue -- From Hamilton Street for a distance
of 20 feet
Palmer Avenue North From Wheatland Avenue to Bemis
Avenue
Parker Street South From the "no exit" sign back 25 feet
Park Street -- Entire length
Park Street [Repealed
2-19-2002 by Ord. No.
02-10]
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:502
Name of Street Side Location
Partridge Lane East From Pendleton Avenue to Applewood
Drive
Pendexter Avenue Both From Chicopee Street to a point 300
feet east thereof
Pendexter Avenue Both From Meadow Street to a point 100
feet west thereof
Pendleton Avenue
[Added 11-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-40]
North From the entrance to Bellamy Middle
School east for a distance of 25 feet
Pendleton Avenue North From the entrance to the Bellamy
School east for a distance of 120 feet
Pendleton Avenue
[Added 9-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-28]
North From the edge of Greenwood Terrace
for a distance of 25 feet
Pendleton Avenue South From a point 200 feet north of the
Bellamy School driveway to a point
200 feet south of the Bellamy School
driveway
Pendleton Avenue South From the entrance to Doverbrook
Estates to Woodbridge Road
Pendleton Avenue South From Prospect Street to Taft Avenue
Percy Street South From Grattan Street to Trilby Avenue
Perkins Street -- From Exchange Street to a point 50
feet therefrom
Perrault Street North Entire length
Pervier Avenue West From Britton Street to a point 125
feet north thereof
Peter Street [Added
6-21-2005 by Ord. No.
05-156]
West Entire length
Pheasant Way South From Applewood Drive to
Doverbrook Road
Philathea Street East For 125 feet
Pine Street East From Belcher Street to Walnut
Avenue
Plainfield Street Both From the corner of Center Street
west to the railroad tracks
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:503
Name of Street Side Location
Pleasantview Avenue
[Added 8-4-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-37]
-- Before the intersection of
Pleasantview Avenue and Crawford
Street going west on the even side of
the street, 67 feet prior to the stop
sign
Pleasantview Avenue South From Crawford Avenue to a point
100 feet east thereof
Pleasantview Avenue South From Dale Street for a distance of 40
feet
Pleasantview Avenue South From Dale Street east for a distance
of 150 feet to driveway
Polaski Avenue -- In front of 76 Polaski Avenue (in front
of storm drain)
Poplar Street North 20 feet west prior to the bend
Poplar Street North From Dayton Street to a point 20 feet
west
Poplar Street South From Chicopee Street to a point 40
feet west
Prospect Street South From College Street east to the end
of Prospect Street
Prospect Street South From a point 180 feet east of Yelle
Street to Chicopee Street
Quarry Avenue West From Front Street for a distance of
25 feet
Reed Avenue [Added
5-15-2001 by Ord. No.
01-25]
-- Entire length, even side
Rivers Avenue East From Adams Street to Charbonneau
Terrace
Riverview Place Both From Lucretia Avenue south to the
end of Riverview Place
Riverview Place South From Chicopee Street to Lucretia
Avenue
Robak Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-43]
East From the intersection of Burnett
Road for a distance of 60 feet
Robak Drive [Added
3-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-82]
West From driveway to Burnett Road
Robak Drive [Added
2-17-2015 by Ord. No.
15-12]
West From the intersection of Burnett
Road for a distance of 80 feet
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:504
Name of Street Side Location
Robbins Road Both Entire length
Robinridge Road SouthwestFrom Greenwood Terrace to the dead
end of Robinridge Road
Robinridge Road West From Greenwood Terrace to a point
300 feet therefrom
Rochester Street West From East Street to a point 50 feet
north thereof
Rolf Avenue North From Grattan Street to Dale Street
Rolf Avenue [Added
5-16-2006 by Ord. No.
06-190]
North Between 202 Rolf Avenue and 216
Rolf Avenue
Royal Street West From the north side of Britton Street
to a point 150 feet south thereof
Royal Street West From Britton Street to Beech Street
Roy Street [Added
10-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-170]
North 35 feet from the curbline of Meadow
Street at the northeast corner of Roy
Street
Roy Street South From Chicopee Street to a point 125
feet east thereof
St. Anthony Street
[Repealed 9-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-48]
St. Anthony Street
[Added 9-6-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-49]
South From Chicopee Street for a distance
of 150 feet
Sandtrap Way -- From Putting Lane to Fairway Drive
School Street Both From Cabot Street to Center Street
School Street [Added
10-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-30]
East At intersection of Pleasant Street and
School Street in a northerly direction
for a distance of 40 feet (parking
prohibited here to corner)
School Street [Added
2-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-04]
East From Pleasant Street to South Street
School Street South From Cabot Street easterly for a
distance of 50 feet
School Street West From Gilmore Street to Center Street
School Street [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-41]
West From South Street to Gilmore Street
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:505
Name of Street Side Location
Shaban Drive [Added
2-17-2009 by Ord. No.
09-71]
East 100 feet back from corner, facing
McCarthy Avenue
Shaban Drive [Added
5-19-2009 by Ord. No.
09-90]
East 200 feet back from corner, facing
McCarthy Avenue (parking
prohibited here to corner)
Shaban Drive [Added
5-19-2009 by Ord. No.
09-91]
West Between first driveway and corner
(parking prohibited between signs)
Shepard Street [Added
9-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-48]
South For a distance of 100 feet beginning
at the corner of Chicopee Street
Sheridan Street
[Repealed 10-18-2016
by Ord. No. 16-64]
Sheridan Street -- From 15 Sheridan Street to
Memorial Drive
Sheridan Street [Added
7-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-33; repealed
10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-65]
Sheridan Street [Added
7-1-2008 by Ord. No.
08-30]
East From Central Avenue to Emmet
Street
Sheridan Street North From Memorial Drive easterly for
565 feet to a point 75 feet east of
Patrick Street
Sheridan Street [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-66]
South From Memorial Drive to Taylor
Street
Silvin Road [Repealed
4-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-11]
Silvin Road [Added
11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-30]
-- From Silvin Road to Dale Street on
the southeast side from driveway to
Dale Street
Simonich Circle [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-52]
East At the intersection of Circle for a
distance of 110 feet northerly
Skeele Street [Repealed
2-15-2005 by Ord. No.
05-117]
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:506
Name of Street Side Location
Slate Road Both Entire length
South Street [Added
11-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-105]
-- Between driveways of Nos. 109
through 115
South Street North From Ash Street to a point 150 feet
west thereof
South Street North From a point 350 feet west of Ash
Street to Center Street
South Street North From Nonotuck Street to Union
Street
South Street [Added
4-16-2002 by Ord. No.
02-24]
North At the intersection with School Street
for a distance of 25 feet from both
sides of the intersection (no parking
here to corner)
South Street [Added
9-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-67]
South Easterly at corner of Nonotuck
Avenue
Southwick Street East From East Street for a distance of 50
feet
Southwick Street East From East Street to a point 100 feet
south thereof
Southwick Street West Entire length
Springfield Street
[Added 9-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-76]
-- For a distance of 50 feet on both
sides of the intersection of Davenport
Street (no parking here to corner)
Springfield Street
[Added 10-17-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-73]
-- For a distance of 20 feet in the
vicinity of Elms College main
entrance (no parking here to
driveway)
Springfield Street
[Added 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-89]
-- For a distance of 30 feet from the
intersection of Gaylord Street south
(no parking here to corner)
Springfield Street
[Added 1-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 1106]
-- For a distance of 30 feet in a
northerly direction from the
intersection of Newbury Street (in
front of 435-437 Springfield Street)
(parking prohibited here to corner)
Springfield Street
[Added 4-15-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-14]
-- At the intersection of Northwood
Street (north and south) for a
distance of 50 feet
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:507
Name of Street Side Location
Springfield Street
[Added 5-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-07]
-- In front of 111 Springfield Street for
a distance of 20 feet in a southerly
direction to the driveway of the
Community Church
Springfield Street
[Added 3-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-12]
-- In front of 405-407 Springfield Street
for a distance of 20 feet; parking
prohibited here to driveway
Springfield Street Both From Center Street to Front Street
Springfield Street
[Added 2-21-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-04]
West From No. 54 to driveway (parking
prohibited here to corner)
Spring Street West From a point 68 feet from Front
Street to a point 90 feet south
thereof
Sterling Street -- Northerly end
Stewart Street East From Cote Avenue for a distance of
25 feet
Stewart Street [Added
9-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-50]
East From the intersection of Cote Avenue
to the intersection of Ludger Avenue
Stone Avenue [Added
10-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-72]
South Entire length
Sullivan Street South Entire length
Summit Avenue [Added
11-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-74]
South --
Summit Avenue
[Repealed 11-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-72]
Summit Avenue North From Windsor Street for a distance
of 85 feet west
Sunnymeade Avenue
[Added 9-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-62]
Both For a distance of 40 feet at the
intersection of Broadway
Sunnymeade Avenue
[Added 6-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-30]
South From Wheatland Avenue for a
distance of 100 feet
Szetela Drive -- Directly in front of the pond
Taylor Street Both From Sheridan Street to a point 510
feet southeast of Sheridan Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:508
Name of Street Side Location
Telegraph Avenue
[Added 3-15-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-9]
South From Montcalm Street to James
Street
Telegraph Avenue West Entire length of the Streiber School
property
Thaddeus Street [Added
2-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-27]
East From the corner of Naomi Street to
the first driveway (approximately 40
feet)
Thaddeus Street [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-82; repealed
2-18-1997 by Ord. No.
97-10A]
Theodore Street Both From Broadway to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Theodore Street South From Broadway to a point 50 feet
therefrom
Toronto Street [Added
3-17-2015 by Ord. No.
15-17]
West Between 29 Toronto Street and 39
Toronto Street; parking prohibited
between driveways
Tourtelotte Avenue
[Added 2-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-114;
repealed 5-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-128]
Towne Street -- In front of the entire driveway at 20
Towne Street for a distance of 20 feet
in an easterly direction
Trilby Avenue Both From Grattan Street to a point 40
feet west thereof
Trilby Avenue [Added
7-7-1998 by Ord. No.
98-45]
Both From the intersection of Grattan
Street for a distance of 20 feet
Trilby Avenue [Added
6-21-2005 by Ord. No.
05-158]
Approximately 20 feet in front of 51
Trilby Avenue starting from Stewart
Street
Vadnais Street East Entire length
Vadnais Street West From Route 33 to a point 100 feet
therefrom
View Street Both Entire length
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:509
Name of Street Side Location
Virginia Avenue [Added
10-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-28]
East Entire length
Volpe Drive Left From Grocki Drive through the loop
and "live" parking on the right-hand
side
Waite Avenue [Added
6-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-51; amended
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-55]
West Between Hendrick Street and
Beauchamp Terrace for
approximately 100 feet
Walnut Street -- From High Street to Church Street
Ward Street East 50 feet, eastern section
Warregan Street [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No.
01-73; amended
4-16-2002 by Ord. No.
02-22]
South From corner of Chicopee Street for a
distance of 35 feet
Washington Street
[Added 11-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-48]
South 25 feet from the intersection of
Madison Street to the corner
Watson Street East From East Street to a point 75 feet
therefrom
Wellington Avenue
[Added 1-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-4]
-- From Pole No. 4 east for a distance
of 250 feet
Wellington Avenue
[Added 10-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-50]
East For a distance of 25 feet, starting
from the intersection of Windsor
Street southerly from 85 feet to 110
feet
Western Avenue [Added
1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-05]
North For a distance of 30 feet from
Broadway (parking prohibited here
to corner)
Western Avenue South From Broadway to Wheatland
Avenue
Westover Road City -- --63
Westover Road [Added
12-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-84]
North From Casey Drive easterly for a
distance of 100 feet
63.Editor's Note: A plan showing the areas of no parking is on file in the office of the Clerk
and may be examined there during regular business hours.
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-65
1:510
Name of Street Side Location
West Street West From Abbey Street to a point 50 feet
north thereof
Wheatland Avenue
[Added 9-7-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-93]
East From Front Street to Archie Street
Wheatland Street
[Added 11-18-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-61]
-- From the intersection of Harrison
Avenue in a southerly direction for
30 feet
Whitman Street [Added
4-3-2018 by Ord. No.
18-12]
Both 25 feet from the intersection of
Chicopee Street to the corner
Wilfred Street West Entire length
Windsor Street [Added
10-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-36]
Both Entire length from the intersection of
Windsor Street and Summit Avenue
Wintworth Street
[Added 6-26-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-25]
East From Front Street to Elm Street
Wintworth Street West From a point 165 feet from the
intersection of Elm Street to a point
30 feet north thereof
Wintworth Street West From Elm Street to Front Street
Woodbridge Road Both From Pendleton Avenue to Partridge
Lane
Wood Street North Entire length
Worthington Street
[Added 2-1-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-7;
repealed 4-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-34]
Yale Street [Added
2-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-181; repealed
4-17-2007 by Ord. No.
07-34]
Yale Street [Added
11-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-78]
North For a distance of 21 feet from the
intersection of Yale Street and Muzzy
Street
Yelle Street Both From Prospect Street to a point 180
feet south thereof
Yvonne Street South From Chicopee Street to the railroad
tracks
§ 260-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-65
1:511
Name of Street Side Location
-- North From a point 200 feet west of
Lawrence Road to a point 200 feet
north of Nelson Street
-- South From a point 170 feet west of
Lawrence Road to a point 200 feet
north of Nelson Street
§ 260-66. Schedule VII: Time Limit Parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below, between the hours
specified for longer than the time indicated below:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Asinof Avenue -- 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day
From 13 Asinof Avenue to
Hampden Street
Bell Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
From Front Street to a
point 50 feet therefrom
Brandon Avenue North 1 hr./Any day Entire length
Britton Street
[Added 9-21-2010
by Ord. No. 10-38]
-- 30 mins.;
10:00 a.m. to
7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
400 Britton Street, in the
vicinity of the public
library entrance (for one
parking space)
Britton Street
[Repealed
5-15-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-38]
Britton Street
[Added 11-16-2010
by Ord. No. 10-47]
North 1 hr./Any day From 352-358 Britton
Street (between signs)
Britton Street
[Added 11-17-2009
by Ord. No. 09-23;
repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-47]
Broadway West 2 hrs./Any day From Belcher Street to
Pine Street
Broadway West 30 mins./Any
day
From Pine Street to
Summer Street
§ 260-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-66
1:512
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Broadway West 15 mins./Any
day
From Summer Street to
Walnut Street
Burnett Road Both 2 hrs./Any day In the vicinity of the M
and M Trucking Company
Cabot-Miller
(Chicopee Center)
Parking Lot
-- 2 hrs. Spaces 1 to 18
Cabot Street
[Added 11-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-56]
-- 15 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
From driveway to
entrance of 51 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street -- 1 hr. In front of 65 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street
[Added 11-19-2013
by Ord. No. 13-22]
East 30 mins./Any
day
30 feet from Exchange
Street in a southerly
direction
Cabot Street West 30 mins./Any
day
From Park Street to
Center Street
Cadieux Avenue
[Added 6-16-2015
by Ord. No. 15-36]
Odd 10:00 p.m. to
4:00 a.m./Any
day
Center Street
[Added 8-2-2011
by Ord. No. 11-34]
-- 30 mins.; 7:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
At 82 Center Street 20
feet past driveway in a
northerly direction
Center Street
[Added 8-2-2011
by Ord. No. 11-33]
-- 30 mins.; 7:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
At 82 Center Street 50
feet past driveway in a
southerly direction
Center Street -- 1 hr./Any day From 121 Center Street
to Nonotuck Avenue
Center Street
[Added 5-15-2001
by Ord. No. 01-26;
amended 8-7-2001
by Ord. No. 01-72]
-- 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
At 178 Center Street
between two driveways
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-66
1:513
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Center Street Both 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday,
holidays
excluded
Northerly from School
Street to Exchange Street
Center Street East 5 mins./Any
day
From a point 238 feet
south of Exchange Street
to a point 40 feet north
thereof (35 Center Street)
restricted to bank curb
service
Center Street East 1 hr./Any day From South Street to a
point 238 feet south of
Exchange Street
Center Street North 15 mins./Any
day
From Park Street to a
point 50 feet therefrom
Center Street North 30 mins./Any
day
East of the intersection of
West Street for a distance
of 30 feet (excluding the
20 feet from the
intersection)
Center Street Northwest
1 hr./Any day From Cabot Street to
Chestnut Street
Center Street South 2 hrs./Any day From a point 150 feet
west of School Street to a
point 50 feet therefrom
Center Street
[Added 2-18-1997
by Ord. No. 97-5]
South 15
mins./Monday
through
Saturday
From Ash Street to Union
Street
Center Street West 1 hr./Any day From Exchange Street to
Abbey Street
Center Street/
Springfield Street
West 1 hr.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 65 feet
north of the north
curbline of Exchange
Street to Front Street
Chapin Street North 1 hr./Any day From Springfield Street
to Nonotuck Avenue
§ 260-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-66
1:514
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Chicopee Street
[Added 9-18-2008
by Ord. No. 08-39]
-- 30 mins.; 5:00
a.m. to
2:00p.m./Any
day
To the corner of
Charbonneau Terrace
Chicopee Street
[Added 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 16-8]
-- 1 hr.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day
In front of 826 Chicopee
Street
Chicopee Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
In front of 832 Chicopee
Street
Chicopee Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
In front of 1016 Chicopee
Street
Chicopee Street -- 1 hr.; 5:00
a.m. to 2:00
p.m.
In front of 930 Chicopee
Street for the length of
business on block
Chicopee Street
[Added 9-21-2000
by Ord. No. 00-64]
-- 30 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 11:00
p.m./Any day
Beginning at 959
Chicopee Street for a
distance of 75 feet
Chicopee Street East 1 hr./Any day From Blanche Street to a
point 75 feet therefrom
Chicopee Street
[Added 9-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-69;
repealed
1-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-92]
Chicopee Street
[Added 1-22-2008
by Ord. No. 08-94]
West 30 mins.;
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Any
day
In front of 922-924
Chicopee Street
Chicopee Street
[Added 10-21-2014
by Ord. No. 14-32]
West 1 hr./7:00 a.m.
to 8:00
p.m./Any day
From John Street to
Whitman Street
Chicopee Street
[Amended
4-16-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-25]
West 30 mins./Any
day
From Leslie Street to a
point 40 feet south
thereof
Chicopee Street West 1 hr./Any day From Riverview Place to a
point 100 feet north
thereof
Chicopee Street West 30 mins./Any
day
From Tourtellotte Street
to Erline Street
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-66
1:515
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Chicopee Street West 2 hrs./Any day From Whitman Street to
John Street
Church Street
[Added 5-20-2008
by Ord. No. 08-08]
-- 30 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
In front of 71 Church
Street for a distance of
100 feet from the corner
of Walnut Street
Church Street South 30 mins./Any
day
From Grove Street to a
point 120 feet east
thereof
Church Street Southeast 1 hr./Any day From Walnut Street to
Grove Street
Cochran Street North 1 hr./Any day From a point 90 feet east
of Broadway to Hamilton
Street
College Street East 1 hr./Any day From James Street,
northerly for a distance of
200 feet
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-87]
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-88]
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-89]
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-86]
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-85]
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-84]
§ 260-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-66
1:516
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Dale Street East 1 hr./Any day From Grattan Street to
McKinstry Avenue
Dallaire Avenue North 30 mins./Any
day
From a point beginning
100 feet east of Grattan
Street to a point 30 feet
east thereof
Dallaire Avenue
[Added 9-1-1998
by Ord. No. 98-51;
repealed
5-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-29]
Dallaire Avenue
[Repealed
5-19-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-26]
Dwight Street
[Added 9-21-2004
by Ord. No. 04-96]
Southwest
30 mins. Corner of Dwight and
School Streets for a
distance of 65 feet on
each street
East Main Street
[Added 10-16-2007
by Ord. No. 07-74]
North 1 hr.; All/Any
day
In front of 145 East Main
Street
East Main Street
[Added 10-16-2007
by Ord. No. 07-75]
North 15 mins.; All/
Any day
In front of 151 and 155
East Main Street
East Main Street South 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
From Broadway to
Belcher Street
East Street
[Repealed
3-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-10]
East Street
[Repealed
2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-07]
East Street
[Repealed
2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-06]
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-66
1:517
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Ellerton Street
[Repealed
4-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-10]
Exchange Street -- 2 hrs./Any day In front of 111 Exchange
Street
Exchange Street
[Added 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 16-5]
-- 30 mins./Any
day
In front of 136 Exchange
Street
Exchange Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
In front of 136-140
Exchange Street
Exchange Street
[Added 3-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-15]
-- 1 hr./Any day From 200 Exchange
Street for a distance of
150 feet easterly from
Perkins Street
Exchange Street -- 2 hrs./Any day From a point 207 feet
from the intersection of
Chestnut Street to a point
62.72 feet east thereof
Exchange Street Both 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
From West Street to
Dwight Street
Exchange Street North 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 45 feet east
of Cabot Street to a point
40 feet east thereof
Exchange Street North 1 hr.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 85 feet east
of Cabot Street to a point
100 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Center Street
Exchange Street North 15 mins./Any
day
From Depot Street to a
point 143 feet east
thereof
Exchange Street South 30 mins./Any
day
From a point 45 feet from
the easterly curbline of
Cabot Street to a point 40
feet east thereof
Exchange Street South 1 hr.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
From a point 85 feet east
of the easterly curbline of
Cabot Street to Miller
Street
§ 260-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-66
1:518
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Exchange Street South 1 hr.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the east curbline of
Miller Street to a point
100 feet west of the west
curbline of Center Street
Fay Street Both 2 hrs./Any day Entire length
Forest Street
[Repealed
4-19-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-17]
Front Parking Lot
[Repealed
11-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-24]
Front Street
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-83]
Front Street [Added
9-1-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-69]
-- 2 hrs./Any day Between Canal Street and
315 Front Street
Front Street [Added
10-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-11C]
North 1 hr. In front of 291 Front
Street
Front Street [Added
10-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-29]
-- 2 hrs./Any day In front of 424 Front
Street
Front Street
[Amended
2-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-8;
2-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-9; repealed
2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-06]
Front Street
[Repealed
9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-49]
Front Street
[Repealed
2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-08]
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-66
1:519
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Front Street
[Repealed
2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-07]
Front Street
[Repealed
6-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-38]
Front Street
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-82]
Front Street
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-81]
Front Street [Added
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-91]
North 1 hr./Monday
through Friday
From Electric Light
Department office to 817
Front Street
Front Street
[Repealed
6-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-37]
Front Street South 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday,
holidays
excluded
From a point adjacent to
the north side steps of
City Hall extending
easterly to the driveway
opening which divides
City Hall from the City
Hall
Front Street South 30 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through
Friday,
holidays
excluded
4 parallel spaces adjacent
to City Hall Annex
Front Street
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-80]
Front Street South 1 hr./Any day From Grape Street to a
point 100 feet therefrom
§ 260-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-66
1:520
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Front Street South 1 hr./Any day From Wheatland Avenue
to Academy Street
Front Street City
Hall Parking Lot
[Added 11-19-2013
by Ord. No. 13-25]
-- 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
6 spaces located at the
easterly end of the
parking lot
Granby Road South 30 mins./Any
day
From the bridge to a
point 50 feet east thereof
Grattan Street
[Added 11-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-80]
East 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
From the driveway at 506
Grattan Street north for
40 feet
Grattan Street
[Added 8-2-2011
by Ord. No. 11-31]
East 1 hr. In front of 558 Grattan
Street
Grattan Street
[Added 5-15-2007
by Ord. No. 07-40;
repealed 8-2-2011
by Ord. No. 11-30]
Grattan Street
[Added 2-21-2012
by Ord. No. 12-03]
East 1 hr. 100 feet from Ward Street
Grattan Street North 1 hr. 250 feet up from 52
Grattan Street to Ward
Street
Grattan Street West 30 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Any day
From a point 185 feet
south of Trilby Avenue to
a point 50 feet south
thereof
Harvard Street West 1 hr./Any day From Cochran Street to
Madison Street
Hope Street North 2 hrs./Any day From Chicopee Street to
a point 20 feet therefrom
Lafayette Street North 30
mins./Monday
through Friday
From Grattan Street to a
point 100 feet east
thereof
Magnolia Terrace North 2 hrs./Any day From Springfield Street
to a point 50 feet
therefrom
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-66
1:521
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Main Street [Added
12-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-110]
-- 30 mins. West of 31 Main Street
for a distance of
approximately 100 feet
Main Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
In front of 103 Main
Street
Main Street
[Amended
12-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-108]
Both 2 hrs./8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Broadway to Grove
Street
Main Street South 30 mins.; 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Grove Street to a
point 170 feet west
thereof
Main Street South 2 hrs./Any day --
Montgomery Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
At 62 Montgomery Street
for a distance of 50 feet
Park Street Both 2 hrs./Any day From Cabot Street to
Chestnut Street
Pine Street -- 15 mins./Any
day
From 94 Pine Street to a
point 50 feet therefrom
Riverview Terrace
[Added 9-23-1999
by Ord. No. 99-86]
Both 2 hrs. From Front Street for a
distance of 150 feet
Roosevelt Avenue South 2 hrs./7:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Springfield Street
for a distance of 125 feet
St. Jacques Avenue North 1 hr./Any day From College Street to a
point 50 feet west thereof
School Street
[Added 9-21-2004
by Ord. No. 04-95]
Northwest
30 mins. Corner of Dwight and
School Streets, 65 feet on
each street
South Street North 2 hrs./Any day From 156 South Street to
Center Street
Springfield Street
[Added 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-35]
-- 2 hrs./Monday
through Friday
From Howard Street
south for 100 feet
Springfield Street
[Added 4-18-1995
by Ord. No. 95-12]
-- 15 mins./Any
day
In front of 250 Springfield
Street (one car space)
§ 260-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-66
1:522
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Springfield Street
[Repealed
5-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-14]
Springfield Street
[Added 5-16-2017
by Ord. No. 17-16]
East 15 mins./9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Any day
In front of 51 Springfield
Street
Springfield Street
[Added 3-15-2016
by Ord. No. 16-11]
East 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Between the north side of
the driveway at No. 123
to the south side of the
driveway at No. 111
Springfield Street
[Added 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-36;
repealed
5-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-15]
Springfield Street East 1 hr./Any day From Fairview Avenue to
Roosevelt Avenue
Springfield Street East 30 mins./7:00
a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Any day
From Sherman Avenue to
a point 100 feet north
therefrom
Springfield Street East 1 hr./Any day From Sherman Avenue to
Newbury Street
Springfield Street West 1 hr./Any day From Stearns Terrace to a
point 300 feet south
thereof
Springfield Street Both 1 hr.; 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./Monday
through
From Spring Street north
to the end of the Rivoli
building
Springfield Street
[Repealed
11-15-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-172]
Springfield Street East 1 hr./Any day From Sherman Avenue to
Newbury Street
Springfield Street West 1 hr./Any day From Stearns Terrace to a
point 300 feet south
thereof
§ 260-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-66
1:523
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Spring Street -- 2 hrs.; 8:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
6 spaces
Summit Avenue
[Added 11-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-73;
repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-50]
Summit Avenue
[Repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-49]
Tourtellotte Avenue South 15 min./Any
day
From Chicopee Street to
a point 100 feet
therefrom
Volpe Drive
[Repealed
11-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-102]
§ 260-67. Schedule VIII: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below, between the hours
specified below:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Berger Street Both 7:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m./Any
day
Entire length
Bonneville Avenue
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-79]
Brandon Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
§ 260-66 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-67
1:524
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Brightwood Street
[Added 2-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-01]
South 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
Entire length
Burton Street
[Repealed
11-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-97]
Casino Avenue
[Added 10-20-1998
by Ord. No. 98-65;
repealed
9-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-42]
Casino Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the corner of
Springfield Street to the
first driveway
Chicopee Street
[Added 11-21-2000
by Ord. No.
00-83C]
-- 6:00 p.m. to
7:00
a.m./Monday
through
Saturday
At 375 Chicopee Street
City Hall Annex -- 9:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./reserved
4 parallel spaces
adjacent to the City Hall
Annex on the south side
of Front Street the
Registry of Motor
Vehicles
Connell Street
[Added 11-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-82]
East 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Cyman Drive
[Repealed
9-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-84]
Deslauriers Street
[Added 3-21-2006
by Ord. No.
06-184]
East Monday
through Friday
From Westover Road
north for 200 feet
§ 260-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-67
1:525
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Eaton Street Both 8:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m./Any
day
Entire length
Falmouth Road North 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m./Any
day
From Brentwood Terrace
to Memorial Drive
Falmouth Road North 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./Any
day
From Route 33 to
Brentwood Terrace
Fanjoy Street
[Repealed
12-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-65]
Front Street
[Amended
1-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-6]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Academy Street to
Bonneville Avenue
Front Street [Added
9-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-82;
amended
9-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-83]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Bonneville Avenue
to Academy Street
Gaylord Street
[Added 12-20-2005
by Ord. No.
05-176; repealed
6-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-15]
Granby Road Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Any
day
From a point 50 feet east
of Chicopee Street to a
point 400 feet therefrom
Granby Road North 3:00 p.m. to
5:00 p.m./Any
day
From Chicopee Street to
a point 50 feet east
thereof
Hampden Street
[Added 4-18-2017
by Ord. No. 17-6]
-- 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
4:00
p.m./School
days
From the south driveway
of Bowe Street to
Stonina Drive
Hampden Street East 3:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m./Any
day
From Casino Avenue to
Center Street
§ 260-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-67
1:526
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Harrison Avenue
[Added 10-21-2008
by Ord. No. 08-53]
North 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
For 400 feet from
Wheatland Avenue
Holly Street [Added
10-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-43]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Holly Street [Added
12-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-113]
South 2:00 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Kendall Street East 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. and
1:30 p.m. to
2:30 p.m./
Monday
through Friday
when school is
in session
In front of Lambert
Lavoie School from
School from tree north
for 100 feet to sidewalk
Kendall Street East 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m./Any
day
From Plymouth Street to
a point 250 feet north
thereof
Kendall Street South 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
except school
buses
--
Kendall Street
[Added 1-20-2015
by Ord. No. 15-3]
East 11:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./Any
day
After the intersection of
Stebbins Street, heading
north towards Rolf
Avenue, for a distance of
50 feet
Kendall Street
[Added 10-21-2014
by Ord. No. 14-34;
repealed
1-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-4]
§ 260-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-67
1:527
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Lafayette Street
[Added 11-16-2010
by Ord. No. 10-43]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Chapel Street for a
distance of 80 feet
Lagadia Street
[Added 11-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-81]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Peter Street
westerly to the end
Laurel Street
[Added 2-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-02]
East 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
Entire length
Maple Street -- 7:30 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Area of St. George's
School
Middle Street West 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./Any
day
From Main Street to
Court Street
Moore Street
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-76]
Murphy Court
[Added 2-20-2018
by Ord. No. 18-2]
Both Entire length
Paine Avenue
[Added 3-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-17;
repealed
10-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-31]
Patrick Street -- 8:30 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Any
day
From Sheridan Street
west to corner
§ 260-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-67
1:528
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Percy Street [Added
10-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-96]
South 3:00 p.m. to
2:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday;
All day/
Saturday and
Sunday
From Grattan Street for
400 feet
Plymouth Street Both 2:00 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
Between Paradise Street
and Kendall Street
Rolf Avenue [Added
10-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-32]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
At 221 Rolf Avenue for a
distance of 18 feet after
driveway
Rolf Avenue [Added
5-16-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-45]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
From Kendall Street
easterly to Pole No. 18
Royal Street Both 1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m./Any
day
From Britton Street to
Beech Street
Rzasa Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-78]
Rzasa Drive
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-77]
South Street
[Added 2-18-1997
by Ord. No. 97-6]
South 7:30 a.m. to
3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the entrance of
Holy Name Church to the
end of Holy Name School
property
Springfield Street
[Repealed
6-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-42]
§ 260-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-67
1:529
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Springfield Street
[Added 6-21-2016
by Ord. No. 16-43]
East 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m./Any
day
Between the north side
of the driveway at No.
123 to the south side of
the driveway at No. 111
Springfield Street
[Added 11-15-2005
by Ord. No.
05-174]
East Any time/
Monday
through Friday
From the intersection of
Fairview Avenue in a
southerly direction to the
driveway before the Elms
College Admissions
building
Stearns Terrace North 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Any
day
Entire length
Stearns Terrace South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the corner of
Springfield Street to the
first driveway
Stebbins Street North 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m./Any
day
At intersection of
Windsor Street
Stebbins Street South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m./Any
day
From Windsor Street to
Sherbrooke Street
Stewart Street
[Added 4-18-1995
by Ord. No. 95-14;
amended
10-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-98;
10-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-98]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September
through June
From Trilby Avenue for a
distance of 80 feet in
both directions
Streiber Drive
[Added 4-18-2000
by Ord. No. 00-40]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Summit Avenue
[Amended
5-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-31;
repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-51]
§ 260-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-67
1:530
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Summit Avenue
[Added 11-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-70;
repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-52]
Summit Avenue
[Repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-53]
Summit Avenue
[Repealed
11-17-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-71]
Thaddeus Street
[Added 7-6-1995
by Ord. No. 95-30]
-- 6:00 a.m. to
8:00
p.m./Monday
through
Saturday
From 49 Thaddeus Street
to 117 Thaddeus Street
Trilby Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m./Any
day, September
to June
From Grattan Street to
Stewart Street
Van Horn Street
[Repealed
9-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-90]
Wheatland Avenue
[Added 9-7-2004
by Ord. No. 04-94]
West 8:00 a.m. to
2:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Front Street to
Harrison Avenue
Windsor Street
[Repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-54]
Windsor Street
[Repealed
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-55]
§ 260-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-67
1:531
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Yvonne Street South 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.; 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.; 7:00 p.m.
to 9:00
p.m./Any day
Entire length
§ 260-68. Schedule IX: Parking for the Handicapped.
In accordance with § 260-27A, the following locations shall be designated as
areas for parking for the handicapped:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Abbey Street
[Added 11-20-2012
by Ord. No. 12-34]
-- -- 22 Abbey Street
Abbey Street
[Added 11-21-2006
by Ord. No. 06-15;
repealed
11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-32]
Abbey Street
[Added 5-15-2007
by Ord. No. 07-39;
repealed
11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-33]
Adams Street
[Added 12-19-2006
by Ord. No. 06-19]
-- -- 27 Adams Street
Alvord Avenue
[Added 5-19-2009
by Ord. No. 09-88]
-- -- 19 Alvord Avenue
Ames Avenue
[Added 3-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-20]
-- All 49 Ames Avenue; 1
Ames Street [Added
2-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-06]
-- All 56 Ames Avenue
Arlington Street
[Added 7-1-2008
by Ord. No. 08-32]
-- -- 47 Arlington Street
§ 260-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:532
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Bell Street -- All At the intersection of Elm
Street in the vicinity of
the Holy Mother of the
Rosary Church; 2
Beverly Street
[Added 2-19-2013
by Ord. No. 13-6;
repealed 9-6-2018
by Ord. No. 18-29]
Bonner Street
[Added 4-17-2012
by Ord. No. 12-08]
-- All 36 Bonner Street
Bonner Street
[Added 9-21-2011
by Ord. No. 11-40]
-- All 86 Bonner Street
Bonner Street
[Added 1-20-2009
by Ord. No. 09-69]
-- -- 96 Bonner Street
Britton Street
[Added 9-18-2008
by Ord. No. 08-36]
-- -- One-hour time limit at
400 Britton Street in front
of entrance ramp to
Fairview Public Library
Broadway Street
[Added 10-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-91]
-- All 70 Brodaway Street,
Building 101; 1
Brodeur Street -- All In front of 15 Brodeur
Street; 1
Burton Street
[Added 3-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-18;
repealed
11-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-98]
Canal Street [Added
12-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-105]
-- All 30 Canal Street
Center Street
[Amended
5-19-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-32]
-- All In front of 36 Center
Street (VOC); 1
Center Street -- All 35 Center Street; 1
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:533
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Center Street -- All In front of 100 Center
Street; 1
Center Street
[Added 4-17-2001
by Ord. No. 01-20]
-- All 152 Center Street;
parking only
Center Street
[Added 11-19-1996
by Ord. No.
96-100]
West All Opposite 48 Center
Street; 1
Central Avenue
[Added 11-19-2002
by Ord. No. 02-57]
-- All 77 Central Avenue
Chapel Street
[Repealed
2-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-179]
Chapel Street
[Added 2-21-2006
by Ord. No.
06-180]
North -- From approximately 102
feet from the intersection
of Grattan Street to a
point 215 feet from the
intersection of Grattan
Street; 5
Chapman Street South 4:00 p.m. to
10:00
p.m./Tuesday
Near Assumption Church
Hall (near the
handicapped ramp
entrance); 1
Charbonneau
Terrace (11) [Added
4-15-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-4; repealed
4-3-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-9]
Chase Place [Added
11-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-100;
repealed
4-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-186]
Chestnut Street
[Added 3-18-1997
by Ord. No. 97-17]
-- All In front of St. Stanislaus
Club; 1
§ 260-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:534
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Chicopee Street
[Added 3-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-19]
-- 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.;
1:30 p.m. to
4:00 p.m./All
In front of 730 Chicopee
Street; 1
Chicopee Street -- All From Leslie Street to a
point 20 feet therefrom; 1
Chicopee Street South All From Whitman Street to a
point approximately 20
feet therefrom; 1
Church Street
[Added 2-1-2000
by Ord. No. 00-11;
repealed
9-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-67]
Circle Drive -- All In front of 79 Circle
Drive; 1
Circle Drive -- All In front of 81 Circle
Drive; 1
Crescent Drive
[Added 9-6-2005
by Ord. No.
05-162]
-- All In front of 89 Crescent
Drive; 1
Crescent Drive
[Added 10-15-1996
by Ord. No. 96-91]
-- All In front of 140 Crescent
Drive; 1
Crescent Drive -- All In front of 288 Crescent
Drive; 1
Crescent Drive South All In the on-street parking
area in front of 261
Crescent Drive; 1
Crescent Drive South All In the on-street parking
area across from 285
Crescent Drive; 1
Cyman Drive
[Added 4-19-2005
by Ord. No.
05-123]
-- All In a northerly direction
from the existing
handicap parking along
the church; 3
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:535
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Davenport Street
[Added 3-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-19;
repealed
1-22-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-93]
Dublin Street -- All In front of 29 Dublin
Drive; 1
Dwight Street
[Added 9-21-2011
by Ord. No. 11-42]
-- All 74-76 Dwight Street
Edbert Street
[Added 11-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-78]
-- All In front of 90G Edbert
Street; 1
Elcon Drive
[Repealed
6-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-31]
Elcon Drive [Added
4-20-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-23]
-- All 11 Elcon Drive; 1
Elcon Drive [Added
3-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-20]
-- All In front of 64 Elcon Drive;
1
Elcon Drive [Added
12-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-60]
-- All In front of 86 Elcon Drive;
1
Elcon Drive -- All In front of 92 Elcon Drive;
1
Elcon Drive -- All Off of court area, third
parking spot from
entrance; 1
Elcon Drive [Added
12-18-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-83]
-- All 136 Elcon Drive
Elm Street [Added
12-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-56
-- -- 49 Elm Street
Elmer Drive [Added
10-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-67]
-- All In front of Elmer Drive; 1
§ 260-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:536
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Elmer Drive [Added
4-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-124]
-- All 7 Elmer Drive; 1
Elmer Drive [Added
9-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-52]
-- All In area of 29 Elmer Drive
Elmer Drive [Added
6-19-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-50]
-- All 110 Elmer Drive
Elmer Drive [Added
4-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-31]
-- All 111 Elmer Drive
Emerald Street
[Added 2-21-2012
by Ord. No. 12-05]
-- All 27 Emerald Street
Emerald Street
[Repealed
4-19-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-21]
Exchange Street
[Added 3-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-18;
repealed
11-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-81]
-- All 111 Exchange Street; 1
Ferry Street [Added
11-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-101]
Gilmore Street
[Added 2-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-11]
-- All 12 Gilmore Street; 1
Grape Street
[Added 4-16-2002
by Ord. No. 02-26]
-- All 18 Grape Street; 1
Grape Street
[Added 4-17-2001
by Ord. No. 01-21]
-- All 24 Grape Street; 1
Grape Street
[Added 12-16-1997
by Ord. No. 97-59]
-- All In front of 112 Grape
Street; 1
Grape Street West All From Front Street for a
distance of 20 feet; 1
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:537
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Grattan Street
[Added 12-16-1997
by Ord. No. 97-65]
East All 45 feet to 70 feet from the
intersection of Providence
Street in a southerly
direction; 1
Grattan Street
[Added 5-16-2006
by Ord. No.
06-189]
-- -- 205 Grattan Street
Grattan Street
[Added 6-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-45]
-- All Near the branch library
(location to be
determined by the
Handicapped
Commission); 1
Grocki Drive [Added
6-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-39]
-- All Between the houses at 28
and 29 Grocki Drive, on
the right-hand side; 1
Grocki Drive
[Added 5-19-2009
by Ord. No. 09-89]
-- -- 31 Grocki Drive
Grocki Drive
[Added 6-26-2003
by Ord. No. 03-27]
-- All 39 Grocki Drive
Grocki Drive -- All --; 2
Hamilton Street
[Added 2-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-10;
repealed 2-1-2000
by Ord. No. 00-10]
Hope Street
[Repealed
4-19-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-18]
Hope Street [Added
3-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-13]
-- All 19 Hope Street
Hobson Court
[Repealed
5-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-28]
Honeysuckle Drive
[Added 1-16-2007
by Ord. No. 07-25]
-- -- 12 Honeysuckle Drive,
near Pole #1
§ 260-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:538
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
John Street [Added
10-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 08-54]
-- -- 25 John Street
Kaveney Street
[Added 9-20-2016
by Ord. No. 16-63]
-- -- 26 Kaveney Street
Lincoln Street
[Added 2-16-1999
by Ord. No. 99-12]
-- All 27 Lincoln Street; 1
Main Street -- All In front of 28 Main
Street; 1
Main Street -- 8:30 a.m. to
4:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
In front of 93 Main Street
Maple Street
[Repealed
5-19-2016 by Ord.
No. 15-23]
Marshall Street
[Added 4-16-1996
by Ord. No. 96-26]
-- All In front of 57 Marshall
Street; 1
Meadowlark Lane
[Added 3-16-2004
by Ord. No. 04-62]
-- All 36 Meadowlark Lane
Meadowlark Lane
[Added 1-20-2009
by Ord. No. 09-64]
-- -- 54 Meadowlark Lane
Meetinghouse Road -- All In front of 60
Meetinghouse Road; 1
Meetinghouse Road
[Added 7-6-1995
by Ord. No. 95-32]
-- All In front of 128
Meetinghouse Road; 1
Mt. Carmel Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon;
Sunday
From a point 165 feet
west of Chicopee Street
to a point 22 feet west
thereof; 1
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:539
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Meetinghouse Road
[Added 5-22-1997
by Ord. No. 97-26;
repealed
5-18-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-28]
Monroe Street
[Added 9-21-2011
by Ord. No. 11-41;
repealed
9-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-22]
Myrtle Street
[Added 12-21-2004
by Ord. No.
04-107]
-- All 25 Myrtle Street
Narragansett
Boulevard [Added
9-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-50]
-- All In front of No. 70
Narragansett Boulevard;
1
Nash Street [Added
11-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-24]
South -- At the corner of Nash
Street and Chicopee
Street
Newell Street
[Added 9-5-2006
by Ord. No. 06-08]
-- -- 54 Newell Street
Northern Drive -- All 99 Northern Drive; 1
Paine Avenue
[Added 11-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-55;
repealed
10-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-11F]
Park Street [Added
1-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-02]
-- All 4 - 6 Park Street
Park Street [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-23]
-- All 89 Park Street
Peloquin Drive
[Added 10-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-92]
-- All 14 Peloquin Drive; 1
§ 260-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:540
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Peloquin Drive
[Added 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-79;
repealed
10-17-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-81]
Peloquin Drive
[Added 4-17-2007
by Ord. No. 07-33]
West All 36 Peloquin Drive
Peloquin Drive -- All 82 Peloquin Drive; 1
Peloquin Drive
[Added 6-17-1997
by Ord. No. 97-31]
-- All At 104 Peloquin Drive; 1
Perkins Street -- All In front of 51 Perkins
Street; 1
Perkins Street West 7:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m.;
Wednesday;
10:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m. and
5:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m.;
Sunday
In front of Pioneer Valley
Baptist Church; 1
Plante Circle
[Added 11-18-2014
by Ord. No. 14-41]
-- All 20 Plante Circle
Plante Circle -- All At 34, 44, 54 and 68
Plante Circle; 4
Pleasant Street
[Added 4-19-2016
by Ord. No. 16-22]
-- All 25 Pleasant Street
Prospect Street
[Added 10-16-2001
by Ord. No. 01-85;
repealed 9-6-2018
by Ord. No. 18-30]
Providence Street North All From Grattan Street to a
point 20 to 40 feet
therefrom; 1
Providence Street North All From a point 45 feet from
Grattan Street to a point
70 feet from Grattan
Street
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:541
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Rivers Avenue
[Added 12-4-2018
by Ord. No. 18-54]
-- -- 46 Rivers Avenue
Riverview Terrace -- All In front of 10 Riverview
Terrace; 1
Riverview Terrace
[Repealed
2-18-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
Riverview Terrace
[Added 6-16-1998
by Ord. No. 98-43;
repealed
6-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-52]
Riverview Terrace
[Added 6-17-1997
by Ord. No. 97-29;
repealed
6-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-53]
Riverview Terrace
[Added 9-21-1995
by Ord. No. 95-49;
repealed
6-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-29]
Riverview Terrace
[Added 9-21-1995
by Ord. No. 95-49;
repealed
6-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-53]
Riverview Terrace
[Added 11-20-2001
by Ord. No. 01-99]
-- All 68 Riverview Terrace; 1
Riverview Terrace
[Added 6-20-2000
by Ord. No. 00-54;
amended
2-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-112]
-- All 82 Riverview Terrace; 1
§ 260-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:542
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Riverview Terrace
[Added 3-20-2001
by Ord. No. 01-16]
-- All 86A Riverview Terrace; 1
Riverview Terrace
[Added 6-17-1997
by Ord. No. 97-29]
-- All In front of 94 Riverview
Terrace; 1
Riverview Terrace
[Added 10-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-89]
-- All 94A Riverview Terrace; 1
Robinson Drive -- All For a distance of 15 feet
at the end of the cul-desac
at 19 Robinson Drive;
1
Roosevelt Avenue
[Added 12-18-2001
by Ord. No.
01-106]
-- All 67 Roosevelt Avenue; 1
St. Anthony Street
[Added 7-7-2009
by Ord. No. 09-13]
-- -- 24 St. Anthony Street
School Street
[Added 9-21-2006
by Ord. No. 06-10]
-- -- 85 School Street
Southern Drive
[Added 4-19-2005
by Ord. No.
05-122]
-- All In front of 3 Southern
Drive; 1
Southern Drive
[Added 6-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-39]
-- All Across from 22 Southern
Drive; 1
Southern Drive
[Added 11-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-77]
-- All In front of 23 Southern
Drive; 1
Southern Drive
[Added 3-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-19]
-- All Across from 25 Southern
Drive; 1
Spring Street
[Added 11-17-2009
by Ord. No. 09-22;
amended
11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-46]
-- -- 22 Spring Street
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-68
1:543
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Springfield Street East All In front of Elm's College
Library; 2
Springfield Street
[Added 4-19-2005
by Ord. No.
05-127]
West All In front of Munich Haus
Restaurant near 50
Springfield Street; 1
Stewart Street
[Repealed
9-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-53]
Stonina Drive
[Added 1-20-2009
by Ord. No. 09-65]
-- -- 11 Stonina Drive
Stonina Drive
[Added 7-1-2008
by Ord. No. 08-33]
-- -- 38 Stonina Drive
Stonina Drive -- All In front of 47 Stonina
Drive; 1
Stonina Drive
[Added 4-15-2003
by Ord. No. 03-12]
-- All 95 Stonina Drive
Volpe Drive -- All --; 2
Volpe Drive [Added
7-6-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-31]
-- All In front of 5 Volpe Drive;
1
Walnut Street
[Added 4-17-2007
by Ord. No. 07-32;
repealed
9-18-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-45]
Walnut Street
[Added 4-18-2017
by Ord. No. 17-5]
-- -- 24 Walnut Street
Walter Street
[Added 3-17-2009
by Ord. No. 09-81;
repealed
4-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-4]
§ 260-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-68
1:544
Name of Street Side Hours/Days
Location; Number of
Spaces
Ward Street [Added
4-16-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-26;
repealed
2-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-9]
West Street -- All In front of 41 West Street;
1
Woodbridge Road
[Added 2-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-08]
-- All 19 Woodbridge Road
Woodbridge Road
[Added 4-19-2005
by Ord. No.
05-121]
-- All 98 Woodbridge Road; 1
§ 260-69. Schedule X: Severe Weather Parking. [Amended
3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-16; 2-18-1997 by Ord. No. 97-10;
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 00-12; 6-26-2003 by Ord. No. 03-24;
12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-63]
In accordance with § 260-29B, the following streets are designated as
streets subject to severe weather regulations.
Name of Street Side Location
Abbey Memorial Drive Both Entire length
Academy Street Both Entire length
Alvord Avenue — Entire length
Armory Street Both Entire length
Ashland Street [Added
3-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-10]
Both Entire length
Beauchamp Terrace Both Entire length
Bemis Avenue Both Entire length
Boutin Street Both Entire length
Britton Street Both Entire length
Broadway Both Entire length
Buckley Boulevard Both Entire length
Burnett Road Both Entire length
Cabot Street Both Entire length
Canal Street Both Entire length
§ 260-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-69
1:545
Name of Street Side Location
Carew Street Both Entire length
Center Street Both Entire length
Chicopee Street Both Entire length
Church Street Both Entire length
Cochran Street Both Entire length
College Street Both Entire length
Columba Street Both Entire length
Court Street Both Entire length
Dale Street — Entire length
Davitt Bridge Both Entire length
East Main Street Both Entire length
East Street Both Entire length
Exchange Street Both Entire length
Factory Street Both Entire length
Fairview Avenue Both Entire length
Front Street Both Entire length, except from Dwight
Street to Exchange Street
Fuller Road Both Entire length
Granby Road Both Entire length
Grape Street Both Entire length
Grattan Street Both Entire length
Grove Avenue Both Entire length
Grove Street Both Entire length
Hampden Street Both Entire length
Hilton Street Both Entire length
Ingham Street Both Entire length
Irene Street Both Entire length
James Street Both Entire length
Lawrence Road Both From Granby Road to Nichols Road
Main Street Both Entire length
McKinstry Avenue Both Entire length, except for the
northern side of McKinstry Avenue
abutting Meadow Green
Apartments, between Eastern
Avenue and Crescent Drive
Meadow Street Both Entire length
Montcalm Street Both Entire length
§ 260-69 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-69
1:546
Name of Street Side Location
Montgomery Street Both Entire length
Moore Street Both Entire length
Newbury Street Both Entire length
New Lombard Road Both Entire length
New Ludlow Road Both Entire length
Nonotuck Avenue Both From 139 Nonotuck Avenue to 149
Nonotuck Avenue (December 1 to
March 1)
Oak Street Both Entire length
Old Fuller Road Both Entire length
Orchard Street Both Entire length
Pendleton Avenue Both Entire length, except from
Applewood Drive to Woodbridge
Road
Prospect Street Both Entire length, except from Memorial
Drive east to College Street
Prospect Street Both All of lower Prospect Street starting
from a point at the corner of Buckley
Boulevard and Prospect Street in a
southerly direction to the corner of
Prospect Street to Yelle Street,
excluding state regulations of
parking at or near a corner
Rimmon Avenue Both Entire length
Royal Street Both Entire length
Shawinigan Drive Both Entire length
St. James Avenue Both Entire length
Sheridan Street Both Entire length
Simard Drive Both Entire length
South Street Both Entire length
Springfield Street Both Entire length
Stearns Terrace [Added
4-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-7]
Both Entire length
Sunnymeade Avenue Both Entire length
Trilby Avenue Both Entire length
Vadnais Street Both Entire length
Walnut Street Both Entire length
Westover Road Both Entire length
§ 260-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-69
1:547
Name of Street Side Location
West Street Both Entire length
Wheatland Avenue Both Entire length
Woodlawn Street Both For a distance of 600 feet
Yelle Street Both Entire length
§ 260-70. Schedule XI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with § 260-31, the following streets are designated as oneway
streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Adams Street West From Chicopee Street (Sunday
only)
Alden Street East From Meadow Street to Rivers
Park
Ash Street [Added
9-19-1996 by Ord. No.
96-80]
-- From South Street to Center
Street
Baltic Avenue [Amended
4-20-2004 by Ord. No.
04-63]
-- For 50 feet from the intersection
of Grattan Street
Beauregard Terrace West Entire length
Bell Street [Repealed
5-16-2000 by Ord. No.
00-41]
Butler Avenue North/West From East Street to Hilton Street
Cabot Street South From Front Street to Center
Street
Celestine Street East Between Chicopee Street and
Meadow Street (Sunday only)
Celia Street [Added
12-16-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-63]
-- East and west side to Dare Way
Center Street North From Cabot Street to Front Street
Chapin Street -- From Springfield Street to
Nonotuck Avenue (Sunday only)
Chase Place North From Front Street to Ames
Avenue
Chicopee Public Library
courtway
-- Entering from the southerly end
and exiting on the northerly end
§ 260-69 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-70
1:548
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Circle Drive [Added
10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-58; amended
2-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-5]
-- Excluding from Emmet Street to
Central Avenue
Clinton Street [Added
2-20-2001 by Ord. No.
01-03]
South South Street to Chapin Street
Cochran Street [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-59; repealed
9-21-2011 by Ord. No.
11-45]
Cyman Drive West Entire length
East Street Avenue -- From East Street to Fuller Street
Exchange Street East From Cabot Street to Center
Street
Fair Street -- From Dale Street to Grattan
Street
Front Street West From Springfield Street to Depot
Street
Fuller Street -- From East Street Avenue to East
Street
Fuller Street North From East Street
Howard Street [Added
9-18-2008 by Ord. No.
08-40]
West From a point 225 feet from
Springfield Street to School Street
Jacob Street South Entire length
Kendall Street [Added
11-20-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-98]
North From Summit Avenue to Rolf
Avenue (7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.;
Monday through Friday;
September to June)
Lafayette Street West From York Street (Sunday only)
Lauzier Terrace
[Amended 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-38]
West From a point 205 feet west of
Memorial Drive
Leslie Street East From Chicopee Street (Sunday
only)
Linden Street South From Maple Street
Maple Street East From Belcher Street
§ 260-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-70
1:549
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Market Square North From the intersection of Center
Street, Exchange Street,
Springfield Street to Front Street
and entrance to Davitt Memorial
Bridge
Memorial Avenue
[Added 10-17-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-72]
-- From Britton Street to Broad
Street, Monday through Friday,
7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 1:30
p.m. to 3:00 p.m., school days only
Milton Street [Added
10-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-78]
South Entire length, Monday through
Friday, 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Montgomery Street South From Prospect Street to
Pennsylvania Avenue
Montgomery Street West From Pennsylvania Avenue to the
Montgomery Street Junction
Mt. Carmel Avenue East Entire length (7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon, Sunday only)
Northern Drive West Entire length
Olmstead Avenue East From McKinley Avenue
Park Street Southwest From Cabot Street to Center
Street
Perkins Street
[Amended 3-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-19A]
North Entire length, except two-way
traffic shall be permitted between
Front Street and Exchange Street
Plymouth Street East From Paradise Street and Kendall
Street, Monday through Friday,
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
Ranger Street West From Rivers Park to Meadow
Street
St. Anthony Street West Between Meadow Street and
Chicopee Street (Sunday only)
St. Louis Avenue West Entire length (7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon, Sunday only)
Sergeant Avenue [Added
10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-59]
-- Entire length
Sherbrook Street
[Added 12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-42]
North Between Bay State Road and
McKinstry Avenue
§ 260-70 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-70
1:550
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Southern Drive West Entire length
Stonina Drive West From Nonotuck Avenue to Plante
Circle
Vadnais Street
[Repealed 3-21-2000
by Ord. No. 00-30]
Victoria Park North Starting at a point approximately
295 feet south of East Street at
the beginning of the island (east
side of the island)
Victoria Park South Starting at a point approximately
295 feet south of East Street at
the beginning of the island (west
side of the island)
Whitman Street South From Skeele Street (Sunday only)
§ 260-71. Schedule XII: Rotary Traffic.
In accordance with § 260-32, the following areas are designated as rotary
areas:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 260-72. Schedule XIII: Right Turns on Red.
In accordance with § 260-39E(2), the following intersections are designated
as intersections where right turns when facing a red signal are prohibited:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Beauchamp Terrace -- East Street
Broadway South East Street
Buckley Boulevard
[Added 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-83]
-- Prospect Street
Center Street [Repealed
9-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-16]
Center Street -- Springfield Street, 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
§ 260-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-72
1:551
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Columba Street [Added
10-18-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-171]
East Grattan Street
Fairview Avenue [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-45]
South Springfield Street
Montcalm Street [Added
1-20-2015 by Ord. No.
15-6]
Both New Ludlow Road
New Ludlow Road
[Added 1-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-7]
Both Montcalm Street
Sheridan Street -- Memorial Drive
Simard Drive [Added
6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
16-41]
-- Yelle Street
South Street East Springfield Street
Springfield Street
[Repealed 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-16]
Springfield Street North Fairview Avenue
§ 260-73. Schedule XIV: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with § 260-40C, the erection and maintenance of an isolated
stop sign or signs are authorized as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
1st Avenue -- Burnett Road
2nd Avenue -- First Avenue
8th Avenue [Added
12-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-105; amended
6-18-2002 by Ord. No.
02-33]
-- Ross Avenue
8th Avenue South James Street
8th Avenue South Ross Avenue
9th Avenue [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-39]
Both Ross Avenue
§ 260-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:552
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
9th Avenue South James Street
Academy Street North Front Street
Academy Street South Fairview Avenue
Access Road North James Street
Acrebrook Drive [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-46]
West Mountainview Street
Adams Street [Added
11-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-58]
Northwest Rivers Avenue
Alfred Street South Mountainview Street
Alvord Avenue West Broadway
America Street West Old Field Road
Amherst Street Both Old Field Road
Andersen Road [Added
10-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-89]
-- James Street
Andover Road [Added
12-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-62]
West Pembroke
Andover Road -- Westport Drive
Ann Street Both New Ludlow Road
Ann Street North Homer Street
Anson Street West Blanchard Street
Applewood Drive South Pendleton Avenue
Arcade Street -- Schoolhouse Road
Arcade Street South Mary Street
Archie Street East Sunnymeade Avenue
Archie Street Northwest Wheatland Avenue
Armory Drive North Fairview Avenue
Armory Drive West Fairview Avenue
Arthur Street West Old Field Road
Asinof Avenue [Added
10-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-37]
-- McKinley Avenue
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:553
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Asselin Street [Added
10-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-86]
-- Boutin Street
Asselin Street [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-48]
South Jamrog Drive
Atkins Street North Prospect Street
Austin Street East Saratoga Avenue
Baltimore Avenue
[Added 10-17-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-45]
-- New York Avenue
Barbara Street [Added
6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-46]
Both Boulay Circle (both crossings)
Barbara Street [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-87]
-- Jacob Street
Baystate Road [Added
12-16-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-64]
-- York Street
Beauchamp Terrace West St. James Avenue
Beaumont Avenue -- Carew Street
Beaumont Avenue East Old Field Road
Beesley Avenue -- Granby Road
Beesley Avenue
[Amended 5-16-1995
by Ord. No. 95-19]
Both Nelson Street
Bemis Avenue [Added
10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-52]
North Harrison Avenue
Bemis Street Both Skeele Street
Bennett Street Both Moore Street
Berger Street [Added
6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-40]
-- Mary Street
Bernice Street South Westover Road
Bliss Avenue Both Bemis Avenue
Bliss Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:554
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Boivin Terrace
[Repealed 5-19-1998
by Ord. No. 98-28]
Bonneville Avenue -- Fairview Avenue
Bonneville Avenue
[Added 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-46]
-- Front Street
Bostwick Lane Both Pendleton Avenue
Bourbeau Street [Added
2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
98-13]
-- Reed Street
Boutin Street [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-27]
North Pendleton Avenue
Brandon Avenue East Easterly intersection of Cyman
Drive
Brentwood Terrace West Falmouth Road
Brightwood Street Both Laurel Street
Brittany Street Both Lachine Street
Bromont Street -- Carew Street
Buckley Boulevard South Prospect Street
Burton Street East Hampden Street
Cabot Street South School Street
Cadieux Street South Granby Road
Call Street Both Skeele Street
Calvin Street -- Newall Street
Carter Drive -- Granby Road
Casey Drive Both Pendleton Avenue
Casino Avenue Both Nonotuck Avenue
Casino Avenue Both Stearns Terrace
Chapel Street West Grattan Street
Chapin Street
[Amended 5-18-2010
by Ord. No. 10-14]
Both Nonotuck Avenue
Charles Street -- Muzzy Street
Chateaugay Street -- Spence Street
Cherryvale Street North New Ludlow Road
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:555
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Chester Street North Wilson Street
Chestnut Street North Exchange Street
Chicopee Street -- Old Field Road
Christopher Street
[Added 2-1-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-8]
-- Olsen Street
Claire Street [Amended
2-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-07]
Both Frontenac Street
Clairmont Avenue -- Edgewood Avenue
Clinton Street [Added
2-20-2001 by Ord. No.
01-05]
-- Chapin Street
Cobb Avenue -- Granby Road
Cobb Avenue Both Beesley Avenue
Coburn Street -- Orange Street
Cochran Street
[Amended 11-19-1996
by Ord. No. 96-101]
-- Waite Avenue
Cochran Street Both Muzzy Street
Cochran Street Both Southwick Street
College Street South James Street
Columba Street -- Schoolhouse Road
Columba Street East Montgomery Street
Connecticut Avenue -- Hendricks Street
Connecticut Avenue -- Madison Street
Connell Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
Connell Avenue Southwest Bemis Avenue
Cortland Street Both Medford Street
Court Street East Belcher Street
Court Street West Grove Street
Cox Street -- Gill Street
Cox Street -- Harding Street
Craigie Avenue [Added
1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
09-70]
North Billings Street
Crestwood Street West East Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:556
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Cyran Street [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-74]
-- Irene Street
Cyran Street [Added
2-1-2000 by Ord. No.
00-5]
-- Schorr Street
Czepiel Street -- Granby Road
Dale Street [Added
9-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-49]
-- At the intersection of Dale Street
and Montgomery Street (easterly
side)
Dalton Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
Dalton Avenue Southeast Bemis Avenue
Daniel Drive Both Champagne Avenue
Dayton Street East Old Field Road
Dayton Street East Poplar Street
Deane Street -- Blanchard Street
Dejordy Lane [Added
3-19-2002 by Ord. No.
02-17]
-- Slate Road
Delaney Avenue -- Whitin Avenue
Delaney Avenue North Wilson Avenue
Depot Street South Exchange Street
Depot Street South I.B.C. Drive
Deslauriers Street
[Added 10-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-62]
-- Falmouth Road
Deslauriers Street Both Pendleton Avenue
Dobek Avenue [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No.
00-39]
-- Szady Drive
Donlyn Drive -- Donlyn Drive (where it turns east
to Saratoga Avenue)
Donlyn Drive -- Saratoga Avenue
Donlyn Drive North Fairview Avenue
Dorothy Street [Added
6-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30]
-- Lukasik Street
Doverbrook Avenue North Applewood Drive
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:557
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Doverbrook Road South Pendleton Avenue
Dublin Street West Kimball Street
Dunn Street [Added
11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-28]
-- Fletcher Circle (northwest corner)
Dunn Street [Added
11-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-29]
-- Fletcher Circle (southeast corner)
Dwight Street Both Exchange Street
Dwight Street Both School Street
Edgewood Avenue -- Granby Road
Edward Street [Added
2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-3]
West Arcade Street
Elliot Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
Elliot Avenue Southwest Bemis Avenue
Ellsbree Street Both Nonotuck Avenue
Elmer Drive [Added
10-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-63]
-- Chicopee Street
Emery Street Northeast Factory Street
Emmet Street [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-51]
East Circle Drive
Factory Street [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
06-02]
Northwest Prospect Street
Fair Street East Dale Street
Fair Street [Added
8-4-2015 by Ord. No.
15-38]
Northwest Fair Street and Hillside Avenue
Fairway Drive -- Burnett Road
Falmouth Road -- Route No. 33
Farnsworth Street
[Added 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-40]
-- Newbury Street
Felix Street -- Schoolhouse Road
Ferry Street Both Skeele Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:558
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Ferry Street East Chicopee Street
Filmore Street Both New Ludlow Road
Forrest Street Both Skeele Street
Franklin Street [Added
9-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-52]
Both McKinley Avenue
Frederick Street West Oldfield Road
Frink Street [Added
2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
98-11]
-- Reed Street
Frontenac Street [Added
2-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-07]
Both Claire Street
Frontenac Street North Beauchamp Terrace
Front Street -- Depot Street
Gardner Road [Added
10-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-64]
Both Where Leona Avenue cuts through
Garrity Street -- Columba Street
Garrity Street -- Lagadia Street
Gaylord Street North From 15 Gaylord Street to Grant
Street
Gelinas Drive -- Robak Drive
Gilbert Avenue -- Newbury Street
Gilbert Avenue North Nora Street
Gilmore Street Both Nonotuck Avenue
Glenwood Street West Gilbert Avenue
Glenwood Street [Added
5-16-2000 by Ord. No.
00-42]
-- Moore Street
Goodhue Avenue Both Wheatland Avenue
Goodhue Avenue Southwest Bemis Avenue
Grandview Street -- Granby Road
Granger Street [Added
8-6-1996 by Ord. No.
96-75]
-- Paderewski Street
Granville Avenue West Oldfield Road
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:559
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Grape Street [Added
4-19-2005 by Ord. No.
05-126]
South Springfield Street
Grattan Street East Montgomery Street
Grattan Street West Chicopee Street
Green Point Circle North James Street
Green Street South James Street
Greenwood Terrace -- Lynwood Drive
Greenwood Terrace
[Added 4-18-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-17]
Both Pendleton Avenue
Greenwood Terrace East Applewood Drive
Grove Avenue Northeast Pine Street
Hamel Street [Added
6-17-2008 by Ord. No.
08-19]
East Dale Street
Hampden Street South Springfield Street
Hampshire Street
[Added 4-3-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-8]
East Hartford Street
Harrington Road [Added
11-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-76]
-- Reedstone Avenue
Harrison Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
Harrison Avenue Southwest Bemis Avenue
Haven Avenue North Ridgewood Road
Hawthorne Street Both Laurel Street
Hendrick Street Both Waite Avenue
Hendricks Street Both Huntington Street
Hendricks Street East Huntington Avenue
High Street Northeast Walnut Street
High Street Southwest Pine Street
Highland Avenue Both Lemuel Avenue
Hillcrest Street South Frontenac Street
Hilton Street -- East Main Street
Homer Avenue West Royal Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:560
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Honey Lane [Added
9-17-1998 by Ord. No.
98-60]
-- Basil Drive
Honeysuckle Drive North Pendleton Avenue
Honeysuckle Drive South Westover Road
Huntington Avenue
[Added 1-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-24]
Both Hendrick Street
Huntington Avenue
[Added 2-20-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-7]
North Shelton Street
Hyde Avenue Northwest Wheatland Avenue
I.B.C. Drive South Depot Street
Ingham Street [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-54]
Both Irene Street
Irene Street [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-54]
Both Ingham Street
Irene Street -- Factory and Atkins Street
Irwin Street -- Fairmont Street
Irwin Street [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-57]
-- Montgomery Street
Jacob Street -- Prospect Street
Jacob Street Both Vadnais Street
Jacob Street East James Street
Jamrog Drive North Fletcher Circle
Johnson Drive -- James Street
John Street North Skeele Street
Jones Ferry Road East Chicopee Street
Joy Street East Oldfield Road
Keddy Boulevard North James Street
Kendall Street [Added
9-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-52]
-- Rolf Avenue
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:561
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Kendall Street
[Amended 10-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-95]
Both Stebbins Street
Lachine Street East East Street
Laclede Avenue [Added
11-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-100]
-- Boston Street
Lagadia Street -- Garrity Street
Lagodia Street East Montgomery Street
Laramee Street [Added
2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
98-14]
-- Reed Street
Larchmont Street
[Added 10-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-35]
-- Fairmont Street
Larchmont Street
[Added 10-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-36]
-- Montauk Road
Lariviere Drive -- Blanchard Street
Lariviere Drive -- Deane Street
Laurel Street [Added
9-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-68]
Both Brightwood Street
Laurel Street [Added
9-1-1998 by Ord. No.
98-55]
-- Sanders Street
Lawrence Road [Added
10-6-2015 by Ord. No.
15-55]
Both Lawrence Road and Leona Avenue
Lawrence Road South Granby Road
Lemuel Avenue (west
end)
-- Hampden Street
Lemuel Street East Nonotuck Avenue
Leona Avenue Both Champagne Avenue
Leona Avenue [Added
10-6-2015 by Ord. No.
15-56]
Both Leona Avenue and Lawrence Road
Lincoln Grove Curve
[Added 10-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-73]
North Broadway Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:562
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Litwin Lane -- Moreau Drive
Litwin Lane East and
South
Dobek Avenue
Lombard Road West Burnett Road
Lombard Street Both New Ludlow Road
Longwood Drive [Added
3-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-26]
North Pendleton Avenue
Lorraine Street East Meadow Street
Lorraine Street West Chicopee Street
Loveland Terrace -- Carew Street
Loveland Terrace East Carew Street
Loveland Terrace West Crestwood Street
Ludger Avenue [Added
11-17-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-75]
-- Stewart Street
Ludlow Road Both Old Ludlow Road
Ludlow Road West New Ludlow Road
Lukasik Street [Added
6-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-30]
-- Dorothy Street
Lynwood Drive -- Greenwood Drive
Lynwood Drive -- Honeysuckle Drive
Madison Street Both Washington Street
Madison Street South Connecticut Avenue
Madison Street [Added
10-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-57]
South Madison Street and Waite Avenue
Mandalay Road North James Street
Manning Street West Montcalm Street
Marble Avenue [Added
10-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-76]
-- Hampden Street
Marcelle Street [Added
9-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-99]
-- Arcade Street
Marguerite Street East Carew Street
Marguerite Street West Loveland Terrace
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:563
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Marion Street Both Hampden Street
Market Street East Church Street
Marten Street [Added
4-21-2015 by Ord. No.
15-19]
-- Marten Street and Pendleton
Avenue
Marten Street [Added
4-21-2015 by Ord. No.
15-18]
-- Marten Street and Tanglewood
Street
Martha Street Both Marguerite Street
Martha Street Both Wildermere Street
Massachusetts Avenue South Towne Street
Mathieu Drive East Bardon Street
Mathieu Drive [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord. No.
14-26]
-- Woodcrest Drive
McKinley Avenue
[Added 12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-44]
-- Asinof Avenue
McKinstry Avenue -- At driveway from Jahn Foundry
and LaFlamme Property
McKinstry Avenue
[Added 10-17-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-76;
repealed 5-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-30A]
Mead Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
Mead Avenue Southwest Bemis Avenue
Medina Street -- Paderewski
Meetinghouse Road East Meadow Street
Middle Street South Market Street
Milton Street [Added
5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
98-25]
North Massachusetts Avenue
Monroe Street -- Connecticut Avenue
Monroe Street Both Waite Avenue
Monroe Street [Added
6-15-2010 by Ord. No.
10-29]
-- Watson Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:564
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Montauk Road [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-58]
-- Montauk and before entering
Montello
Montauk Road Both Mt. Vernon Road
Montauk Road [Added
2-17-2004 by Ord. No.
04-58]
-- Wilmont Street
Montgomery Street
[Added 11-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-104]
-- Exit to Chicopee Comprehensive
High School
Moore Street -- Fairview Avenue
Moore Street Both Bennett Street
Mount Carmel Street -- Rivers Avenue
Mount Vernon Road -- Montauk Road
Moreau Drive East Litwin Lane
Moreau Drive South Post Road
Muzzy Street Both Cochran Drive
Myrtle Street South Elm Street
Nash Street Both Skeele Street
Nelson Street [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-19]
Both Beesley Avenue
Nelson Street [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-19]
Both Overlook Drive
Nelson Street West Granby Road
New Lombard Road West Burnett Road
Nichols Road Both Lawrence Road
Nonotuck Avenue Both Casino Avenue
Norman Street -- Lafleur Drive
Oakridge Street North Mountainview Street
Oakridge Street South Pendleton Avenue
Ohio Avenue Both Towne Street
Old Field Road North Kurtz Street
Old Fuller Road -- Lombard Road
Old Lyman Road Both Ludlow Road
Old Lyman Road North Britton Street
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:565
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Old Pendleton Road East Pendleton Avenue (near entrance
to Bellamy School)
Olea Street -- Grattan Street
Olko Circle (both ends) North Burnett Road
Ondrick Drive -- Rich Street
Ondrick Drive West East Street
Otis Street Both Ellerton Street
Outer Drive [Added
10-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-90]
Both James Street
Overlook Drive [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-19]
Both Nelson Street
Paine Avenue -- Hamilton Street
Palmer Avenue Northeast Wheatland Avenue
Paradise Street [Added
4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
12-09]
North At the intersection of Plymouth
Street
Paradise Street [Added
3-16-2004 by Ord. No.
04-59]
South Plymouth Street going south
uphill on Paradise
Parkwood Drive [Added
10-19-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-42]
-- Nelson Street
Partridge Lane South Pendleton Avenue
Pendexter Avenue
[Added 12-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-63]
East Meadow Street
Pendleton Avenue
[Added 11-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-50]
-- Prospect Street
Pendleton Avenue
[Amended 4-18-1995
by Ord. No. 95-17]
Both Greenwood Terrace
Pendleton Avenue South Bellamy School
Pendleton Avenue
[Added 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-27]
South Simard Drive
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Towne Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:566
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Percy Street East Grattan Street
Perkins Street Both Exchange Street
Pervier Avenue North Homer Street
Pervier Avenue South Britton Street
Philathea Street -- Caroline Street
Pickering Street -- Artisian Street
Pickering Street -- Warregan Street
Pleasantview Avenue
[Added 7-6-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-80]
-- Crawford Avenue
Plymouth Street -- Kendall Street
Plymouth Street -- Paradise Street
Pondview Drive South Mountainview Street
Poplar Street Both Old Field Road
Poplar Street East Chicopee Street
Post Road West Moreau Drive
Prospect Street Both College Street
Prospect Street Northeast Buckley Boulevard
Prospect Street West Buckley Boulevard
Providence Street -- At the south end
Providence Street West Arcade Street
Quebec Street -- Chateaugay Street and Champlain
Street
Raylo Street [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
06-03]
South Terimar Street
Reed Street -- Burn Street
Rich Street [Added
7-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-35]
-- Wildermere Street
Rimmon Avenue North Newbury Street
Rita Street -- Mountainview Street
Riverview Terrace
[Added 9-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-40]
North Corner of Riverview Terrace, 180
feet north of Front Street
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:567
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Rochester Street [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-55]
-- Bromont Street
Rolf Avenue Both Dale Street
Roosevelt Avenue East Saratoga Avenue
Ross Avenue [Added
9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-39]
Both 9th Avenue
Ross Avenue East Montcalm Street
Ross Avenue West James Street
Royal Street [Added
3-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-29]
North Beech Street
Royal Street -- Britton Street
Royalton Street [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-54]
-- Bromont Street
Saratoga Avenue North Fairview Avenue
School House Road
[Added 12-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-58]
-- Olsen and Cote Avenue
School Street Both Dwight Street
Scott Street -- Old Field Road
Searle Street [Amended
2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
98-12]
South Reed Street
Shea Drive -- Robak Drive
Sherbrook Street
[Added 10-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-33;
repealed 1-20-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-5]
Sherbrook Street
[Added 4-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-16]
-- Sherbrook Street and Summit
Avenue
Sherbrook Street Both McKinstry Avenue
Sherbrook Street Both Wellington Street
Sheridan Street Both Fuller Road
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:568
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Sheridan Street [Added
9-5-2006 by Ord. No.
06-09]
East Intersection of access road to mall
at Sheridan Street
Sherman Avenue Both Davenport Street
Sherman Avenue Both Mellen
Sherman Avenue Both Northwood Street
Sherman Avenue Southeast Rimmon Avenue
Simard Drive South Yelle Street
Simonich Street West Granby Road
Skeele Street Both Call Street
Skeele Street South Warregan Street
South Street West Center Street
Southwick Street Both Charles Street
Southwick Street Both Cochran Street
Spence Street -- Frontenac Street
Springfield Street South Hampden Street
St. Onge Street [Added
5-19-2015 by Ord. No.
15-22]
-- Dale Street and St. Onge Street
Stearns Terrace Both Casino Avenue
Stebbins Street
[Amended 6-20-2000
by Ord. No. 00-51]
Both Kendall Street
Stebbins Street Both Windsor Street
Stedman Street East Meadow Street
Stedman Street West Chicopee Street
Stephen Street -- Parallel to Outer Drive (Otter)
Stewart Street -- Schoolhouse Road
Stewart Street [Added
10-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-97]
-- Trilby Avenue
Stonina Drive West Hampden Street
Streiber Drive [Added
12-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-104]
-- Streiber School parking lot
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:569
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Sullivan Street [Added
12-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-56]
-- Kaveney Street
Summer Street [Added
9-3-2003 by Ord. No.
02-48]
-- Pine Street
Summit Avenue [Added
5-16-2000 by Ord. No.
00-43]
-- Kendall Street
Summit Avenue Both Windsor Street
Sunflower Avenue West Granby Road
Sunnymeade Avenue East Broadway
Sunnymeade Avenue Southwest Bemis Avenue
Surrey Lane West Hunt Seat Drive
Swol Street -- Granby Road
Swol Street [Added
6-17-2014 by Ord. No.
14-7]
-- Simonich Street
Szady Street [Added
9-23-1999 by Ord. No.
99-85]
-- Dobek Avenue
Szetela Drive -- Wanda Street
Thaddeus Street [Added
10-7-1997 by Ord. No.
97-49]
-- Columba Street
Thaddeus Street [Added
5-15-2001 by Ord. No.
01-27]
-- Ward Street
Thornwood Street Both Medford Street
Towne Street [Added
10-17-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-11E]
Northeast Massachusetts Avenue
Tremont Street Both Kimball Street
Trilby Avenue [Added
2-1-2000 by Ord. No.
00-9]
-- Arcade Street
Trilby Avenue [Added
2-17-2004 by Ord. No.
04-57]
-- Grattan Street
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-73
1:570
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Union Street [Added
9-21-2000 by Ord. No.
00-61]
-- South Street
Vadnais Street -- Telegraph Avenue
Vadnais Street Both Jacob Street
Valley View Street -- Arcade Street
Vivian Street -- Stedman Street
Volpe Drive [Added
11-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-103]
-- Grocki Drive
Voss Avenue -- Blanchard Street
Voss Avenue -- College Street
Waite Avenue [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-89A]
-- Monroe Street
Waite Avenue [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-89A]
-- Shelton Street
Walnut Street [Added
6-20-2000 by Ord. No.
00-56]
-- Church Street
Walnut Street East Broadway
Walton Street [Added
10-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-77]
-- Hampden Street
Wanda Street South Szetela Drive
Ward Street -- Columba Street
Ward Street Both Grattan Street
Warregan Street -- Lafleur Drive
Warwick Road -- Brentwood Terrace
Washington Street Both Madison Street
Wellington Street Both Sherbrook Street
Wellington Street Both Windsor Street
Western Avenue [Added
8-1-1995 by Ord. No.
95-43]
-- Broadway
Western Avenue Northwest Wheatland Avenue
White Birch Avenue South James Street
§ 260-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-73
1:571
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Whittlesey Avenue East James Street
Wildermere Street Both Crestwood Street
Wildermere Street South Carew Street
Wilk Lane -- Cinnamon Drive
Wilk Lane [Added
10-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-79]
-- McDonald Drive
Wilmont Street -- Newell Street
Wilson Avenue West Old Field Road
Windsor Street North Summit Avenue
Windsor Street South McKinstry Avenue
Woodbridge Road Both Partridge Lane
Woodbridge Road Both Pendleton Avenue
Woodcrest Circle South Westover Road
Woodcrest Court [Added
9-16-2014 by Ord. No.
14-27]
-- Woodcrest Drive
Worthington Street West Arcade Street
York Street [Added
2-20-2018 by Ord. No.
18-4]
South Chapel Street
York Street Both Lafayette Street
Yvette Street [Added
2-1-2000 by Ord. No.
00-4]
-- Schorr Street
§ 260-73.1. Schedule XIVA: Four-Way Stop Signs With Four-Way
Placards. [Added 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-97]
In accordance with § 260-40C, the erection and maintenance of four-way
stop signs are authorized as follows:
(Reserved)
§ 260-74. Schedule XV: Traffic Signals.
In accordance with § 260-39I, traffic signals shall be located at the following
intersections:
§ 260-73 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-74
1:572
Name of Street At Intersection of
Abbey Drive Broadway
Broadway [Added 4-20-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-24]
Abbey Memorial Drive
Burnett Road New Lombard Road
Carew Street [Added 5-18-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-35]
East Main Street
Celia Street [Added 6-15-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-59]
James Street
Chicopee Street [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-83B]
Grattan Avenue
Columba Street (pedestrian crossing
lights)
Grattan Street
Dale Street (blinking yellow light)
[Added 6-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-48]
Rolf
McKinstry Avenue (blinking red
lights) [Amended 5-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-30A]
Arcade Street
McKinstry Avenue (blinking yellow
lights) [Amended 5-7-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-30A]
McKinstry Avenue
§ 260-75. Schedule XVI: Yield Intersections.
The following streets are designated as yield streets at the intersections and
in the directions indicated:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Bridle Path Road -- At No. 66
Briere Drive -- Mary Street
Church Street Southbound Broadway
Francis Street [Added
4-18-1995 by Ord. No.
95-13]
-- Hafey Street
Springfield Street South Center Street
Springfield Street South Front Street
Sunnymeade Avenue East Archie Street
§ 260-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-76
1:573
§ 260-76. Schedule XVII: Prohibited U-Turns.
In accordance with § 260-45, U-turns shall be prohibited at the following
locations:
Name of Street Location
Bridges All
Center Street From Exchange Street to Cabot Street
Exchange Street From Center Street to Perkins Street
Main Street From Broadway to Grove Street
§ 260-77. Schedule XVIII: Prohibited Turns.
In accordance with § 260-46, the following turns shall be prohibited at the
locations indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection of
Britton Street
[Added 10-17-1995
by Ord. No. 95-75]
-- Right Memorial Drive (both
intersections)
East Main Street West Left Broadway
Lauzier Terrace
[Added 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-41]
-- Right Wendy's driveway 180
feet west of Memorial
Drive
Park Street [Added
10-21-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-31]
-- Left South side while exiting
89 Park Street
§ 260-78. Schedule XIX: Required Turns.
Vehicles shall be required to make the following turns at the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Required
Turn At Intersection of
Buckley Boulevard South Right Prospect Street (right
lane)
Cabot Street (left
lane)
South Left Exchange Street
Cabot Street (right
lane)
South Right Exchange Street
§ 260-76 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-78
1:574
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Required
Turn At Intersection of
Chicopee Street (left
lane) [Added
2-18-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-7]
North Left Wilson Street
Chicopee Street (left
lane)
South Left Prospect Street
Chicopee Street
(right lane)
North Right Prospect Street
East Street (left
lane)
Both Left Beauchamp Terrace
East Street (left
lane)
Both Left Crestwood Street
Exchange Street (2
left lanes)
East Left Center Street
Front Street (left
lane)
West Left Cabot Street
Granby Road (left
lane)
North Left Grattan Street
Grattan Street (right
lane)
East Right Montgomery Street
Montcalm Street
(left lane)
North Left James Street
Montgomery Street
(left lane)
North Left Sheridan Street
Pride Service
Station (no left turn
from exit) [Added
3-21-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-8]
East Right Montgomery Street
Prospect Street
(right lane)
East Right Yelle Street
Springfield Street
(right lane)
South Right Center Street
§ 260-79. Schedule XX: Commercial Vehicles Excluded.
In accordance with § 260-49A, commercial vehicles are excluded from the
following streets or parts of streets:
§ 260-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-79
1:575
Name of Street Location
Abby Memorial Drive Entire length
Armory Drive Entire length
Baltic Avenue Entire length
Beauregard Terrace Entire length
Couege Street [Added
5-17-2016 by Ord. No.
16-24]
Entire length
Debra Street From Memorial Drive to Vadnais Street
Deslauriers Street Entire length
Fair Avenue Entire length
Jacob Street Entire length
Old Lyman Road Entire length
Pendleton Avenue From Memorial Drive to Woodbridge Road
Prospect Street Entire length
Rolf Avenue From Grattan Street to Dale Street
South Street Entire length
Vadnais Street Entire length
White Birch Avenue Entire length
§ 260-80. Schedule XXI: Tow-Away Zones.
In accordance with § 260-52A, the following locations shall be designated as
tow-away zones:
Name of Street Side Hours Limits
Academy Street
[Added 3-17-1998
by Ord. No. 98-21;
repealed
10-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-68]
Belcher Street
[Added 12-21-1999
by Ord. No.
99-112]
Even All Intersection of East Main
and Belcher Street
Berger Street -- 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Entire length
Burnett Road North All From Blanan Drive to
Robak Drive
§ 260-79 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-80
1:576
Name of Street Side Hours Limits
Center Street East All From a point 30 feet south
of Plainfield Street to a
point 105 feet north of
Plainfield Street
Charbonneau
Terrace [Added
2-15-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-113]
-- All From 34 Charbonneau
Terrace to end of 120
Rivers Avenue
Duprat Street West All From the southerly end of
the street for a distance of
300 feet in a northerly
direction
Eastern Avenue
[Added 10-7-1997
by Ord. No. 97-57]
Even All From Empire Street to
Northern Drive
East Main Street Both All From Carew Street to the
Springfield City line
East Main Street
[Added 12-18-2001
by Ord. No.
01-107]
South All Between Hilton Street and
Hillman Street
East Street (off East
Street)
-- All From the easterly side of
the Avenue intersection of
East Street for a distance
of 30 feet
Emerson Street North All Entire length
End Street Both All Entire length
Falmouth Road South All From the intersection of
Route 33 for 200 feet
Florence Street North All From Chicopee Street to a
point 50 feet west thereof
Florence Street South All From Chicopee Street to a
point 70 feet east thereof
Front Street
[Repealed
6-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-36]
Grattan Street North All For a distance of 40 feet
Grattan Street North All From a point 140 feet to a
point 265 feet therefrom
§ 260-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-80
1:577
Name of Street Side Hours Limits
Grove Street
[Repealed
10-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-53]
Hamilton Street
[Repealed
11-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-96]
Hamilton Street
[Added 6-15-1999
by Ord. No. 99-55]
Both All All entire length
Hampden Street
[Added 6-21-2011
by Ord. No. 11-14]
East All In front of 401 Hampden
Street for a distance of 95
feet in a southerly
direction
Lawndale Street
[Added 2-1-2000
by Ord. No. 00-6]
Both All From Meadow Street for a
distance of 250 feet
Montville Street Both All In front of 47 Montville
Street for a distance of 40
feet
Page Court [Added
6-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-56]
-- All Entire length
Paine Avenue
[Added 6-15-1999
by Ord. No. 99-54]
-- All Entire length
Pendexter Avenue
[Added 3-21-2000
by Ord. No. 00-28]
Both All From Meadow Street
entrance for a distance of
250 feet
Porter Street -- All In front of the Dugre
property
Prospect Street Both All From College Street to
dead end (Westover Air
Force Base)
Providence Street South All From Grattan Street to a
point 265 feet therefrom
Providence Street Southwest
All From Grattan Street to a
point 300 feet therefrom
Providence Street Southwest
All From Grattan Street to a
point 100 feet west thereof
§ 260-80 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-80
1:578
Name of Street Side Hours Limits
Riverview Place
(dead ends)
-- All From Lucretia Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday,
except
funeral and
wake parking
when posted
From 20 Roosevelt Avenue
to the corner of
Springfield Street
Sherman Avenue
[Added 6-26-2003
by Ord. No. 03-23]
-- All Between driveway at 14
Sherman Avenue and
handicap entrance to Dana
Park
Springfield Street East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday,
except
funeral and
wake parking
when posted
From the northerly corner
of Roosevelt Avenue south
to the first driveway
Springfield Street East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday,
except
funeral and
wake parking
when posted
From Roosevelt Avenue to
Austin Street
Springfield Street West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday,
except
funeral and
wake parking
when posted
From Chapin Street south
to Casino Avenue
Spring Street
[Repealed
10-6-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-53]
§ 260-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-80
1:579
Name of Street Side Hours Limits
Spring Street
[Added 10-6-2015
by Ord. No. 15-54]
West All From a point 68 feet from
Front Street to a point 98
feet therefrom
Stonina Drive
[Added 4-15-2003
by Ord. No. 03-13]
North
(even
number)
All From the corner of
Hampden Street to the
corner of Plante Circle
Union Street
[Added 6-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-42]
West All From the intersection of
South Street to the first
driveway
Volpe Drive [Added
11-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-101]
Both All Entire length
§ 260-81. Schedule XXII: Speed Limits.
Operation of a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of the following
limits shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is greater than is
reasonable and proper. The provisions of this section shall not abrogate in
any sense MGL c. 90, § 14.
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Ann Street [Added
6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-51]
20 Entire length
Anson Street 25 Entire length
Applewood Drive 25 Entire length
Ashgrove Street [Added
10-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-83]
20 Entire length
Basil Road 30 To Ludlow Town line
Basil Road 15 Rest of length
Beaudry Avenue 20 Entire length
Beauregard Terrace 15 Entire length
Bemis Avenue 25 Entire length
Better Way 30 Entire length
Blanchwood Avenue 15 Entire length
Bonneville Avenue 25 Entire length
Bostwick Lane [Added
2-6-1996 by Ord. No.
96-3]
20 Entire length
§ 260-80 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-81
1:580
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Boutin Street 25 Entire length
Britton Street [Added
8-6-1996 by Ord. No.
96-74]
25 Entire length
Casey Drive [Added
10-17-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-74]
20 Entire length
Central Avenue 20 Entire length
Champagne Avenue 20 Entire length
Chapel Street [Added
9-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-60]
25 Entire length
Charpentier Boulevard 20 At Chicopee and Meadow Streets
Circle Drive 20 Entire length
Clairmont Avenue
[Added 8-6-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-73]
20 Entire length
Clarke Street 15 Entire length
Cora Avenue 25 0.19 miles between Chicopee
Street and Hayes Street
Crescent Drive 15 Entire length
Dale Street 25 Entire length
Daley Street [Repealed
3-19-2002 by Ord. No.
02-14]
Daley Street [Added
3-19-2002 by Ord. No.
02-15]
20 Entire length
DeJordy Lane [Added
6-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-58]
15 Entire length
Delauriers Street 25 Entire length
Doverbrook Road 25 Entire length
Eastern Drive 15 Entire length
Edbert Street 15 Entire length
Edgewood Avenue
[Added 8-6-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-72]
20 Entire length
Elcon Drive 15 Entire length
§ 260-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-81
1:581
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Elizabeth Street 20 At Meadow Street
Elizabeth Street 20 From approximately 1/8 mile from
Meadow Street to Chicopee Street
Elmer Drive 15 Entire length
Emmet Street 20 Entire length
Fairview Avenue 30 Entire length
Falmouth Road [Added
9-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-51]
20 Entire length
Ferry Street 25 0.25 miles between Dike Road and
Chicopee Street
Florence Street [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-84]
25 Entire length
Front Street [Added
3-19-1996 by Ord. No.
96-17]
25 Entire length
Granby Road 20 At curve
Granby Road 30 200 feet before the curve and 200
feet after the curve up to Grattan
Street
Grattan Street 25 Entire length
Greenwood Terrace 25 Entire length
Griffith Road 30 Entire length
Holiday Circle 15 Entire length
Honey Lane 15 Entire length
Honeysuckle Drive 25 Entire length
Horseshoe Drive 25 Entire length
Irene Street 25 Entire length
Jacob Street [Added
12-19-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-87]
25 Entire length
James Street 30 Entire length
Jennings Street 20 Entire length
Keddy Boulevard [Added
10-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-82]
15 Entire length
§ 260-81 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-81
1:582
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Kendall Street [Added
4-16-1996 by Ord. No.
96-28]
20 School zone
Lafayette Street [Added
9-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-61]
25 Entire length
Lariviere Drive [Added
2-15-2005 by Ord. No.
05-115]
25 Entire length
Lauzier Terrace 1550 feet from Memorial Drive
Lawrence Road 20 From Granby Road to Nichols
Road
Lombard Road 25 To Robak Drive
Lorraine Street [Added
6-18-1996 by Ord. No.
96-50]
20 Entire length
Ludlow Road [Added
5-16-1995 by Ord. No.
95-20]
20 Entire length
Lynwood Drive 25 Entire length
Madison Street 20 Entire length
Marshall Street 15 Entire length
Meadowlark Lane 25 Entire length
Montcalm Street 30 South at New Ludlow Road
Moore Street 25 Entire length
Musiak Drive [Added
9-19-1996 by Ord. No.
96-78]
25 Entire length
Narragansett Boulevard
[Added 10-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-55]
30 From Chicopee Street to the dike
Nelson Street 20 Entire length
Newbury Street 25 From the Springfield City line to
Springfield Street
New Ludlow Road 25 From west of Montcalm Street to
the South Hadley line
Northern Drive 15 Entire length
Old Field Road 25 At the corner of Foss Avenue
Old Field Road 25 At 380 Old Field Road, both sides
§ 260-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-81
1:583
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Old Field Road 25 At the corner of Peace Street
Partridge Lane 25 Entire length
Pheasant Way 25 Entire length
Plante Circle 15 Entire length
Prospect Street 25 From Buckley Boulevard to
Montcalm Street
Reed Street 20 Entire length
Rimmon Avenue [Added
10-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-66]
25 Entire length
Robinridge Road 25 Entire length
Rose Street [Added
6-15-1999 by Ord. No.
99-50]
15 Entire length
Roy Street 15 Entire length
Sergeant Avenue 20 Entire length
Shawinigan Drive
[Amended 1-16-2001
by Ord. No. 01-01]
40 Entire length
Shaw Park Avenue
[Added 6-18-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-48]
20 Entire length
Sheridan Street
[Amended 1-16-2007
by Ord. No. 07-21]
30 North of Fuller Road
Sheridan Street 25 Between Memorial Drive and
Fuller Road
Slate Road [Added
4-18-1995 by Ord. No.
95-16]
15 Entire length
Southern Drive 15 Entire length
Stedman Street
[Amended 6-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-49]
20 Entire length
Stonina Drive 15 Entire length
Sunnymeade Avenue
[Added 10-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-53]
20 Between Wheatland Avenue and
Bemis Avenue
Taylor Street 15 Entire length
§ 260-81 CHICOPEE CODE § 260-81
1:584
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Vivian Street 15 Entire length
Voss Avenue [Added
2-15-2005 by Ord. No.
05-116]
25 Entire length
Western Drive 15 Entire length
Westover Road 30 Entire length
White Birch Avenue 15 Entire length
Wilson Avenue [Added
2-6-1996 by Ord. No.
96-2]
20 Entire length
Woodbridge Road 25 Entire length
Woodstock Street 30 Entire length
§ 260-82. Schedule XXIII: No Through Trucks.
Through trucks are prohibited at the following locations:
Name of Street Location
College Street [Added 9-18-2001
by Ord. No. 01-78]
At the end
New Ludlow Road [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 01-82]
At the intersection of Ann Street
New Ludlow Road [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 01-79]
At the intersection of Cherryvale
Street
New Ludlow Road [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 01-81]
At the intersection of Filmore Street
New Ludlow Road [Added
9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 01-80]
At the intersection of Lombard Street
§ 260-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-82
1:585
Chapter 260R
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Commission — See Ch. 16. Art. IX.
City vehicles — See Ch. 95.
Motor vehicles on City property — See Ch.
198.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 250.
Unregistered and abandoned vehicles — See
Ch. 262.
Chapter 262
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 260.
§ 262-1. Prohibited storage.
§ 262-2. Notice to remove; failure to remove.
No person, company or corporation in control of real property in the
City of Chicopee, other than a bona fide licensed commercial auto
salvage yard or commercial garage, as determined by the License
Committee of the City Council, shall permit the outdoor storage or
parking thereon for more than three days of an abandoned,
disassembled, inoperable motor vehicle except for one unregistered
vehicle that is operable. [Amended 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10;
9-17-1998 by Ord. No. 98-59; 6-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-61;
9-1-2009; 9-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-59]
A.
Any such motor vehicle may be deemed a public nuisance and an
attractive hazardous condition by the Chicopee Department of Public
Health, MGL c. 111, § 123.
B.
Real property, as related aforesaid, includes yards, lawns, driveways,
empty property, land parcel and tree belts. It is, however, not limited
to public vehicular travel byways where the Chicopee Department of
Public Health determines it to be a public safety hazard, attractive
nuisance or detrimental to the health of the Chicopee community.
C.
Upon inspection, those motor vehicles may be appropriately tagged,
without prior notice to the owner of said vehicle, with a decal calling
for a seventy-two-hour notice to remove.
A.
B. Failure to remove such vehicle will be subject to:
§ 260-82 CHICOPEE CODE § 262-2
1:586
§ 262-3. Removal by City; impoundment.
If the Chicopee Department of Public Health must remove the vehicle from
the stored or parked area, it will be impounded at a site determined by the
Chicopee Department of Public Health. The cost of impounding and storage
will be assessed to the owner of said vehicle or vehicles.
§ 262-4. Conflict with statute.
This section is not intended to preclude any enforcement by the Chicopee
Police Department under provisions of MGL c. 135.
§ 262-5. Notice to violators.
Violators, if known, will be notified, in writing, to abate the condition and be
given five calendar days to comply with said order.
§ 262-6. Prosecution.
Persons, companies or corporations in violation may be prosecuted upon
proper procedures by the Chicopee Department of Public Health in the
Trial Court of the Housing Court of Hampden County, held at Springfield,
Massachusetts.
§ 262-7. Definitions. [Added 6-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-60]
Removal by towing at the owner's expense unless an appeal is
made to the Health Commissioners within five working days.
(1)
(2) A fine of $50 per day until such vehicle or vehicles is moved.
Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their
ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be considered for
definitional purposes:
ABANDONED — Anything which is left on municipal property under
such circumstances and for a period of more than three days that it
appears the owner does not have any plan to claim it.
DISASSEMBLED — In a state of ruin so as to be incapable of
propulsion; not intact or substantially the same condition as originally
purchased.
INOPERABLE — In order for a motor vehicle to be inoperable as that
term is used in this chapter, it must not have a valid inspection sticker,
or be incapable of operation under its own power, or be unable to run
without assistance, or not be capable of safe movement, or not be fit
in all ways for safe, legal and ordinary use as a motor vehicle on the
public ways of the commonwealth. Any vehicle which is inoperable and
is parked or stored in violation of this chapter may be removed by the
B.
§ 262-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 262-7
1:587
Chapter 266
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
§ 266-1. Permit required for transport of certain substances.
Chapter 269
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Works Department - See Ch. 80.
Sewers — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Wastewater treatment — See Ch. 266.
§ 269-1. General duties of Water Commissioner. [Amended
9-1-2009]
The Board of Water Commissioners shall, under the general direction of
the Mayor and City Council, have charge of the construction, alteration
and care of all water pipes and water fixtures owned by the City and may
make all necessary repairs thereto and extension thereof; shall have general
control and care of all buildings and structures used exclusively by the
Water Department; and shall keep the same in repair.
§ 269-2. General duties of Superintendent of Water Department.
[Amended 6-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-37; 12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-73]
The Superintendent of the Water Department shall, under the direction and
control of the Superintendent of Public Works and as a department head
within the division structure consistent with Chapter 80 of the Chicopee
City in accordance with this chapter.[Amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-19]
UNREGISTERED — No valid registration or number plate as issued by
the Department of Motor Vehicles under the provisions of MGL c. 90.
UNINSPECTED — Lacking a valid inspection sticker as issued under
the provisions of MGL c. 90.
No person, firm, corporation, political subdivision or agency thereof or
other entity shall cause to be transported or transport any sludge or
any solid, semisolid or liquid waste from without the City to any limit
within the City without first securing a permit from the City Council.
A.
Said permit shall be granted by a majority (seven) of all the members of
the City Council.
B.
§ 262-7 CHICOPEE CODE § 269-2
1:588
City Code, have secondary charge and care of all new construction or
extension and of all repairs and management of the works of said
Department. He shall have authority to dig up the streets and highways, so
far as is necessary for the purpose of paving and repairing lines of water
pipe or water mains, but in all such cases the streets, while so dug up,
are to be suitably protected and guarded, and after the work is finished,
the streets shall be left in a condition satisfactory to the Superintendent
of Public Works. All defects in highways or streets caused by leaks in
water mains or pipes shall be repaired by the Superintendent of the Water
Department to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works. Upon
receiving notice from the Chief of the Fire Department of any defective
hydrant, said Superintendent shall cause the same to be repaired without
delay. The Superintendent of the Water Division should issue a news release
to the newspapers and place information on local media notifying residents
of any scheduled maintenance that would result in service disruption.
§ 269-3. Superintendent to act as registrar. [Amended 12-15-2015
by Ord. No. 15-74]
The Superintendent of the Water Department shall act as registrar and shall
keep such books and make such reports and perform such other duties as
the Board of Water Commissioners and the Superintendent of Public Works
may prescribe. He shall file with the City Collector and City Auditor on
the first day of each month a list of water receipts which are payable on
those days, and on the first day of each month he shall file with the City
Collector and City Auditor a statement of all water receipts and other claims
which may have become due to the City during the preceding month in
his Department. Whenever any bill is abated or changed by the Board of
Water Commissioners, a certificate of such abatement or change, signed by
the Superintendent of the Water Department, shall be delivered to the City
Collector and City Auditor and shall become his voucher for the amount
therein stated.
§ 269-4. Duties of Deputy Superintendent.
Whenever, by reason of absence, illness or other cause, the Superintendent
of the Water Department is unable to perform the duties of his office, the
Deputy Superintendent of the Water Department shall perform such duties
and, when so doing, shall exercise all of the powers and assume all of the
responsibilities of the office of the Superintendent of the Water Department.
§ 269-5. Duties of Water Department Engineer. [Amended
12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-75]
There shall be established the position of Engineer of the Water
Department, who shall have charge of all records, plans and designs of
the water distribution system, including all extensions and replacements.
He shall make such reports and perform such other duties as the
Superintendent of Public Works, Superintendent of Water and the Board of
Water Commissioners may prescribe.
§ 269-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-6
1:589
§ 269-6. Authority to prescribe rules and regulations; establishment
of tariff. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 08-50]
§ 269-7. Disposition of surplus receipts. [Amended 9-1-2009]
All surplus receipts of the Water Department shall be held in a reserve fund
which can only be expended within the Department upon the request of the
Board of Water Commissioners, the recommendation of the Mayor and the
approval of the City Council.
§ 269-8. Responsibilities of contractors and developers. [Amended
4-7-1981]
The Board of Water Commissioners may prescribe rules and regulations
for the use of water supplied by the City for domestic and other
purposes and shall maintain and keep in force such a tariff of water
rates as shall have been ordained by the City Council, printed copies of
which rules and regulations and rates shall be furnished to all persons
taking water of the City.
A.
The Board of Water Commissioners, when notified and requested by
the Board of Sewer Commissioners, will terminate the water service
to all customers located outside the City of Chicopee limits who have
unpaid balances for sewer use and storm fees. Termination will be in
accordance with the Water Department's written policy and regulations
titled "Billing, Termination & Appeal Regulations."
B.
All contractors, land developers, subdividers, real estate operators and
home builders of more than one unit shall be required to provide and
pay for construction, installation, testing and disinfection of consumer
water mains, pipes, valves, hydrants and fittings in streets and ways
as designed, specified and approved by the Board of Water
Commissioners. Said contractors, land developers, subdividers, real
estate operators and home builders shall supply all material as
specified by the Board of Water Commissioners and equipment
necessary for the installation of house service connections from the
main in the street to a point in the cellar where the City Water
Department connects its meter. The City Water Department shall install
said house service connections at the expense of the contractor, land
developer, subdivider, real estate operator or home builder.
A.
The work herein required to be done by the contractors, land
developers, subdividers, real estate operators and home builders shall
pay for the time of an inspector designated by the Superintendent
of Public Works, and said work shall be subject to acceptance by
the Superintendent of Public Works in consultation with the
Superintendent of the Water Division. [Amended 12-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-76]
B.
The above-mentioned contractors, land developers, subdividers, real
estate operators and home builders shall post a maintenance bond to
C.
§ 269-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 269-8
1:590
§ 269-9. Use and control of hydrants.
§ 269-10. Water and water meter rental rates.
§ 269-11. Water emergency. [Added 10-4-1988]
guarantee maintenance of the system for a period of one year from the
date of completion and commencement of use, the amount of said bond
to be 10% of the cost of installation.
All above-mentioned water mains, etc., shall become the property of
the City of Chicopee at the expiration of one year from the date of
acceptance.
D.
All hydrants in the City of Chicopee shall be under the control,
supervision and maintenance of the Water Department. No person,
except the Chicopee Fire Department, for emergency use only, shall use
any hydrant for any purpose, unless authorized to do so in writing by
the Board of Water Commissioners. Any defects in hydrants shall be
reported forthwith to the Water Department, which shall correct said
defect at once.
A.
Any unauthorized use of a hydrant by anyone shall be prosecuted as a
violation of this chapter and subject the offender to a fine of not more
than $50.
B.
The Water Department shall establish and maintain the following tariff
of water rates.64
A.
The Water Department shall establish and maintain the following water
meter rental rates.65
B.
All charges or bills shall be due and payable 45 days after issued and
charges or bills remaining unpaid after such due date shall be charged
interest thereon at a rate of 14% per year as provided in MGL c. 40,
§ 21E. If the last day of the forty-five-day period after issuance of the
bill falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the account may be paid
on the next regular business day thereafter without payment of the late
payment fee, effective with bills rendered on or after January 2, 1990.
[Added 12-19-1989]
C.
The Mayor, with the Superintendent of the Water Department and the
Board of Water Commissioners, shall have the authority to declare a
public emergency due to inadequate water supplies. The Mayor shall
have the authority with the above to put a partial ban or total ban on
outside water use which is deemed unnecessary. The announcement in
the media shall include a listing of prohibited activities. A total ban
shall be approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
A.
64.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
65.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 269-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-11
1:591
§ 269-12. Cross-connection control. [Added 2-7-1989; amended
6-23-1989]
Quality Engineering. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First offense: warning.
(2) Second offense: fine of $25 and any court costs.
(3) Third offense: fine of $50 and any court costs.
(4) Fourth offense: fine of $100 and any court costs.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which
a violation occurs or continues. Violations beyond the fourth day will
receive a fine of $150 per day plus any court costs. If a water
emergency ban on outdoor use is terminated and another emergency
declared later the same year, the first offense during the new
emergency will be a warning.
B.
C. The Police Department shall be the enforcing authority.
The Mayor shall designate the appeals officer and collector of violations
of this chapter and any other details.
D.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
Protect the public potable water supply served by the Chicopee
Water Department from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating such contaminants or pollutants which could
backflow or backsiphon into the public water system.
(1)
Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between its customers in-plant potable water
system and nonpotable systems.
(2)
Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination
or pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
(3)
A.
Authority. The authority for this section is:
As provided in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, (Public
Law 93-523), and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Drinking
Water Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, the water purveyor has the
primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved
sources or any other substances from entering the public potable
water system.
(1)
The City of Chicopee, Board of Water Commissioners, Rules and
Regulations, adopted ____________ .
(2)
B.
§ 269-11 CHICOPEE CODE § 269-12
1:592
Responsibility. The Water Commission shall be responsible for the
protection of the public potable water supply distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow or backsiphonage of
contaminants or pollutants. If, as a result of a survey of the premises,
the Commission determines that an approved backflow prevention
device is required at the City's water service connection or as in-plant
protection on any customer's premises, the Commission or its delegated
agent shall issue a cross-connection violation form to said customer
to install approved backflow prevention devices. The customer shall,
within a time frame determined by the Commission, install such
approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure or refusal
or inability on the part of the customer to install said device or devices
within the specified time frame shall constitute a ground for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been properly installed.
C.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The method of preventing backflow through
the use of an unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the
flood rim of the receptacle.
APPROVED — Accepted by the reviewing authority as meeting an
applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation or as suitable
for the proposed use.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR DEVICES — A
method to prevent backflow approved by the Department for use in
Massachusetts.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow device
used to prevent backsiphonage which is not designed for use under
static line pressure.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply of unknown or
questionable quality on or available to the premises other than the
supplier's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from
any source other than the intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC
VENT — A device having two independently operating check valves
separated by an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically
venting it to the atmosphere, in which the check valves are force loaded
to a normally closed position and the venting means is force loaded to
a normally open position.
D.
§ 269-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-12
1:593
BACK PRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical means or other
means which causes water or other liquids or substances to flow or
move in a direction opposite to that which is intended.
BACKSIPHONAGE — A form of backflow due to reduced or
subatmospheric pressure within a water system.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe rising at least 35 feet, at its
topmost point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
COMMISSION — The City of Chicopee Board of Water Commissioners
or owner or operator of a public water supply system.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological
substance or matter in water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between a
distribution pipe of potable water from a public system and any waste
pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain or other unapproved source.
CROSS-CONNECTION VIOLATION FORM — A violation form
designated by the Department, which is sent to the owner by the water
supplier with copies sent to the Department, plumbing inspectors and
Board of Health delineating cross-connection violations found on the
owner's premises and a procedure for corrective action.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Quality Engineering.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — A backflow prevention device
which incorporates an assembly of check valves, with shutoff valves at
each end and appurtenances for testing.
IN-PLANT PROTECTION — The location of approved backflow
prevention devices in a manner which provides simultaneous protection
of the public water system and the potable water system within the
premises.
OWNER — Any person maintaining a cross-connection installation or
owning or occupying premises on which cross-connections can or do
exist.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department which allows a crossconnection
installation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, trust,
partnership, the commonwealth, a municipality, district or other
subdivision or instrumentality of the United States, except that nothing
herein shall be constructed to refer to or include any American Indian
tribe or the United States Secretary of the Interior in his capacity as
trustee of Indian lands.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow prevention
device designed to prevent only backsiphonage and which is designed
for use under static line pressure and which has necessary
appurtenances for testing.
§ 269-12 CHICOPEE CODE § 269-12
1:594
REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An approved
backflow prevention device incorporating two or more check valves,
an automatically operating differential relief valve located between
the two checks, two shutoff valves and necessary appurtenances for
testing.
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two spring-loaded,
independently operating check valves without tightly closing shutoff
valves and test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of
the water meter to act as a containment device.
REVIEWING AUTHORITY — The Department, its designee or the local
plumbing inspector, authorized by MGL c. 142 and licensed by the
Board of State Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters, whichever
is responsible for the review and approval of the installation of an
approved backflow prevention device.
Administration.
The Commission will operate an active cross-connection control
program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills
the requirements of the State Department of Environmental
Quality Engineering's cross-connection regulations and is approved
by the Department.
(1)
The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible
cross-connections and shall follow the provisions of the
Commission's program and the Department regulations.
(2)
E.
Duties of Commission and owner.
Commission.
On new installations, the Commission will provide on-site
evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine
the type of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required,
and notify the owner of plan approval requirements by the
appropriate reviewing authority.
(a)
For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the
Commission will perform surveys of the premises and reviews
of as-built plans and issue a cross-connection violation form to
the owner detailing any corrective action required, the method
of achieving the correction and the time allowed for the
correction to be made. The time period allowed shall depend
on the degree of hazard involved.
(b)
The Commission will not allow any cross-connection to remain
unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for
which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly
tested to ensure satisfactory operation.
(c)
(1)
F.
§ 269-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-12
1:595
If the Commission determines at any time that a serious threat
to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated
immediately.
(d)
The Commission shall have on its staff, or shall have a
delegated representative, who is a backflow prevention device
tester certified by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(e)
The Commission will begin initial premises inspections to
determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following
the approval of this program by the Department, during the
calendar year 1989. Initial focus will be on high hazard
industries and commercial premises.
(f)
Owner.
The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or
protection of all cross-connections on his premises.
(a)
The owner shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining
all necessary approvals and permits for the maintenance of
cross-connections and installation of backflow prevention
devices, and applying annually for the renewal of each permit.
(b)
The owner shall have any device that fails an inspection or test
repaired by a licensed plumber.
(c)
The owner shall inform the Commission of any proposed or
modified cross-connection and also any existing crossconnections
of which the owner is aware but has not been
found by the Commission.
(d)
The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow
preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same
type on the bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation
for testing of the device(s) must apply additional devices
necessary to allow testing to take place.
(e)
The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner
approved by the Department and the Commission.
(f)
The owner shall install only reduced pressure backflow
preventers and double check valve assemblies approved by the
State Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
(g)
Any owner of industrial, commercial or institutional premises
having a private well or other private water source must have
a permit if the well or source is cross-connected to the
Commission's system. Permission to cross-connect may be
denied by the Commission. The owner may be required to
install a backflow preventer at the service entrance if a private
water source is maintained even if it is not cross-connected to
the Commission's system.
(h)
(2)
§ 269-12 CHICOPEE CODE § 269-12
1:596
The owner of any residential premises having a private well
or other private water source will not be allowed a physical
connection with the public water system.
(i)
The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees
for permits, device testings, retestings in the case that the
device fails to operate correctly and second reinspections for
noncompliance with Commission or Department requirements.
(j)
Degree of hazard. The Commission recognizes the threat to the public
waste system arising from cross-connections. As such, the Commission,
whereas it is responsible for the quality of the public water supply,
may require a containment device on the water service entrance to
any customer who, as a result of unprotected cross-connections, could
contaminate the public water supply system.
G.
Enforcement. The Commission shall not allow a cross-connection to
exist with the public water supply system unless it is considered
necessary and all appropriate approvals and permits have been issued.
H.
Existing in-use backflow prevention devices. Any existing backflow
preventer shall be allowed by the Commission to continue in service
unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the effectiveness of
the present backflow preventer or result in an unreasonable risk to the
public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in the case
of a residential installation converting to a business establishment, any
existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced pressure
backflow preventer, or a reduced pressure backflow preventer must be
installed in the event that no backflow device was present.
I.
Periodic testing.
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually by
the Commission.
(1)
Periodic testing shall be performed by the Commission's certified
tester or his delegated representative, who shall be a certified
tester.
(2)
The testing shall be conducted during the Commission's regular
business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the
owner, may require additional charges to cover the increased costs
to the Commission.
(3)
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies must be tested annually by the owner, independent of
the semiannual test by the water supplier, and said test must be
conducted by a certified tester.
(4)
Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must
be repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. When repairs are
(5)
J.
§ 269-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 269-12
1:597
Chapter 272
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 16, Art.
IV.
necessary, upon completion of the repair, the device will be
retested at the owner's expense to ensure proper operation. High
hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if
the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be repaired
immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more
than 14 days after the test date will be established. The owner is
responsible for spare parts, repair tools or a replacement device.
Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the
owner ensuring that uninterrupted water service remains during
testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when the
owner desires such continuity.
Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified above in Subsection J(1) in cases where there is a history
of test failures and the Commission feels that due to the degree
of hazard involved, additional testing is warranted. Cost of the
additional tests will be borne by the owner.
(6)
Records and reports.
Records. The Commission will initiate and maintain the following:
Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or
inspections.
(a)
(b) Master files on approved cross-connection installations.
Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
(c)
(1)
Reports. The Commission will submit the following to the
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering:
(a) Initial listing of high hazard cross-connections.
(b) Initial listing low hazard cross-connections.
Annual update lists of items in Subsection K(2)(a) and (b)
above.
(c)
(d) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections and surveys.
(2)
K.
§ 269-12 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-1
1:598
§ 272-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the wetlands, related water
resources and adjoining land areas in the City of Chicopee by prior review
and control of activities deemed by the Conservation Commission likely to
have a significant or cumulative effect upon wetland values, including but
not limited to the following: public or private water supply, groundwater,
groundwater quality, flood control, erosion and sedimentation control,
storm damage prevention, prevention of water pollution, fisheries, shellfish,
wildlife habitat, recreation, aesthetics, agriculture and agriculture values.
The values are to be known collectively as the "wetland values protected by
this chapter."
§ 272-2. Resource areas.
Except as permitted by statute or as provided in this chapter, no person
shall remove, fill, dredge, alter or build upon or within 100 feet of the
wetland resource areas such as:
§ 272-3. Permit required; application; fee; exceptions.
Any freshwater wetland, riverine wetland, marsh, wet meadow, bog or
swamp.
A.
B. Any bank or beach.
Any lake, river, pond or stream, whether intermittent or continuous,
ephemeral, natural or man-made.
C.
D. Any land under the aforesaid waters.
Any land subject to flooding by groundwater, surface water or storm
flowage.
E.
F. Isolated wetlands, including kettle holes.
G. Seasonal wetlands.
H. Upstream drainage that has the potential of altering a resource area.
Exceptions.
The application and permit required by this chapter shall not be
required for maintaining, repairing or replacing an existing and
lawfully located structure or facility which is used in the service
of the public to provide electric, gas, water, sanitary sewer, storm
drainage, public roadway, telephone, telegraph or other
communication services, provided that written notice has been
given to the Conservation Commission prior to the commencement
of the work, provided that the structure or facility will not be, in the
opinion of the Chicopee Conservation Commission, substantially
changed or enlarged, and provided that any work done conforms
(1)
A.
§ 272-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-3
1:599
to the performance standards and regulations adopted by the
Conservation Commission.
Emergency projects.
The application and permit required by this chapter shall not
apply to emergency projects necessary for the protection of
the health or safety of the public, provided that the work is to
be performed or ordered to be performed by an agency of the
commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof, provided that
a request for emergency certification has been filed with the
Chicopee Conservation Commission prior to commencement of
work or within 24 hours after commencement and emergency
certification has been granted by the Chicopee Conservation
Commission or its agent, and provided that the work is
performed only for the time and place certified by the
Conservation Commission for the limited purpose necessary
to abate the emergency. Within 21 days of commencement of
any emergency project, a permit application shall be filed with
the Conservation Commission for review as provided in this
chapter.
(a)
Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the
Commission, the Commission may, after notice and a public
hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and
order restoration and mitigation measures.
(b)
(2)
Application for permit.
Written application shall be filed with the Conservation
Commission to perform any work which will or which, in the
opinion of the Conservation Commission, may affect resource areas
within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Upon the petition of 10
residents of the City, the Conservation Commission shall require
any work commenced within the jurisdiction of this chapter without
a permit to be stopped and may require a written application as
approved in this section. The application shall include such plans as
are deemed necessary by the Conservation Commission to describe
the proposed activities and their effects on the environment. No
work or alteration shall commence without receiving and
complying with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(1)
The Conservation Commission may require an application and
plans under this chapter in addition to the notice of intent and
plans filed pursuant to the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131,
§ 40. Any person desiring to know whether or not proposed work
on an area is subject to this chapter shall file a request for
determination form one with the Conservation Commission. A filing
fee may be required for a written request for determination. The
applicant shall pay for the notice to be published and mailed.
(2)
B.
§ 272-3 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-3
1:600
§ 272-4. Notice; hearing.
At the time of an application or request, the applicant shall pay a
filing fee specified in regulations of the Commission. This fee is in
addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c.
131, § 40. In addition, the Commission is authorized to require the
applicant to pay the costs and expenses of any expert consultant
deemed necessary by the Commission to review the application or
request up to a maximum of 2,500. The Commission may waive the
filing fee and costs and expenses for an application or request filed
by a government agency.
(3)
The permit under the Wetlands Protection Ordinance should be
applied for prior to application for any other permits, variances and
approvals from the municipal government.
(4)
Any person filing a notice of intent or request for determination with
the Conservation Commission shall provide a list of abutters residing
300 feet of the proposed project according to the most recent records
of the Assessors, including those across a traveled way, or any other
persons as the Conservation Commission shall require. When the
person requesting a determination is other than the owner, the notice
of the hearing and the determination itself shall be sent by the
Conservation Commission to the owner as well as to the person making
this request.
A.
The Conservation Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine
its hearing under this chapter with the hearing conducted under the
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
B.
The Conservation Commission may request comments and
recommendations from appropriate boards or commissions before final
action is taken for a determination or notice of intent hearing, which
the Conservation Commission shall take into account but which shall
not be binding on the Conservation Commission.
C.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application or
request for determination, with written notice given at the expense of
the applicant, five working days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
D.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed application or request for determination,
unless an extension is authorized, in writing, by the applicant.
E.
The Commission shall issue its permit or determination, in writing,
within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon, unless an
extension is authorized, in writing, by the applicant.
F.
The Commission shall have authority to continue the hearing to a
certain date announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the
hearing, which may include receipt of additional information offered by
G.
§ 272-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:601
§ 272-5. Notification of boards and Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Any person filing a permit application or a request for determination with
the Commission may be requested to provide a copy thereof at the
Commission's request to the City Council, Planning Board, Board of
Appeals, Board of Health and Building Inspector (Board of Water
Commissioners, etc.). The Commission shall not take final action until such
boards and officials have had 14 days from receipt of notice to file written
comments and recommendations with the Commission, which the
Commission shall take into account but which shall not be binding on
the Commission. The applicant shall have the right to receive any such
comments and recommendations and to respond to them at a hearing of the
Commission prior to final action.
§ 272-6. Issuance; denial; revocation.
the applicant or others, information and plans required of the applicant,
deemed necessary by the Commission in its discretion, or comments
and recommendation of boards and officials. In the event that the
applicant objects to a continuance or postponement, the hearing shall
be closed, and the Commission shall take action on such information as
is available.
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities
which are the subject of the application are likely to have a significant
or cumulative effect upon the wetland values protected by this chapter,
the Commission, within 21 days of the close of the hearing, shall issue
or deny a permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit,
the Commission shall impose conditions which the Commission deems
necessary or desirable to protect those values, and all activities shall be
done in accordance with those conditions.
A.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for just cause and,
among other things, failure to meet any requirement of this chapter;
for failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by
the Commission; for failure to meet the design specifications of the
Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or
cumulative effects upon the wetland values protected by this chapter;
and where no conditions are adequate to protect those values. Due
consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the
applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public hearing.
B.
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance. Any permit
may be renewed for an additional one-year period, provided that a
request for renewal is received, in writing, by the Commission prior to
expiration.
C.
For good cause, the Commission may revoke or modify a permit issued
under this chapter after notice to the holder of the permit and notice to
the public, abutters and town boards, pursuant to § 272-4, and a public
hearing.
D.
§ 272-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-6
1:602
§ 272-7. Rules and regulations.
§ 272-8. Definitions.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine the permit with
other action on an application issued under the Wetlands Protection
Act.
E.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall
promulgate rules and regulations to accomplish the purposes of this
chapter. These regulations shall be consistent with the terms of this
chapter. The Commission may amend the rules and regulations after
public notice and public hearing.
A.
Failure by the Commission to promulgate rules and regulations or a
legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to
suspend or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
B.
Unless otherwise stated in this chapter or in the rules and regulations
promulgated under this chapter, the definitions, procedures and
performance standards of the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and Associates Regulation 310 CMR 10.00 shall apply.
C.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this chapter:
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following actions when
undertaken in areas subject to this chapter:
Removal, grading, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or
aggregate materials of any kind.
(1)
Changing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics,
salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns and
flood-retention characteristics.
(2)
(3) Drainage or other disturbance of the water level or water table.
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality.
(4)
(5) Driving of piles or erection of buildings or structures of any kind.
Placing of obstructions, whether or not they interfere with the flow
of water.
(6)
(7) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees.
Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or
other physical or chemical characteristics of surface and ground
water.
(8)
"Wildlife habitat," which shall mean those areas subject to this
chapter which, due to their plant community composition and
(9)
A.
§ 272-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-8
1:603
BANK — The portion of the land surface which normally abuts and
confines a water body. It occurs between a water body and a vegetated
bordering wetland and its adjacent floodplain or, in the absence of
these, occurs between a water body and an upland.
BOGS — Areas where standing or slowly running water is near or at
the surface during a normal growing season and where a vegetational
community has a significant portion of the ground or water surface
covered with sphagnum moss (Sphagnum species) and where the
vegetational community is made up of a significant portion of one or
more, but not limited to nor necessarily including all, of the following
plants or groups of plants: aster (Aster nemoralis), azaleas
(Rhododendron canadense and Rhododendron viscosum), black spruce
(Picea mariana), bog cotton (Eriophorum), cranberry (Vaccinium
macrocarpon), high-bush blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum, larch
(Latrix laricina), laurels (Kalmia augustifolia and Kalmia polifolia),
leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata), orchids (Arethusa, Calopogon,
Pogonia), pitcher plant (Sarracenia purpurea), sedges (Cyperaceae),
sundews (Droseraceae), sweet gale (Myrica gale) and white cedar
(Chamacyparis thyoides).
EPHEMERAL STREAM — 66 A stream or position of a stream which
flows only in direct response to precipitation. It receives little or no
water from springs and no long-continued supply from melting snow or
other sources. Its channel is at all times above the water table.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — 67 Wetland types which are associated
with nontidal or saltwater wetlands.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — 68
structure, hydrologic regime or other characteristics, provide
important food, shelter, migratory or overwintering areas or
breeding areas for wildlife.
Other changes or modifications which the Conservation
Commission in good faith determines to have a potential adverse
effect on wetland values.
(10)
A "bank" may be partially or totally vegetated, or it may be
comprised of exposed soil, gravel or stone.
(1)
The upper boundary of a "bank" is the first observable break in
the slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher. The
lower boundary of a "bank" is the mean annual flow level.
(2)
A stream which flows part of the time, as after a rainstorm, during
wet weather or during part of the year.
(1)
66.Editor's Note: The source for this definition is from the Dictionary of Geological Terms by
the American Geological Institute, 1974 Edition.
67.Editor's Note: The source for this definition is from Michael L'Heureux.
68.Editor's Note: The source for this definition is from the Dictionary of Geological Terms by
the American Geological Institute, 1974 Edition.
§ 272-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-8
1:604
KETTLE HOLE — 69 A bowl-shaped depression, usually from 30 to 50
feet deep to 500 feet deep, that resulted from the resting place or
burial place of a huge mass of ice that became detached during glacial
melting. The final melting of the ice left a depression. A "kettle pond" is
a "kettle hole" which still retains water.
LAKE — Any open body of water with a surface area of 10 acres or
more.
LAND IN AGRICULTURAL USE — Any qualifying wetland within a
farm which is qualified or eligible to be qualified under the Farmland
Assessment Act, MGL c. 61A, §§ 1-5.
LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING (BORDERING AND ISOLATED) —
One which flows only at certain times when it receives water from
springs (spring-fed) or from some surface source (surface-fed) such
as melting snow.
(2)
BORDERING LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — An area with low,
flat topography adjacent to and inundated by floodwaters rising
from rivers, streams, ponds or lakes. It extends from the banks of
these waterways and water bodies; where a bordering vegetated
wetland occurs, it extends from said wetland.
The boundary of "bordering land subject to flooding" is the
estimated maximum lateral extent of floodwater which will
theoretically result from the statistical one-hundred-year
frequency storm. Said boundary shall be that determined by
reference to the most recently available flood profile data
prepared for the community within which the work is proposed
under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), currently
administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Said boundary so determined shall be presumed accurate. This
presumption may be overcome only by credible evidence from
a registered engineer or other professional competent in such
matters and to the satisfaction of the Conservation
Commission.
(a)
Where NFIP profile data is unavailable, the boundary of
"bordering land subject to flooding" shall be the maximum
lateral extent of floodwater which has been observed or
recorded.
(b)
(1)
ISOLATED LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — An isolated
depression or closed basin without an inlet or an outlet, It is an
area which at least once a year confines standing water.
(2)
69.Editor's Note: The source for this definition is from the Dictionary of Geological Terms by
the American Geological Institute, 1974 Edition.
§ 272-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-8
1:605
LAND UNDER WATER —
MARSH — Areas where a vegetational community exists in standing
or running water during the growing season and where a significant
part of the vegetational community is composed, but not limited to nor
necessarily including all, of the following plants or groups of plants:
arums (Araceae), bladderworts (Utricularia), bur reeds
(Sparganiaceae), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), cattails
(Typha). duckweeds (Lemnaceae), ellgrass (Vallisneria), frog bits
Hydrophilic grasses (Oiaceae), leatherleaf (Chamaedaphne calyculata),
pickerelweeds (Pontederiaceae), pipeworts (Eriocaulon), pondweeds
(Potamogeton), rushes (Juncaceae), sweet gale (Myrica gale), water
milfoil (Haloragaceae), water lilies (Nymphaeaceae), water starworts
(Callitrichaceae) and water willow (Decodon verticillatus).
NORMAL MAINTENANCE OR IMPROVEMENT OF LAND IN
AGRICULTURAL USE —
"Isolated land subject to flooding" may be underlain by
pervious material, which in turn may be covered by a mat of
organic peat or muck.
(a)
The boundary of "isolated land subject to flooding" is the
perimeter of the largest observed or recorded volume of water
confined in said area.
(b)
Land under water bodies is the land beneath any river, stream,
pond or lake. Said land may be composed of organic muck or peat,
fine sediments, rocks or bedrock.
(1)
The boundary of land under water bodies is the mean annual highwater
level.
(2)
Includes only:
(a) Tilling practices customarily employed in the raising of crops.
Pasturing of animals, including such fences and protective
structures as may be required.
(b)
Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and similar materials
subject to state and federal regulations covering their use.
(c)
Constructing, grading or restoring of field ditches, subsurface
drains, grass waterways, culverts, access roads and similar
practices to improve drainage, prevent erosion, provide more
effective use of rainfall and improve equipment operation and
efficiency, in order to improve conditions for the growing of
crops.
(d)
(1)
Improvements of land in agricultural use — Also includes more
extensive practices such as the building of ponds, dams, structures
for water control, water and sediment basins and related activities,
but only where a plan for such activity approved by the
(2)
§ 272-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-8
1:606
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,
the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to City ordinances, administrative agencies, public or quasi-public
corporations or bodies, the City of Chicopee and any other legal entity,
its legal representatives, agents or assigns.
POND — Any open body of water, either naturally occurring or manmade
by impoundment, which is never without standing water due
to natural causes, except during periods of extended drought. For
purposes of this definition, "extended drought" shall mean any period of
four or more months during which the average rainfall for each month
is 50% or less of the ten-year average for that same month. Basins
or lagoons which are part of wastewater treatment plants shall not be
considered "ponds."
QUALIFYING WETLAND — Only inland freshwater areas which are
seasonally flooded basins or flats or inland fresh meadows.
RIVER — A natural flowing body of water that empties into any lake or
other river and which flows through the year.
RlVERINE WETLAND — 70 Wetland and deep-water habitats that are
contained within a channel. These areas are particularly valuable in
reducing the danger of flooding.
SEASONAL WETLANDS — Isolated depressions or closed basins which
temporarily confine water during periods of high water table and high
input from spring runoff, snow melt or heavy precipitation and support
populations of nontransient macroorganisms or serve as breeding
habitat for a select species of amphibians. In the absence of those
habitat functions, the areas should be considered land subject to
flooding.
STREAM — A body of running water, including brooks and creeks,
which moves in a definite channel in the ground due to a hydraulic
gradient. A portion of a "stream" may flow through a culvert or beneath
a bridge. Such a body of running water which does not flow throughout
the year is also a "stream."
Conservation District of the Soil Conservation Service is furnished
to the Conservation Commission prior to the commencement of
work.
All such activity shall subsequently be carried out in accord with
said plan. In the event that the work is not carried out in
accordance with the required plan, the Conservation Commission
may place a stop order on said work and have recourse to such
measures as if the plan were an order of conditions.
(3)
70.Editor's Note: The source for this definition is from Wetlands by William J. Mitsch and
James G. Gosselink 1986.
§ 272-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-8
1:607
§ 272-9. Security.
For major projects requiring specialized expertise, the Commission may
require, as a permit condition, that the performance and observance of
other conditions be secured by one or both of the following methods:
SWAMPS — Areas where groundwater is at or near the surface of the
ground for a significant part of the growing season or where runoff
water from surface drainage frequently collects above the soil surface
and where a significant part of the vegetational community is made up
of but is not limited to nor necessarily includes, all of the following
plants or groups of plants: alders (Alnus), ashes (Fraxinus), azaleas
(Rhododendron canadense and Rhododendron viscosum), black spruce
(Picea mariana), buttonbush (Cophalanthus occidentalis), white
hellebore (Veratrum viride), hemlock (Tsuga canadensis), high-bush
blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum), larch (Larix laricina), cowslip
(Caltha palustris), poison sumac (Toxicodendron vernix), red maple
(Acer rubrum), skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus), sphagnum
mosses (Sphagnum), spicebush (Lindera benzoin), black gum tupelo
(Nyssa sylvatica), sweet pepper bush (Clethra alnifolia), white cedar
(Chamaecyparis thyoides) and willow (Salicaceae).
UPSTREAM DRAINAGE WITH POTENTIAL OF ALTERING WETLANDS
— 71 Overland or surficial flow (runoff), which may originate from
natural sources (springs, snow melt, precipitation, etc.) or human
development (roads, driveways, slope changes, lawns, drainage swales,
drainage outfalls or other human landscape alterations), which carries
a sediment load or pollution that may alter a resource area. Such
drainage may not necessarily flow in any discernible channel but may
flow as sheet flow (over smooth surfaces), thread flow (through small
stems and leaves) or riverlet flow (along small hills on the surface).
WET MEADOW — Where groundwater is at the surface for a significant
part of the growing season and near the surface throughout the year
and where a significant part of the vegetational community is composed
of various grasses, sedges and rushes; made up of, but not limited
to nor necessarily including all, of the following plants or groups of
plants: blue flag (Iris), vervain (Verbena), thoroughwort (Eupatorium),
dock (Rumex), fales loosestrife (Lythrum), marsh fern (Dryopteris
thelypteris), rushes (Juncaceae), sedges (Cyperaceae), sensitive fern
(Onoclea sensibilis) and smartweed (Polyconum).
The Commission may adopt additional definitions not inconsistent with
this section in its regulations promulgated pursuant to § 272-7 of this
chapter.
B.
By a bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities in an amount
determined by the Commission to be sufficient and payable to the City
of Chicopee.
A.
71.Editor's Note: The source for this definition is from Michael L'Heureux.
§ 272-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-9
1:608
§ 272-10. Artificial wetlands.
§ 272-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant running with
the land, executed and properly recorded (or registered, in the case of
registered land).
B.
Normally, in order to promote the wetland values and interests listed in
§ 272-1, no removal, filling, dredging or altering shall be mitigated by
or compensated for in any way by creation of a substitute or artificial
wetland.
A.
Exceptions to this section will be at the sole discretion of the
Conservation Commission, whose discretion will not be exercised in an
arbitrary, capricious or discriminatory manner.
B.
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have the
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this chapter for any verifiable complaint
and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or
sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
A.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this chapter, its
regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative orders and civil and criminal court actions.
B.
Upon request of the Commission, the City Solicitor may take legal
action for enforcement under civil and criminal.
C.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other
officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, regulations
thereunder or permits issued thereunder shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $300. Each day or portion thereof during which
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each
provision of the chapter, regulations or permit violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This fine may be in addition to any levied under the
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, to a maximum of $25,000.
E.
In addition to the procedures for enforcement set forth above, the
provisions of the Chicopee Wetlands Ordinance, Chapter 272, may be
enforced, by members of the Chicopee Conservation Commission or the
Conservation Administrator, through the use of noncriminal complaint
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day upon which
a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. The penalty for
violation of any provision of the chapter shall be $25 for the first
offense, $50 for the second offense, $100 for the third offense, $200
for the fourth and each subsequent offense. [Amended 12-20-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-93]
F.
§ 272-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-12
1:609
§ 272-12. Proof of effect on environment.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have any significant or cumulative detrimental effect
upon the wetland values protected by this chapter. Failure to provide
adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be
sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with
conditions.
§ 272-13. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Statutes, independent of
the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and the regulations
thereunder.
Chapter 275
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development and Industrial
Commissions — See Ch. 16, Art. III.
Historical and Historic District
Commissions — See Ch. 16.
Planning Department — See Ch. 75.
Building construction — See Ch. 122.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 132.
Fees — See Ch. 157.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 195.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
§ 272-12 CHICOPEE CODE § 272-13
1:610
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 275-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to lessen congestion in the streets; to
conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers;
to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of the land;
to avoid an undue concentration of population; to meet the housing needs
of the people of Chicopee; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open
space and other public requirements; to preserve the value of land and
buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the
prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage the
most appropriate uses in land throughout the City, including consideration
of the recommendations of the Master Plan, if any, adopted by the Planning
Board and the Comprehensive Plan, if any, of the Regional Planning Agency;
to preserve and to increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations
to obtain said objectives; and to protect the public against the hazards of
flooding and the detrimental use and development of flood-prone areas.
§ 275-2. Establishment of districts. [Amended 4-18-1989; 7-6-1989;
5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-17; 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-19]
For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Chicopee is divided into 16
classes of districts: [Amended 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 04-74]
Residence A District
Residence B District
Residence C District
Residence D District
Commercial A District
Commercial A-1 District
Business A District
Business B District
Business C District
Central Business District
Industrial District
Garden Industrial Planned Unit Development District (IPUD)
Garden Industrial Planned Unit Development (IPUD), Type II
Floodplain Overlay District
Mixed Use (MXD) District
Mill Conversion and Commercial Center Overlay District
A.
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2
1:611
§ 275-3. Applicability of other laws.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to nullify any provisions of the
Building Code of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts insofar as those
provisions deal exclusively with those powers not regulating zoning granted
by the provisions of MGL c. 40A and 41, as amended.
§ 275-4. Terms defined; word usage.
The boundaries of each of these districts are established as shown
on the Building Zone Map entitled "Building Zone Map of the City
of Chicopee, Massachusetts," which accompanies this chapter and is
declared to be a part thereof.72
B.
The terms herein defined shall be used to interpret all the applicable
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
A.
Tense, gender and number. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; and the singular number includes the plural and the singular.
B.
Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their
ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
C.
General definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
terms shall, for the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance have the meaning
indicated in this section:
ABUT — To touch or be contingent.
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES — Customarily incidental to
any principal use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
In no case shall an accessory use dominate in area, extent or purpose
the principal lawful use or building, and except for signs, it shall not
be located between the principal building and the street line. Real
estate signs not over 12 square feet in area and announcement or
professional signs not over two square feet shall not be considered
"accessory uses."[Amended 6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 05-151]
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, video and
other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, and which excludes minors
by virtue of age.[Added 2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-2]
ADULT CLUB — An establishment which as a form of entertainment
allows a person or persons to perform in a state of nudity as defined in
D.
72.Editor's Note: The current Building Zone Map is on file in the office of the City Clerk for
inspection by the public.
§ 275-2 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-4
1:612
MGL c. 272, § 31, and/or allows a person or persons to work in a state
of nudity as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, and which excludes minors as
a virtue of age.[Added 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Any exhibition, film or video, live
performance, display (including amusement machines) or dance of any
type which has a significant or substantial portion of such performance,
actual or simulated, relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, and which excludes minors as a virtue
of age or which includes the exhibition and viewing of persons or
depictions thereof in a state of nudity as defined in MGL c. 272,
§ 31.[Added 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-35]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment to
which the public, patrons or members are invited or admitted and
which is physically arranged to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
studios, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the
premises for the purposes of viewing adult-oriented material or wherein
an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public,
patron or member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect.[Added 7-5-1994
by Ord. No. 94-35]
ADULT THEATER — An enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL
c. 272, § 31, and which excludes minors by virtue of age.[Added
2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 93-2]
APPLICANT — The person or persons, including a corporation or other
legal entity, who applies for issuance of a special permit hereunder. The
applicant must own, or be the beneficial owner of, all the land included
in the proposed site or have authority from the owner(s) to act for him/
her/it/them or hold an option or contract duly executed by the owner(s)
and the applicant giving the latter the right to acquire the land to be
included in the site.[Added 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 04-74]
AREA, BUILDING — The maximum horizontally projected area of the
building at or above grade, exclusive of court and vent shafts.
AREA, FLOOR — The usable area of each story of a building or portion
thereof within surrounding exterior walls.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — As defined in MGL c. 19D, § 1,
Definitions, as amended.[Added 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-78]
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable
story and the roof rafters.
AUTOMOBILE PARKING — An area used for parking in cases where
such a use is not accessory to a permitted or special permit use in the
zoning district in which it is located.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Premises used primarily for
supply gasoline, oil, tires and related products for motor vehicles.
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:613
Maintenance and general repairs to automobiles, motorcycles and
small trucks are permitted as a subordinate activity.
AUTOMOTIVE TRADE — The retail sale of new and used cars, trucks,
motorcycles and other motor vehicles.
AUTO SALVAGE YARD — Storage area for unusable vehicles where
parts are removed and stored, scrap metal is collected and materials
are resold.73
BASE FLOOD — The one-hundred-year flood, otherwise designated
as the flood which has a one-percent possibility of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; as delineated as Floodplain Zones A and
A1-30 on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation reached by the onehundred-
year flood.74
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the City
of Chicopee, also referred to as the "Building Inspector," charged with
the duty of enforcing the Building Code and zoning ordinances of
Chicopee.
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law beyond which a building
shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.
BUSINESS BUILDING — A building in which 100% of the street level
area is used for permitted uses under Business A Zoning
Districts.[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
BUSINESS SERVICES — Services used in the conducting of business
and commerce, including but not limited to consumer and mercantile
credit reporting; news services; research, development and testing;
business management and consulting; equipment rental; photo
finishing; and automotive rental and distribution services.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued by
the building official which permits the use of a building in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies
compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the
building in its several parts, together with any special stipulations or
conditions of the building permit.
CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS — Nonprofit activities, such as a museum
or a service organization.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A residential development in which the
buildings and accessory uses are clustered into one or more groups
separated from adjacent property and other groups within the
development by intervening open land.
73.Editor's Note: The former definition of “auto towing and storage services,” which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 9-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-70
74.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "billboard," which immediately followed, was
repealed 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-47. See now the definition of "sign, billboard."
§ 275-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-4
1:614
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building in which 20% to 100% of the
street level area is used for permitted uses under Commercial A and/
or Commercial A-1 Zoning Districts.[Added 3-19-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Outdoor recreational facilities,
including but not limited to golf driving ranges, outdoor movie theatres,
amusement parks and go-cart tracks.
COMMUNICATIONS — Exchanges and stations used for the transmittal
and relay of electronic communication messages, including but not
limited to facilities for telephone, telegraph, radio, television and cable
television.
CONTRACT CONSTRUCTION SERVICES — Facilities used by firms
engaged in construction activities, including but not limited to
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, painting, electrical, masonry,
stonework, tile setting and plastering, carpentering and wood flooring,
roofing and sheet metal, concrete and well drilling.
CORNER LOT — One with two adjacent sides abutting upon streets or
other public ways.
CURB LEVEL — The elevation of the street curb as established in
accordance with law.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any facility operated on a regular basis, whether
known as a "day nursery," "nursery school," "kindergarten," "child play
school" or known under any other name, which receives seven or more
children (not of common parentage) during the course of any one day,
if such children have special needs for nonresidential custody and
care during part or all of the day separate from their parents. Daycare
centers" shall not include any part of a public school system; any
part of a private, organized educational system unless the services of
such system are primarily limited to kindergarten, nursery or related
preschool services; or a Sunday school conducted by a religious
institution.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
DISPLAY SURFACE — The surface which is made available by the
structure either for the direct mounting of letters and decoration or for
the mounting of the facing material that is intended to carry the entire
advertising message.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Any eating establishment where persons
are either served or eat in their cars, not exclusive of their ability to do
otherwise.
DWELLINGS — [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:615
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one
or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit with
cooking, living sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EATING AND DRINKING PLACES — A building used for the serving of
food and/or drink for consumption on the premises, but excluding drivein
restaurants as defined in this section.
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES — Privately owned and operated facilities
for instruction and education, including but not limited to nursery
schools, colleges and professional schools, vocational and business
schools and art, dancing and driving schools. It does not include daycare
centers.
ELEVATION — Above mean sea level, to be obtained by interpolation
between contours on the United States Geological Survey topographic
map or by field measurements.
ENTERTAINMENT ASSEMBLY — Theaters and other indoor places of
assembly used for entertainment and recreational activities.
FINANCE, INSURANCE and REAL ESTATE — Services associated with
financial and investment needs, including but not limited to banking
services, security and commodity brokers, insurance services and real
estate.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP — As prepared for the
Federal Insurance Administration and adopted by the City.
FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT — Areas subject to the base flood as
defined in this section.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — As prepared for the Federal
Insurance Administration and adopted by the City.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling
unit with not more than three lodgers or boarders.
(1)
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling
units with not more than three lodgers or boarders within the
structure.
(2)
THREE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three
dwelling units.
(3)
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof used
as a multiple dwelling for the purpose of providing four or more
separate dwelling units.
(4)
DORMITORY — A space in a unit where group sleeping
accommodations are provided, with or without meals, for persons
not members of the same family group, in one room or in a series
of closely associated rooms, under joint occupancy and single
management, as in college dormitories.
(5)
§ 275-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-4
1:616
FLOODPROOFED — Watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water with structural components having the
capability to withstand hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effect
of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse plus any portion of the
adjacent bank designated to be kept free of encroachment so that the
discharge of the base flood may be carried without increase in flood
elevation, as designated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The floor area within the perimeter of the
outside walls of the building with no deduction for hallways, stairs,
closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The actual occupied area, not including
accessory unoccupied areas or thickness of walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the gross floor area to the
area of the lot, i.e., a maximum, "FAR" of three to one (3:1) would allow
3,000 square feet of floor area on a one-thousand-square-foot lot, such
as in a four-story building with each floor having 750 square feet.
FRONT YARD — A required open and unoccupied space within and
extending the full width of the lot, parallel to the street lot line, between
the street line and the part of the building nearest to such street line,
exclusive of steps.
GOLF COURSE — A recreational area for playing golf, including a
clubhouse as an accessory use to the "golf course."
GOVERNMENTAL SERVICES — Structures, services, utilities, parks,
playgrounds and offices commonly associated with the operation of
government.
GRADE — A reference plane representing the average of finished
ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls extending to the
lot lines.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — [Repealed 7-3-1984]
GUEST — A person who rents out a room or rooms in a hotel or motel.
HEIGHT, BUILDING — The vertical distance from the grade to the
highest point of the roof, excluding the parapet wall.
HEIGHT, COURT — The vertical distance from the lowest level of the
court to the average height of the top of the enclosing walls.
HEIGHT STORY — The vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost
story, from the top of ceiling to the top of the roof rafters.
HEIGHT, WALL — The vertical distance from the foundation wall or
other immediate support of such wall to the top of the wall.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within
the dwelling and carried on by the inhabitant thereof, which is clearly
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:617
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling purposes and does
not change the character thereof, and provided that no article is sold
or offered for sale except such as may be produced on the premises
by members of the immediate family. Home occupations do not include
telephone and office use where the principal business is not conducted
on the property. At no time shall there be any exterior indication of
the home occupation other than an identification sign, and there shall
be no outdoor manifestations, such as traffic generation, noise, fumes
or noxious odors which are different or greater than those usually
experienced in the residential neighborhood.[Added 3-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-1]
HOSPITAL — An institution licensed by the state devoted to inpatient
care, where medical and/or surgical care is dispensed on a twenty-fourhour
basis.[Added 12-1-1987]
HOTEL or MOTEL — Any building or group of buildings which provides
sleeping accommodations for transient motorists and which is not
licensed as a lodging house.[Amended 8-4-1987]
INDUSTRY — Uses involving the processing, assembly and fabrication
of materials.
INTERIOR LOT LINE — Any lot line other than one adjoining a street
or way.
LODGER or BOARDER — Any person who rents out a room or rooms in
a lodging house.[Amended 8-4-1987]
LODGING HOUSE — A house where lodgings are let to four or more
persons not within the second degree of kinship to the person
conducting it, where the lodging units are not separate dwelling
units.[Amended 8-4-1987]
LOT — A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit. Lots shall
have boundaries identical with those on record in the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds. Two or more contiguous lots in common ownership
may be treated as one lot for the purposes of this chapter, provided that
the combined lots are used as a single lot would customarily be used
and are not later separated.
LOT AREA — The area of the plan defined by the lot lines.
LOT COVERAGE — That percent of the lot covered by the principal and
accessory structure. Coverage shall include the ground area enclosed
by walls, together with the area of all covered porches and other roofed
portions, including areas covered by building overhangs.
LOT DEPTH — Where a minimum lot depth is prescribed, lot depth shall
be measured determining the mean horizontal distance between a front
and rear lot line.[Amended 7-7-1987]
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance along the street lot line from one side
lot line to the other. In the case of a cul-de-sac or curve where the
§ 275-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-4
1:618
turning radius along the street line is 75 feet or less, lot frontage may
be measured along the setback line.
LOT LINE — A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or any
public place. A lot line must be described on a deed or legal instrument.
LOT WIDTH — This distance measured along the setback line between
the side lot lines. If the side lot line does not extend to the front setback
line, the measurement will be taken at the point of intersection with
another line.
MEMBERSHIP CLUBS — Organizations basically social in nature,
including but not limited to business associations; professional
membership organizations; labor unions; and religious, civic, social and
fraternal associations.
MEMBRANE COVERED STRUCTURES — Any temporary or permanent
structure consisting of a frame covered with fabric, plastic or other
flexible material.[Added 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-06]
MINIMUM DISTANCE — "Minimum distance" or average distance from
a building to a lot line or street shall be measured at right angles to
such line.
MOBILE HOME — A dwelling unit built on a chassis and containing
complete electrical, plumbing and sanitary facilities and designed to be
installed on a temporary or permanent foundation for living quarters.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any lot or tract of land upon which three or
more mobile homes occupied for dwelling purposes are located.
MOTOR FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION — Motor freight terminals;
garaging and outside parking and storage of vehicles and as an
accessory use for motor vehicle repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR — Premises primarily used for repair work
on motor vehicles, including but no limited to brake jobs, engine repair
and replacement, electrical repairs, muffler and exhaust system and
transmission repairs, as well as other repairs of any major or minor
nature needed on automobiles or motor vehicles exclusive of auto body
work. It includes towing service for automotive truck repairs and other
services normally contracted for by individuals.[Amended 9-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-65]
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — Facilities utilized in the provision of
services normally provided by municipalities, such as schools, parks,
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:619
playgrounds, municipal office buildings, maintenance buildings and
City-run utilities.
NONCONFORMING USE — The use of any premises, building or
structure which does not conform to the requirements for the district in
which it is located and which was lawfully existing at the effective date
of this chapter or any amendments.
NURSING HOME — As defined in MGL c. 111, § 71, Licensing of
convalescent and nursing homes, infirmaries, etc., as
amended.[Amended 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-78]
OVER AGE 55 RESTRICTED HOUSING — A planned development of
land consisting of one or more structures constructed expressly for
use and residency by persons who have achieved the minimum age
requirement for residency of 55 years or older, as permitted by MGL
c. 151B, § 4, Subsection 6, as amended and developed in accordance
with Chicopee City Code § 275-53 dimensional and density
requirement.[Added 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-78]
OVERLAY DISTRICT REVIEW COMMITTEE — A committee established
by the City Council to assist in the technical review of overlay district
zoning and overlay district project proposals.[Added 8-3-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-74; amended 9-1-2009]
OVERLYING DISTRICT — The zoning district which overlies another
zoning district. In such areas, restrictions pertaining to both districts
apply.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Consumer-oriented services, including but
not limited to laundering and dry cleaning; photographic services;
beauty and barber; apparel repair, alteration and cleaning; and shoe
repair.
PORCH — An accessory to a building projecting from the front, side or
rear of the same. The "porch" shall be separated from the building by a
wall and shall not have a permanent foundation.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services performed by professional
persons for business and personal use, including but not limited to
medical and health; planning, engineering and architectural;
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping; and educational and scientific.
PROJECT — Mill conversion project. The conversion of an existing mill,
or portion thereof, to multifamily dwellings and/or some combination of
appropriate nonresidential uses.[Added 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 04-74]
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite to the street line, except in
case of a corner lot, the "rear lot line" may be elected by the owner,
provided that it be indicated in the plan as filed with the Building
Commissioner.
REAR YARD — A required open unoccupied space, the full width of the
lot, between the rear wall of the building throughout its height and the
rear lot line. In the case of a triangular lot with only one side fronting
§ 275-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-4
1:620
on a street, the rear lot shall be the open unoccupied space between
the rear wall of the building and a line halfway between the point of
intersection of the side lines of the lot.
REPAIR SERVICES — Repair of household items, except motor vehicles,
including but not limited to lawn mowers; electrical appliances; radio
and television; watch, clock and jewelry; reupholstery and furniture.
RETAIL TRADE — The sale of goods to consumers, including but not
limited to the sale of building materials, general merchandise, food,
automotive supplies, marine crafts, apparel, furniture, home
furnishings, pharmaceuticals, liquor, stationery and books, sporting
goods, farm and garden supplies and jewelry.
SALVAGE YARD or JUNKYARD — Any land or premises, with or without
buildings, used for the deposit, collection or storage of used or
discarded things or materials, whether or not in connection with the
dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or disposition
thereof; and the deposit or storage on any lot of three or more wrecked
or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof for one month or more shall be
deemed to be a "salvage yard." Garaged vehicles shall be exempt from
this provision.
SETBACK — The minimum distance from the street lot line to a building
placed thereon, excluding exterior steps.
SETBACK LINE — A line which denotes the location of the minimum
setback.
SIDE YARD — A required open unoccupied space within a lot between
a side lot line, not a street line, and the parts of a building nearest to
such side lot line. Such a "side yard" must extend through its required
width from the street line to the rear yard or its equivalent or to another
street.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, work,
model, banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag or representation used
as or which is in the nature of an advertisement, announcement or
direction or is designed to inform as to the activity or occupation taking
place on a particular premises. A "sign" may be considered accessory
to a particular use when it advertises or indicates the person occupying
the premises on which the "sign" is erected or advertises the property
itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent and which contains no other
matter.
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any sign, display, light, figure, painting, drawing,
poster, object or device, whether fixed or movable, displayed for the
purpose of advertising or identifying goods and services that are sold
or produced on the property on which the sign is located.[Added
10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-47]
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign which advertises an activity or business
other than one conducted on the property.[Added 10-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-47]
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:621
SIGNS, NONACCESSORY — Any billboard, sign, display, light, figure,
painting, drawing, poster, object or device, whether fixed or movable,
displayed for the purpose of advertising or identifying goods and
services that are not sold or produced on the property on which the sign
is located.[Added 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
SIGNS, TEMPORARY — Signs used for a limited period of display,
examples of which include but are not exclusive of the following: signs
pertaining to sales promotions, drives or events of political, civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organizations.[Added
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
SMALL-SCALE PRODUCTION FACILITIES — Uses involving the
processing, assembling and fabrication of materials on a limited basis in
terms of size and number of employees. Such uses are to be developed
in a manner which will improve the general neighborhood in which they
are located. Outdoor storage is prohibited.[Added 3-6-1984]
SMOKEHOUSE — A building where meat or fish is cured by means of
dense smoke.[Added 11-20-1984; amended 6-21-2005 by Ord. No.
05-153]
SPECIAL PERMIT — A permit issued by a City board specifically
authorized in the Zoning Ordinance for the establishment of a use not
permitted as a matter of right in the district in which it is to be located.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — A board authorized by
this chapter to grant special permits.
SPORTS ASSEMBLY — Stadiums, arenas, racetracks and other
facilities used for the viewing of sporting events.
STATE BUILDING CODE — The Massachusetts State Building Code
established by MGL c. 30A, as amended.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
STORY, FIRST — A story in which the finished floor is nearest to and
the ceiling of which is six feet or more above the average grade of the
sidewalk or ground adjoining.
STREET — A primary thoroughfare or highway as dedicated or devoted
to public use by legal mapping use, accepted by the City
Council.[Amended 9-1-2009]
STREET LOT LINE — The line dividing a lot from a street or way.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the actual cash value of the structure before the improvement is started
or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damages occurred.
TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES — Towing and storage
services are businesses that include towing and or storage of towed
§ 275-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-4
1:622
vehicles, trailers or anything mounted on trailers. These operations
include office; dispatch center; parking for towing vehicles and any
other towing equipment, employees and patrons of a towing business;
and storage of vehicles, trailers or anything mounted on trailers which
have been towed from accidents, abandonment or for reasons other
than automotive and truck repair services normally contracted for by
individuals.[Added 9-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-70]
TOWNHOUSE — A row of at least three and not more than eight onefamily
attached dwelling units, each separated from other dwelling
units by a fire wall or walls. Each unit in the row may be owned by a
separate owner.
UNDERLYING DISTRICT — A zoning district which underlies another
zoning district. In such areas, restrictions pertaining to both districts
apply.
UTILITIES — Publicly owned, controlled or regulated services,
including but not limited to electric, gas, water, sewage disposal, solid
waste disposal and communications.
WAREHOUSING and STORAGE — Facilities for the storage of various
goods and commodities and for the distribution thereof, including but
not limited to refrigerated warehousing; farm products warehousing
and storage, excluding stockyards; food lockers; and household goods.
WHOLESALE TRADE — The sale of goods to retail stores or
distributions for the purpose of resale, including but not limited to
farming and construction equipment and vehicles; sales and services
of dry goods and apparel; farm products; electrical goods; hardware;
plumbing; heating equipment and supplies; and machinery.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A wireless
communications monopole or tower which may include antennas,
satellite dishes and associated structures which facilitate wireless
communications services. (NOTE: The current definition of
communications may require amendment; the special permit ordinance
for height, § 275-27, may require amendment.)[Added 4-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-19]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The provision of cellular
telephone service, personal communications and enhanced specialized
mobile radio service. (NOTE: The current definition of communications
may require amendment; the special permit ordinance for height,
§ 275-27, may require amendment.)[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-19]
YARD — A portion of a lot located between a structure and a side or
rear lot line which must remain open and unobstructed except as may
be allowed by specific provisions of this chapter.
§ 275-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-4
1:623

ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 275-5. Enforcement authority.
It shall be the duty of the Building Department to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. The Building Commissioner shall refuse to grant a permit for
the construction or alteration of any building if the building as constructed
or altered would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
shall assess and collect all fines.
§ 275-6. Site plan review. [Amended 4-20-1999 by Ord. No. 99-22;
12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-110]
Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for an
orderly and comprehensive review process for development projects;
to promote safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic movements within
the site and in relation to the site; to protect the capacity of state
and local roads to conduct traffic smoothly and efficiently; to promote
attractive and viable commercial, business and industrial districts; to
protect abutting and nearby property from disturbances from noise,
dust, vibrations and light; to protect the natural environment; to protect
historical resources; to maintain the value of abutting and nearby
property in the project area; to identify and ensure compliance with
all applicable local, state and federal regulations; and to generally
provide for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Chicopee.
To accomplish this, new construction projects have been categorized by
building footprint size and impact and will be reviewed and approved by
Building Department Checklist, Site Plan Review Advisory Committee,
or Planning Board. The procedures for each category of review are
listed below.
A.
Building Department Checklist review.
Projects subject to review by Building Department Checklist:
Development projects with footprints of 1,000 square feet or
less in Commercial A, Commercial A-1, Central Business
District, Business A, Business B, Business C, and Industrial,
Commercial Center and Mill Conversion Overlay Zones. This
also applies to property in IPUD and IPUD II Zones that are
not operated by an established nonprofit development
organization.
(a)
Additions with footprints less than 1,000 square feet to existing
buildings in any zone.
(b)
One-, two- and three-family dwellings on individual lots
(accessory buildings and lots in residential subdivisions
approved after January 4, 2005, are excluded.)
(c)
(1)
(2) Submission requirements:
B.
§ 275-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:625
Building Department Checklist. Building Department
Checklists are obtained in the Building Department.
(a)
A plot plan certified by a person registered under the General
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to practice land
surveying. The following information must be shown on the
plot plan:
All property corners, with type of monumentation
(identified as set or found);
[1]
Existing and proposed grading, proposed grading at house
corners and garage doors;
[2]
[3] Proposed location of the building(s) and driveway;
[4] Utilities;
Elevation of top of foundation wall F.F., benchmark and
datum;
[5]
Direction of stormwater runoff; the proposed grading shall
not direct runoff toward abutting properties;
[6]
Location and dimensions of existing and proposed
easements;
[7]
North arrow, street name(s), zoning district, setbacks, side
yards, lot area, and Chicopee Assessor Map and parcel ID
number.
[8]
[9] Scale: 1:20.
(b)
Site Plan Review Advisory Committee review.
The following projects shall be submitted to the Site Plan Review
Advisory Committee:
Development projects with footprints from 1,000 square feet
up to 7,500 square feet in Commercial A, Commercial A-1,
Central Business District, Business A, Business B, Business,
C and Industrial, Commercial Center and Mill Conversion
Overlay Zones. This also applies to property in IPUD and IPUD
II Zones that are not operated by an established nonprofit
development organization and projects developed in phases
from January 4, 2005, that cumulatively trip any construction
and/or paving plan review criteria.
(a)
Paving projects, that may or may not be associated with
building construction, that include 4,000 square feet or more
of impervious surface in any zone.
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 275-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-6
1:626
Paving projects of less than 4,000 square feet when added to
existing pavement that together totals 4,000 square feet or
more of impervious surface in any zone.
(c)
All municipal projects, including new construction of 1,000
square feet and over, new pavement or reconstruction of
exiting paved areas.
(d)
Submission requirements:
Site Plan Review Advisory Committee application. The
application is available in the Department of Planning and
Development.
(a)
Plans are to be submitted in accordance with the Chicopee
Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations,
Section II, Site Plans, available from the Department of
Planning and Development.
(b)
(2)
Planning Board review.
The following projects shall be submitted to the Planning Board:
Development projects with a footprint of 1,000 square feet or
more in Residential A, Residential B, and Residential C Zones
(excluding one-, two- and three-family dwellings and accessory
uses thereto on individual lots).
(a)
Development projects with a footprint of 7,500 square feet
or more in Commercial A, Commercial A-1, Central Business
District, Business A, Business B, Business C, Industrial, and
Commercial Center and Mill Conversion Overlay Zones. This
also applies to property in IPUD and IPUD II Zones that are
not operated by an established nonprofit development
organization and projects developed in phases from January
4, 2005, that cumulatively trip any construction and/or paving
plan review criteria.
(b)
Development projects with a footprint of 1,000 square feet
or more in Commercial A, Commercial A-1, Central Business
District, Business A, Business B, Business C, Industrial, and
Commercial Center and Mill Conversion Overlay Zones where
the subject property abuts or is within 100 feet of any
residential zone.
(c)
(1)
Submission requirements:
Planning Board site plan review preliminary, definitive and
plan modification applications are available from the
Department of Planning and Development.
(a)
Plans are to be submitted in accordance with the Chicopee
Planning Board Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations,
(b)
(2)
D.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-6
1:627
Section II, Site Plans, available from the Department of
Planning and Development.
Other plan review.
Projects requiring special permits must also submit a plan in
accordance with Chicopee City Code § 275-9.
(1)
Projects in Mixed Use Districts, IPUD and IPUD II Districts shall
submit site plans in accordance with the criteria set forth in the
district regulations. Where there are conflicting requirements, the
requirements of this section shall prevail.
(2)
E.
Stormwater management. All projects must be in compliance Chicopee
City Code Chapter 231.
F.
Unsewered lots. Plan submissions for projects with no sewer available
shall be subject to Health Department approval of on-site waste
disposal plan prior to construction.
G.
Traffic control. The Site Plan Review Advisory Committee reserves the
authority to require traffic studies when the proposed project may
impact traffic volume and circulation or require changes to adjacent
roadways and/or intersections.
H.
Review process. Site plans shall be submitted to the Planning
Department and will be distributed by the Planning Department
representative for review by the following departments: Building,
Public Works, Planning, Conservation, Water, Wastewater Treatment,
Health, Fire, Engineering, Electric Light and any other department
deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner. Department heads
or their designees shall make up the Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee. The Planning Department representative shall meet with
the various departments to review the site plan and solicit written
comments. The site plan shall be fully reviewed within 60 days of the
filing of the application. The Planning Department representative shall
issue a written report to the applicant of the findings of the review. This
review process does not excuse the applicant from compliance with any
other applicable local, state or federal regulations. No building permits
shall be issued for development projects until all applicable regulations
have been met. The Building Department will require project sign-off
from each Site Plan Review Committee member prior to the issuance of
a building permit and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
The sign-off cards are available in the Building Department.
I.
Approval/disapproval. Should the plan be approved, either in total or
with revisions or conditions, it shall serve as the agreed document for
purposes of issuing a building permit, inspections, and certificate of
occupancy. In the event the site plan is not approved, the applicant
may appeal to the Board of Appeals under the provisions hereinafter
contained.
J.
§ 275-6 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-6
1:628
§ 275-7. Certificate of occupancy required.
No land shall be used or occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Building Commissioner stating that the proposed use complies
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 275-8. Board of Appeals.
Performance guarantee. If the developer seeks a certificate of
occupancy for a building prior to the completion of the approved site
improvements, the City of Chicopee shall require the posting of a
performance guarantee to cover the cost of the remaining work.
K.
City Council review. The Planning Board shall submit current copies
of its Subdivision and Site Plan Review Regulations to the Zoning
Committee of the City Council every March for review. [Amended
9-1-2009]
L.
Priority development. [Added 5-19-2009 by Ord. No. 09-87]
Purpose. The Chicopee City Council has adopted the provisions
of MGL Chapter 43D and established priority development sites
which are shown on a map entitled "City of Chicopee Priority
Development Sites Map," available for view in the City Clerk's
office and the Department of Planning and Development. The
purpose of these districts is to promote economic development as
encouraged by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Smart Growth
initiative.
(1)
Applicability. The provisions of this section apply only to those
officially designated locations shown a map entitled "City of
Chicopee Priority Development Sites Map." Unless specifically
noted in this section, all provisions of Chicopee City Code Chapter
275 (Zoning) apply to projects located within a priority
development site.
(2)
Process, review and decisions. For priority development site
projects, all special permit, variance, and/or site plan review
decisions by their respective approving authorities shall be issued
within 180 calendar days after the filing of a complete application
with the appropriate body as specified in Chicopee City Code
Chapter 275 (Zoning). Decisions may include approval, approval
with conditions, or denial of the proposed project in accordance
with Chicopee City Code Chapter 275 (Zoning) and MGL Chapter
43D.
(3)
Concurrent filings. Concurrent filings are allowed for priority
development site projects that require permits from more than one
approving authority.
(4)
M.
Appointment of members. There shall be a Board of Appeals to hear
appeals as provided for in the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 12, and it
A.
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-8
1:629
shall consist of five regular and three associate members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
In the month of March of each year, the Mayor shall appoint two
citizens, one as a regular member of said Board and the other as an
associate member of said Board, the regular member to hold office for a
term of five years and the associate member three years, from the first
Monday of April next.
B.
Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term, and any member
may be removed for cause by the Mayor.
C.
Powers.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant
for a permit that there is an error in any order or decision
made by the Building Commissioner in the enforcement of
this chapter or the General Laws. Such appeals shall be taken
within a period of not more than 30 days from the date the
Building Commissioner gave notice of his decision by filing
with the Building Commissioner and the City Clerk a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds for said appeal. The City
Clerk shall forthwith transmit copies of the appeal to the Board
of Appeals. The Building Commissioner shall transmit to the
Board all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal
was taken. Appeals to said Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved by reason of his or her inability to obtain a building
or occupancy permit or enforcement action from any
administrative officer under the provisions of this chapter, by
the Lower Pioneer Valley Regional Planning Commission, by
any person, including an officer or board of the City or of
any abutting City or town, aggrieved by any order or decision
of the Building Commissioner or other administrative official,
in violation of any provision of MGL c. 40 or this Zoning
Ordinance.
(a)
To authorize, upon petition, variances by a party of interest
from the provisions of this chapter. All of the following
conditions must apply to each case. The Board of Appeals
is authorized to grant a variance where, owing to conditions
especially affecting such parcels or buildings but not affecting
generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal
enforcement of provisions of the law would involve substantial
hardship, financial and otherwise, to the appellant; the
desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment
to the public good; such a variance may be granted without
deviating from the intent or purpose of this chapter; the special
conditions affecting the land which causes the hardship is
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 275-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-8
1:630
related to soil conditions, shape or topography of the land
or structures; and such variance does not authorize any use
or activity which is not otherwise permitted in the district in
which the land or structure is located. The Zoning Board of
Appeals for the City of Chicopee further defines "hardship"
to include lot size, frontage and side, rear and front setback
requirements for cases which, in the opinion of the Board of
Appeals, result in a lot which is not in conformance with the
neighborhood in which it is located if the variance from zoning
requirements is not granted.75
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Appeals
may impose limitations both of time and of use, and continuation
of any use permitted may be conditioned upon compliance with
regulations to be made and amended from time to time thereafter.
The Board of Appeals may reverse, affirm or modify any order or
decision and may make such order or decision as ought to be made.
In the case of an appeal, the Board shall have all the powers of the
Building Commissioner or official from whom the appeal is taken
and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. A vote of four
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order or
decision of the Building Commissioner. At least four members of
the Board shall be required to vote in favor of a variance in order
to pass such an action. Notice of intent to file for an appeal or a
variance shall be filed with City Clerk. [Amended 11-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-89]
(2)
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one
year from the date of grant of such variance, they shall lapse and
may be reestablished only after notice and a new hearing.
(3)
Hearings. The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing on any appeal
transmitted to it by the City Clerk or an officer acting on his behalf
within 65 days from transmittal to the Board of Appeals. Applications
for a variance shall be made to the Board of Appeals, and a public
hearing shall be held as provided for in § 275-9. Notification for all
public hearings shall be in accordance with § 275-10. The Chairman or,
in his absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths, summon
witnesses and call for the production of papers. All hearings of the
Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. At the hearings, any party
may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The decision of the Board
shall be made within 75 days from the date of filing of the appeal,
application or petition. Failure by the Board to act within these limits
shall be deemed to be the grant of relief, application or petition. The
Board of Appeals shall follow all procedures in § 275-12. [Amended
11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-89]
E.
75.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1)(c), which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for the granting of special permits, was repealed 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-89.
§ 275-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:631
§ 275-9. Special permits. [Amended 9-23-1980; 3-19-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-11; 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-78; 11-20-2001 by Ord. No.
01-94]
Special permits shall be authorized by the City Council for uses
specifically within the Zoning Ordinance. Special permits shall be
issued only for uses that are in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this chapter and shall be subject to general and specific
terms set forth therein, and such permits shall also impose conditions,
safeguards and limitations on time or use. [Amended 9-1-2009]
No new special permit granted under this chapter shall be issued
to any applicant who is in default on the payment of taxes, license
fees or other monies due to the City concerning licensed property,
property under a special permit or prospective licensed property or
property under special permit request.
(1)
No new special permit granted under this chapter shall be issued
to any applicant for property for which the owner is in default
on the payment of taxes, license fees or other monies due to the
City concerning licensed property, property under a special permit
or prospective licensed property or property under special permit
request.
(2)
The applicant will attest in writing prior to the granting of a permit
that the conditions set forth in this section relative to all payments
and monies owed the City are fulfilled on the permitted premises.
(3)
At any time it is found that the conditions listed in this section are
not fulfilled, a special permit may be revoked, suspended, altered.
(See § 275-13.)
(4)
A.
A special permit may be revoked or altered by the official granting
authority or a fine of $200 or both be levied if it is determined after
a public hearing that there has been an abuse and/or misuse of the
special permit.
B.
Application. Each application for a special permit shall be filed with the
City Clerk. The special permit granting authority shall receive a copy
of the application, including the date and time of filing certified by the
City Clerk. Applications shall include the following:
The application form, completed in full with signatures from the
Building Commissioner and the Department of Planning and
Development indicating the application is complete.
(1)
Seven plot plans with North point, date and scale (one inch equals
20 feet), showing:
Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and
public areas.
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 275-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-9
1:632
A system of drainage which shall meet the minimum
requirements as stated in Chicopee City Code § 275-6 when
new construction, building additions and/or parking lots are
proposed.
(b)
(c) Lot lines with dimensions.
The location of existing and proposed buildings, parking and
points of access, signs and lighting and refuse disposal areas.
(d)
(e) Zoning, ownership and use of immediately abutting property.
Any additional information that may be required by the
Building Commissioner.
(f)
Twenty days prior to the public hearing, copies of the application for
a special permit shall be submitted by the permit granting authority
to and reviewed by the Board of Health, Department of Planning and
Development, City Engineer, Building Commissioner, Fire Department,
Conservation Administrator and any other board or department
designated by the special permit granting authority. Recommendations
from departments or boards shall be sent to the special permit granting
authority; provided, however, that the failure of any such board or
agency to make recommendations within the twenty-day period shall be
deemed lack of opposition thereto.
D.
Hearings. Special permits shall only be issued following a public
hearing to be held in accordance with § 275-10, held within 65 days
after filing of an application with the City Clerk. The special permit
granting authority shall act within 90 days following the public hearing
for which notice has been given by publication or posting. The required
time limits for a public hearing and said action may be extended by
written agreement between the petitioner and the special permit
granting authority. A copy of such agreement shall be filed in the office
of the City Clerk. Failure by the special permit granting authority to
take final action upon an application for a special permit within 90
days following the date of the public hearing shall be deemed to be
a grant of the special permit. The petitioner who seeks such approval
by reason of the failure of the special permit granting authority to
act within such time prescribed, shall notify the City Clerk, in writing
within 14 days from the expiration of said 90 days or extended time,
if applicable, of such approval and that notice has been sent by the
petitioner to parties in interest. The petitioner shall send such notice
to parties in interest by mail and each such notice shall specify that
appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, and shall be
filed within 20 days after the date the City Clerk received such written
notice from the petitioner that the special permit granting authority
failed to act within the time prescribed. After the expiration of 20 days
without notice of appeal pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, or, if appeal
has been taken, after receipt of certified records of the court in which
such appeal is adjudicated, indicating that such approval has been final,
E.
§ 275-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:633
the City Clerk shall issue a certificate stating the date of approval, the
fact that the special permit granting authority failed to take final action
and that the approval resulting from such failure has become final,
and such certificate shall be forwarded to the petitioner. The special
permit granting authority shall cause to be made a detailed record of its
proceedings, indicating the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and setting forth
clearly the reason for its decision and of its official actions, copies of
all of which shall be filed within 14 days in the office of the City Clerk
and shall be deemed a public record, and notice of the decision shall be
mailed forthwith to the petitioner, applicant or appellant, to the parties
in interest designated in MGL c. 40A § 11, and to every person present
at the hearing who requested that notice be sent to him and stated the
address to which such notice was to be sent. Each such notice shall
specify that appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to MGL c. 40A § 17
and shall be filed within 20 days after the date of filing of such notice in
the office of the City Clerk.
Special permits issued shall require a two-thirds vote by the City
Council. The special permit granted under this section shall lapse in
a period of one year, including such time required to pursue or wait
termination of any appeal from the grant, if a substantial use has not
sooner commenced, except for good cause or, in the case of a permit
for construction, if construction has not begun by such date, except for
good cause. Following such lapse, the rights for the special permit may
be reestablished only after a notice and a new hearing, as specified in
§ 275-10, have been undertaken. [Amended 9-1-2009]
F.
Where a permit or license is required from the City Council in addition
to the special permit, the City Council may hold a single public hearing
for the issuance of both. [Amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-17]
G.
No special permit shall take effect until a copy of the decision bearing
the certification of the City Clerk that, if such an appeal has been filed,
it has been dismissed or denied is recorded in the Registry of Deeds in
the grantor index under the name of the owner of record or is recorded
and noted in the owner's certificate of title. Notice of the decision
shall be sent to the Building Commissioner, Department of Planning
and Development, City Engineer, Board of Health, Conservation
Administrator, and Fire Department.
H.
Fees for recording and registering shall be paid by the owner or
applicant. No building permits shall be issued without proof that the
special permit has been filed with the Hampden County Registry of
Deeds.
I.
Time limitation. There shall be no limitations imposed on special
permits, however special permits will be monitored for performance
and may be subject to revocation, suspension, alteration or fines in
accordance with § 275-13.
J.
§ 275-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-9
1:634
Permit holder and transferability.
Special permits that involve the construction of permanent
structures shall be granted to run with the land and may be
transferred to a new holder without further action by the special
permit granting authority.
(1)
Special permits that involve capital improvements of 50% or more
of the assessed value of a structure at the time of application
shall be granted to run with the land and may be transferred to a
new holder without further action by the special permit granting
authority.
(2)
Special permits that govern the use of an existing structure or site
shall be granted to the applicant and may be transferred to a new
holder only in accordance with the terms of § 275-9L(2).
(3)
K.
Renewal, transfers, modifications and extensions.
Transfers of special permits to a new holder are subject to the same
application and public hearing procedure as new issues.
(1)
Modification of an existing special permit is subject to the same
application and public hearing procedure as new issues.
(2)
Extension of special permits that are not exercised within a year of
issue shall be subject to the same application and public hearing
procedure as new issues.
(3)
L.
The special permit granting authority shall consider the following in its
evaluation of the special permit application:
Conformance of the plan/proposal to zoning ordinances, other
applicable requirements of the Chicopee City Code and all other
applicable regulations.
(1)
Compatibility with existing uses and other uses permitted by right
in the same zoning district.
(2)
Potential for creating a nuisance due to air and water pollution,
flood, noise, dust, vibration, lights or visually offensive structures
and accessories.
(3)
Potential for creating a substantial inconvenience or hazard to
abutters, vehicles or pedestrians.
(4)
Adequacy of protection offered adjoining premises against any
possible detrimental or offensive uses on the site.
(5)
Provision of convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site and in relation to adjacent streets,
property or improvements.
(6)
M.
§ 275-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:635
§ 275-10. Notice of hearing.
Provision of adequate space for off-street loading and unloading
incidental to the normal operation of the establishment or use.
(7)
Provision of adequate methods of disposal and/or storage of
sewage, refuse, and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted
or permissible on the site.
(8)
(9) Adequacy of the stormwater management system.
Adequacy of erosion and sedimentation control for construction
projects.
(10)
Appearance of building, accessory uses and grounds and
compatibility with the appearance of the neighborhood. This
includes scale, building materials, architectural style, and
landscaping.
(11)
The proposal is in general harmony with the purpose and intent of
the Zoning Ordinance.
(12)
The special permit granting authority shall adopt rules and regulations
for the submission of special permit applications in addition to the rules
set down in this section. Such rules shall be filed with the City Clerk.
N.
Notice of a public hearing is required for all appeals, applications
for variances and special permits and for amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance or Map. Notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City of Chicopee once in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14 days
before the day of the hearing, and by posting such notice in a
conspicuous place for a period of not less than 14 days before the day
of such hearing. Notice shall be sent to the petitioner, abutters, owners
of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way and
owners of land within 300 feet of the property line, as they appear on
the most recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of
any such owner is located in another City or town. Notice shall also be
sent to the Chicopee Planning Board and, for zoning amendments, to
the Planning Boards of every abutting City or town, which may forward
recommendations with respect to said matter for the consideration of
the permit granting authority.
A.
The Assessors maintaining the tax list shall certify to the permit
granting authority the names and addresses of parties in interest. The
permit granting authority or special permit granting authority may
accept a waiver of notice from or an affidavit of actual notice to any
party in interest or, in his stead, any successor owner of record who
may not have received a notice by mail and may order special notice to
any such person, giving not less than five nor more than 10 additional
days to reply.
B.
§ 275-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-10
1:636
§ 275-10.1. Filing of decisions for variances and special permits.
[Added 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-91]
The special permit or variance granting authority shall cause to be made
a detailed record of its proceedings, including the vote of each member
upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
setting forth clearly the reason for its decision and of its official actions,
copies of all of which shall be filed within 14 days in the office of the City
Clerk and shall be deemed a public record and notice of the decision shall
be mailed forthwith to the petitioner, applicant or appellant, to the parties
in interest designated in MGL c. 40A, § 11, and to every person present at
the hearing who requested that notice be sent to him and stated the address
to which such notice was to be sent. Each such notice shall specify that
appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, and shall be
filed within 20 days after the date of filing of such notice in the office of the
City Clerk.
§ 275-11. Approved applications.
Publications and notices required shall contain the name of the
petitioner, a description of the area of premises, the street address,
if any, or other adequate identification of the location of the area or
premises which is the subject of the petition, the date and place of
the public hearing, the subject matter of the hearing and the nature of
the action or relief requested, if any. No such hearing shall be held on
any Sunday or legal holiday or on the day on which a federal, state or
municipal election, caucus or primary is held in the City of Chicopee.
C.
Upon the granting of a variance or special permit or any extension,
or modification thereof, the special permit granting authority shall
issue to the owner or to the applicant, if other than the owner, a
certified copy of its decision, containing the name and the address of
the owner, identifying the land affected, setting forth compliance with
the statutory requirements for the issuance of such variance or permit
and certifying that copies of the decisions and all plans referred to in
the decision have been filed with the granting authority and the City
Clerk. No variance or special permit or any extension, or modification
thereof shall take effect until a copy of the decision bearing the
certification of the City Clerk that 20 days have elapsed and no appeals
have been filed or that, if such appeal has been filed, it is dismissed
or denied is recorded at the Registry of Deeds, indexed in the grantor
index under the name of the owner of record or is recorded and noted
on the owner's certificate of title. [Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord. No.
01-92; 2-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04]
A.
Fees for recording and registering shall be paid by the owner or
applicant. No building permits shall be issued without proof that the
special permit has been filed with the Registry of Deeds. [Amended
11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-90]
B.
§ 275-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12
1:637
§ 275-12. Reconsideration of action. [Amended 2-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-05; 9-1-2009]
No appeal, variance or special permit or any extension or modification
thereof which has been unfavorable and finally acted upon by a special
permit or permit granting authority shall be acted favorably upon within
two years after the date of final unfavorable action unless said special
permit or permit granting authority finds, by a vote of four members of
the Board of Appeals or Planning Board or by a two-thirds vote of the
City Council, that specific and material changes in the conditions upon
which the previous unfavorable action was based have occurred, describing
such changes in the record of its proceedings, and unless all but one of
the members of the Planning Board consents thereto and after a notice
has been given to parties in interest, containing the time and place of the
proceedings when the question of consent will be considered. Any petition
for a variance or application for a special permit which has been transmitted
to the permit or special permit granting authority may be withdrawn,
without prejudice, by the petitioner prior to the publication of the notice
of the public hearing thereon, but may thereafter be withdrawn without
prejudice only with the approval of the special permit or permit granting
authority by a majority vote of the full Board.
§ 275-13. Revocation suspension and alteration of special permits.
A special permit may be revoked or altered by the official granting
authority or a fine of $200 or both be levied if it is determined after
a public hearing that there has been an abuse and/or misuse of the
special permit. [Amended 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-22]
A.
Copies of the notice of application for revocation, suspension or
alteration of special permits shall be submitted to and reviewed by the
Board of Health, Department of Planning and Development, Planning
Board, City Engineer, Building Commissioner and any other board
required by the permit granting authority at least 35 days prior to the
public hearing. Recommendations from said Departments or Boards
shall be sent to the permit granting authority; provided, however, that
failure of any such board or agency to make recommendations within
35 days from receipt shall be deemed lack of opposition thereto.
[Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-93]
B.
The special permit granting authority shall act within 90 days following
the public hearing. Failure by the special permit granting authority to
take final action within 90 days of the public hearing shall be deemed to
be a denial of said application for revocation, suspension or alteration
of the special permit. Revocation or alteration of special permits shall
require a two-thirds vote by the City Council. Notice of the decision
shall be sent to the Building Commissioner, Department of Planning
and Development, City Engineer and Board of Health. [Amended
11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-93; 9-1-2009]
C.
§ 275-12 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-13
1:638
§ 275-14. Adoption or amendment of Zoning Ordinance. [Amended
9-1-2009]
A special permit which governs the use of an existing structure or site
and is granted to the applicant may be revoked, suspended or altered
after public hearing if it is determined that the holder of said permit
is in default of any taxes or fees owned to the City of Chicopee. Said
public hearing shall follow the procedure outlined in Subsections B and
C of this section. [Added 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 01-93]
D.
Adoption or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by
the submission to the City Council of a proposed Zoning Ordinance
or amendment by the City Council, Board of Appeals, an individual
owning land affected by an amendment or adoption, 10 registered
voters in the City, the Planning Board and the Lower Pioneer Valley
Regional Planning Commission. The City Clerk shall forward the Zoning
Ordinance amendment to the City Council, which shall, within 14 days
of the receipt of such Zoning Ordinance amendment, submit it to the
Planning Board for review and public hearings.
A.
No Zoning Ordinance or amendment shall be adopted until after the
Planning Board and the Zoning Committee of the City Council have
held public hearings thereon, at which time interested persons shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. These public hearings both shall be
held within 65 days after the proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment
has been submitted to the Planning Board. Notice of the time and place
of such public hearings shall follow the regulations prescribed in this
chapter (§ 275-10) and include the place of where text and maps may
be inspected. Notice of said hearings shall be sent by mail, postage
prepaid, to the Department of Community Affairs, to the Lower Pioneer
Valley Regional Planning Commission, to the abutting communities and
to other parties as prescribed in § 275-10.
B.
The Planning Board shall submit to the City Council, within 21 days
following the Planning Board hearing, a report with recommendations
on the proposed zone change or Zoning Ordinance amendment. The
Zoning Committee of the City Council shall submit its recommendations
after receipt of such report or after 21 days have elapsed from the
Planning Board hearing. If the City Council fails to hold a final vote
on any proposed ordinance or amendment within 90 days after the
Planning Board hearing, no action shall be taken thereon until
subsequent public hearings are held with notice and report as above
provided.
C.
No Zoning Ordinance shall be adopted or changed except by a twothirds
vote of all members of the City Council. If there is filed with
the Clerk prior to final action by the City Council a written protest
against such change, stating the reasons for such protest, duly signed
by owners of 20% or more of the area of land proposed to be included
in such change or the area of the land immediately adjacent extending
D.
§ 275-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-14
1:639
§ 275-15. Petition for leave to withdraw. [Added 11-20-1984;
amended 9-1-2009]
After the Planning Board hearing, any petitioner seeking a leave to
withdraw must notify the City Council Secretary at least but not less than
three working days prior to the Zoning Committee public hearing. The
petitioner shall pay for certified mailing to abutters notifying them of the
petition for a leave to withdraw. Said mail shall be delivered to abutters not
less than 24 hours prior to the hearing. If these procedures are not followed,
the petition for a leave to withdraw will be at the discretion of the City
Council.
§ 275-16. Copy of Zoning Map on file. [Amended 12-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-67]
§ 275-17. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the health,
safety, comfort and convenience and for the general welfare of the people
of Chicopee. This chapter shall not repeal, abrogate nor in any other way
impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or any
rules or regulations previously adopted or issued first of all relating to the
300 feet therefrom, no such change of any ordinance shall be adopted
except by three-fourths vote of all members.
No proposed Zoning Ordinance or amendment which has been
unfavorably acted upon by the City Council shall be considered by the
City Council within two years of the date of unfavorable action unless
the adoption of such a proposed ordinance is recommended in the final
report of the Planning Board. Notice requirement for all hearings shall
be the same as those enumerated in § 275-10.
E.
The City Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the Planning Department,
where it may be viewed during normal business hours, and is also
available for viewing on the City's website. The location and boundaries
of the zoning districts are established as shown on the Zoning Map,
together with all duly adopted amendments as maintained by the City
Clerk's Office, which shall hereby be declared as part of this chapter.
A.
All zoning districts shall be compiled by the City Planning Department,
and a permanent record of all said districts shall be maintained and
represented within the City of Chicopee Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) Spatial Database. All revisions, changes, and updates
to said zoning districts shall be the sole responsibility of the Planning
Department. Where any such uncertainty exists as to the boundary
of any zoning district, the Building Commissioner, upon written
application, shall determine the boundary location, giving due
consideration to the apparent indicated location, official records from
the City Clerk, and the expressed purposes of the Zoning Ordinance.
B.
§ 275-14 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-17
1:640
use of buildings or premises; provided that, where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height
of buildings or requires larger lots or yards than are imposed or required by
such existing provisions or regulations, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
§ 275-18. Validity.
§ 275-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-15-1997 by Ord. No.
97-25A]
Any person or corporation violating any provision of the Zoning Ordinance
may be fined a penalty of up to but not more than $200 for each violation.
Such fine shall be levied by the Building Commissioner and may be
appealed according to procedures set forth in § 275-8.
§ 275-20. Filing fees. [Amended 11-7-1985; 4-17-2007 by Ord. No.
07-36; 9-1-2009]
Applications for a variance or special permit shall be accompanied by a
filing fee as set by the City Council.76 Applications for a change in the
Zoning Map or the Zoning Ordinance shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as set by the City Council.77 Filing fees shall be waived for agencies of the
City of Chicopee. Requests from the Planning Board and the Zoning Board
of Appeals for changes in filing fees shall be submitted to the City Council
as follows:
The effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment shall
be the date on which such adoption or amendment was voted upon by
the City Council, subject to it being signed by the Mayor. [Amended
9-1-2009]
A.
Severability. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or
provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held
unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as
a whole or part thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid.
B.
No claim of invalidity of any zoning ordinance or bylaw arising out of
any possible defect in the procedure of adoption or amendment shall
be made in any legal proceeding, and no state, regional, county or
municipal office will refuse, deny or revoke any permit, approval or
certification because of any such claims of invalidity unless, within 120
days after adoption of an ordinance, legal action is commenced and
notice specifying the court, parties, invalidity claimed and date of filing
is filed, together with the copy of the petition, with the City Clerk within
seven days after the commencement of the actions.
C.
76.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
77.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 275-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20
1:641
A letter from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals Chairman
to the City Council identifying the amount and reasons for the filing fee
change.
A.
A copy of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals legal notice
and meeting minutes indicating the fee change has been advertised,
discussed, and voted favorably upon by a majority of the Board.
B.
§ 275-20 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-20
1:642
ARTICLE III
Regulations Applicable to All Districts
§ 275-21. Conformance required.
No building, structure or premises shall be erected, altered or used in a
manner which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 275-22. Nonconforming uses.
§ 275-23. Restoration of damaged buildings. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent substantial restoration within 12
months and a continuance of use of a building which has been damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, riot, act of public enemy or acts of any kind to such
an extent that the estimated cost of such restoration does not exceed 3/4
of the fair value of the building based on the replacement cost immediately
prior to such damage. Such cost estimate, fair value and replacement cost
shall be determined by the Building Commissioner. In the case of a building
or structure not conforming in use or construction to the provisions of this
chapter which apply to the district in which it is located and so damaged to
a greater extent, the City Council may grant a special permit for restoration
and continuance of use where neither will, in its opinion, be detrimental
or injurious to the character of the neighborhood. Setback and side yard
requirements, however, must conform to the minimum requirements for the
district within which the building or use is to be located. The City Council
may grant a special permit for the right to restore nonconforming uses
beyond the 3/4 of fair value limit, but in no case may the restored value
exceed by 25% the replacement cost immediately prior to such damage.
Structures or uses lawfully in existence or begun or for which a building
or special permit has been issued before the first publication of notice
of public hearing on this chapter may be constructed and/or continued
in their present use. Provisions of this chapter shall apply to any
change or extension of such a use or structure and to any construction
or operations under a building or special permit which has not
commenced within a period of six months after the issuance of the
permit.
A.
Any nonconforming use abandoned or not used for a period of two years
of more shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
B.
The City Council may grant as a special permit the right to extend a
nonconforming use by up to 25% of its fair market value or its area
or the right to alter the use for a purpose not otherwise permitted in
the district if it is found that the proposed use will be less obnoxious
and in greater conformance with the intent of the zoning district within
which it lies and will promote the purposes of this chapter. [Amended
9-1-2009]
C.
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-24
1:643
§ 275-24. Restoration of unsafe buildings.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any building wall declared unsafe by the Building
Commissioner.
§ 275-25. Preservation of lot size.
No lot or plot shall be so reduced in area that any yard, court, open space
or lot size shall be smaller than as prescribed in this chapter for the district
in which it is located.
§ 275-26. Minimum lot frontage.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use on any lot within
the City of Chicopee, except as provided within the Zoning Ordinance.
No building to be occupied in any part for dwelling purposes shall be
constructed on any lot unless such lot has a frontage on a public street or on
a street which has been approved under the provisions of the Subdivision
Control Law or on a private way which is in a condition which meets the
design and construction standards of City streets.
§ 275-27. Height exceptions. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The provisions of this chapter governing the height of buildings in all
districts shall not apply to parapets, cupolas, belfries, chimneys, flag- and
radio poles, gas holders, grain elevators, water towers or to bulkheads, hose
towers, elevator enclosures, water tanks, scenery lofts or scenery towers,
silos, farm buildings, churches, municipal or governmental buildings or
reception and/or transmission antenna facilities less than 25 feet in length.
The City Council may grant a special permit for reception and/or
transmission antenna facilities greater than 25 feet in length.
§ 275-27.1. Wireless communications. [Added 5-22-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-18]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and to minimize adverse visual and
physical impacts to properties and persons in surrounding areas and to
the City in general.
A.
Special permits. A wireless communications facility may be installed
upon issuance of a special permit by the City Council. Special permits
for wireless communications land uses are subject to compliance with
the requirements of the underlying zone and to the following standards.
The City Council may, but is not required to, waive height and/or
setback requirements set forth in this section. Requests for waivers
must be made in writing at the time of application, with suitable
documentation relative to site constraints. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
§ 275-24 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-27.1
1:644
Facility provider control area. Any ground-mounted or side-mounted
wireless communications facility and any accessory structure shall be
enclosed within an area no less than the radius fall area at least 10 feet
greater than the pole height of the facility.
C.
Zoning requirements; Business A, B, and C and industrial with a special
permit. When dimensional requirements of this section contradict
zoning requirements for the zoning district in which the facility is
proposed, this section shall take precedent.
D.
Fencing. Fencing shall be a minimum of six feet in height with a
radius of 15 feet. Fencing may be protective in design, chain link, not
wood, but shall not include barbed wire. Maintenance of safe access to
abutting properties is required.
E.
Screening. A landscaped buffer of evergreen shrubs and/or trees shall
be provided outside the fenced area. Mature vegetative buffer must
equal fence height. Initial plantings of evergreens intended to serve as
the screen shall be five feet in height and spaced no more than three
feet apart. Plants must be maintained in a healthy condition.
F.
Setback. Ground-mounted facilities shall observe a setback of 100%
plus 10 feet of tower height from nonresidentially used abutting parcels
and 200% of tower height from residentially used or residentially zone
abutting parcels. In no case shall a ground-mounted or side-mounted
facility built as an accessory use be allowed on any portion of a lot
between a street lot line and a principal building.
G.
Co-location. Proposed wireless communication facilities of any type
must demonstrate adequate engineering standards to provide for the
location of two more wireless communications carriers.
H.
Height. Height calculations shall include building height for roofmounted
facilities. Maximum height for wireless communications
facilities in business zones is 190 feet; in industrial zones is 190 feet.
I.
Discontinuance. All unused facilities or parts thereof or accessory
facilities and structures which have not been used for more than one
year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. NOTE:
The City will require a minimum bond of $20,000 for this prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This amount may be reviewed
and altered at five-year intervals.
J.
Additional co-locations. Additional co-locations will be $50 per carrier;
$100 per location.
K.
Procedures for special permits. All special permit applications for
wireless communications facilities shall include the following:
(1) A completed copy of the applicable form.
A locus plan showing all the property lines, the exact location of all
existing and proposed structures on the site, the fall area, street,
(2)
L.
§ 275-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-27.1
1:645
§ 275-28. Projections and encroachments in yards.
Except as hereinafter specified, yards and courts required by this chapter
shall be open and unobstructed to the sky. Cornices, leaders, belt courses,
sills and similar ornamental features may project six inches over any yard.
§ 275-29. Property maintenance. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No.
10-41]
No owner of land shall permit his property to become overgrown with
underbrush or vegetation or blocked by snow where such interferes with
safe passage or hinders the visibility of pedestrians or motorists so as to
create a traffic hazard thereby, whether such motorists or pedestrians are
on public or private property. Said owner shall not permit accumulations
of rubbish, trash or other noxious materials unless appropriate licenses or
permits required by law are obtained. This section may be enforced by the
Health Department against the legal owner of the property. Any person or
entity who fails to comply with this section shall be fined up to $50 per day
after receiving written notice by the Health Department.
§ 275-30. Storage of trucks and other equipment. [Amended
9-1-2009; 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 15-41]
landscape features and footprints of all buildings within 500 feet of
the facility.
A color photograph or rendition of the facility and all its
appurtenances.
(3)
A written description of the facility and the technical, economic and
other reasons for the proposed location, height and design and its
capacity to serve one or more service providers.
(4)
Confirmation that the facility complies with all applicable federal
and state standards.
(5)
No truck, truck body, truck-towed trailer, tractor-towed trailer or other
equipment manufactured for use for hauling or carrying materials over
the highways shall be used for storage of any materials of any kind,
whether or not said truck, truck body, truck-towed trailer, tractor-towed
trailer or said other equipment is registered in accordance with MGL
c. 90 or in accordance with the laws of any other state; nor shall the
aforesaid be parked or stored in any place in any district for any time in
excess of two weeks, unless said place is used as a truck terminal or a
parking area for equipment rented to members of the general public for
use on the highways. Excluded are those vehicles or tandem trailers or
wheel boxes that are utilized for the construction of buildings and are
placed in a construction site temporarily and trailers which are utilized
for temporary offices or sanitation stations.
A.
§ 275-27.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-30
1:646
§ 275-31. Soil removal and landfill.
The City Council may, however, authorize by special permit the use of
the above-mentioned equipment for storage by nonprofit organizations,
charitable institutions or for other such activities as the City Council
deems appropriate. Said special permit shall govern the particular
use of said container(s) and shall detail such other provisions and
restrictions as the City Council deems necessary and appropriate.
B.
No person or corporation shall remove ground minerals, topsoil, gravel,
sand or clay from any of the zones in the City of Chicopee for any
purpose or operate a commercial landfill operation without first
obtaining a special permit from the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
The applicant shall file with the City Clerk a plan showing the area to
be excavated or filled. Said plan shall show the following information:
Existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals. [Amended
10-20-1981]
(1)
(2) Abutting land use and ownership.
The location of all entrances and exits to be used by vehicles
working on the site.
(3)
(4) Existing and proposed waterways and ponds.
An indication that the plan has been reviewed by the Building
Commissioner, City Engineer and the Department of Planning and
Development and the Chicopee Conservation Commission. [Added
12-2-1980]
(5)
B.
No such permit shall be granted to authorize any such removal or fill
which would result in the site being inadequately drained. No ponding
of water shall occur unless specifically approved within the plan.
C.
All excavation or filling shall be so conducted that the side banks of
the area on all sides wherever such excavation or filling has been done
shall be left safe at all times during the course of the work, and, upon
completion of the same, the area shall be left in a safe condition so that
no overhanging edges shall be left or any side slopes of more than one
vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal.
D.
Each permit shall be granted for a definite period of time to be fixed by
said Board, but no such permit shall be granted for a period of more
than three years from the date thereof. The Board may revoke said
permit if, after holding a public hearing, violations of this chapter or the
permit have been found.
E.
This section shall not be construed to apply to any such removal or
filling incidental to the construction or alteration of any structure for
which a building permit has been obtained or street which has been
approved by the Planning Board. [Added 12-2-1980]
F.
§ 275-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-31
1:647
§ 275-32. Swimming pools.
§ 275-33. Corner view clearance.
Between the property lines of streets intersecting at an angle of less than
135º and a line joining points on such lines 20 feet distant from their point
of intersection, no building or structure may be erected and no vegetation
may be maintained above a height 3 1/2 feet above the plans through their
curb grade. Within this area, no snow can be piled up above 3 1/2 feet.
After termination of the excavation or at the termination or revocation
of the special permit, whichever is sooner, all persons excavating shall
be required to resurface the area excavated with a minimum of six
inches of topsoil covered by hay or straw or other suitable materials to
prevent erosion. All completed and unused areas shall be seeded and
covered with vegetation during the first growing season following the
work.
G.
A performance bond to be filed with the City Treasurer (to be set
by the City Council in consultation with the City Engineer) shall be
required sufficient to insure the completion of all restoration work
and shall be accompanied by an easement to allow such work to be
filed with the Registry of Deeds. The above-mentioned plan shall be
forwarded to the Building Commissioner, who, with cooperation from
the City Engineer, shall inspect all work performed under this chapter.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
H.
All special permits for soil removal or landfill shall expire upon the
lapse of time as fixed by the City Council. Following such lapse, all
rights granted by the special permit shall be extinguished. The rights
granted under a special permit may be reestablished by filing for a
renewal at least 60 days prior to the expiration. [Added 4-7-1981;
amended 9-1-2009]
I.
No pool for which a building permit is required shall be located nearer
than six feet to any lot line.
A.
All such swimming pools shall be enclosed by a chain link, secure fence
or wall at least four feet high. The location of the fences and the design
of the gates and latches must be of a design which is reasonably secure
for very young children in the opinion of the Building Commissioner.
B.
No swimming pool shall be located within the City unless it complies
with appropriate state and local health codes and Statewide Building
Code.
C.
§ 275-31 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-33
1:648
§ 275-34. Applicability of State Building Code.
Nothing in this chapter shall regulate or restrict the methods of
construction of structures regulated by the State Building Code.
§ 275-35. Subjects not regulated or restricted. [Added 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-3578]
Subjects which zoning may not regulate, restrict, require special permits
for, discriminate against, or exempt; provided, however, that land or
structures may be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk
and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks,
open space, parking and building coverage requirements (from MGL c. 40A,
§ 3):
BUILDING CODE: No zoning ordinance shall regulate or restrict the
use of materials or methods of construction of structures regulated by
the State Building Code.
A.
AGRICULTURE: No zoning ordinance shall prohibit, unreasonably
regulate or require a special permit for the use of land for the primary
purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture; nor the
use, expansion, or reconstruction of existing structures thereon for the
primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture,
including those facilities for the sale of produce, and wine and dairy
products.
B.
WETLANDS: No zoning ordinance shall exempt land or structures from
floodplain or wetlands regulations established pursuant to general law.
C.
SINGLE-FAMILY BUILDINGS: No zoning ordinance shall regulate or
restrict the interior area of a single-family residential building.
D.
RELIGIOUS USES; CHURCHES: No zoning ordinance shall regulate or
restrict the use of land or structures for religious purposes
E.
EDUCATIONAL USES: No zoning ordinance shall regulate or restrict
the use of land or structures for educational purposes on land owned
F.
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 275-35, Agricultural uses.
§ 275-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-35
1:649
or leased by the commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or
bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit
educational corporation.
PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS: Lands or structures used or to be
used by a public service corporation may be exempted in particular
respects from the operation of a zoning ordinance if, upon petition of
the corporation, the Department of Telecommunications and Energy
shall, after notice given pursuant to MGL c. 40aA, § 11 and public
hearing in the City, determine the exemption is required and find that
the present or proposed use of the land or structure is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. This does not
include wireless communications facilities.
G.
CHILD CARE; DAY CARE: No zoning ordinance shall regulate or
restrict the use of land or structures, or the expansion of existing
structures, for the primary, accessory or incidental purpose of
operating a child-care facility; provided, however, that such land or
structures may be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the
bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area,
setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. As
used in this subsection, the term “child-care facility” shall mean a daycare
center or a school-age-child-care program, as those terms are
defined in § 275-4.
H.
LIVING ARRANGEMENTS FOR DISABLED: Imposition of health and
safety laws or land use requirements on congregate living
arrangements among nonrelated persons with disabilities that are not
imposed on families and groups of similar size or other unrelated
persons shall constitute discrimination
I.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME and large family day-care home, as those
terms are defined in MGL c. 28A; § 9, shall be an allowable use unless
prohibited or specifically regulated within any zoning district.
J.
FLOATING ZONES: No provision of a zoning ordinance shall be valid
which sets apart districts by any boundary line that may be changed
without adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance or bylaw.
K.
TEMPORARY SHELTER; MOBILE HOMES: No zoning ordinance shall
prohibit the owner and occupier of a residence which has been
destroyed by fire or other natural holocaust from placing a
manufactured home on the site of such residence and residing in such
home for a period not to exceed twelve months while the residence
is being rebuilt. Any such manufactured home shall be subject to the
provisions of the State Sanitary Code.
L.
HANDICAPPED ACCESS RAMPS: No dimensional lot requirement of
a zoning ordinance, including but not limited to setback, front yard,
side yard, rear yard and open space, shall apply to handicapped access
ramps on private property used solely for the purpose of facilitating
M.
§ 275-35 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-35
1:650
§ 275-36. Placement of residential structures.79 [Added 6-21-2011
by Ord. No. 11-17]
The purpose of this section is to eliminate infill housing that fronts on the
backyards of existing homes, thus reducing privacy and creating visually
awkwardly placed buildings that may have a negative impact on
neighborhood property values. This section applies to lots created after
June 21, 2011.
§ 275-37. Nonconforming lots.
ingress or egress of a physically handicapped person, as defined in MGL
c. 22, § 13A.
SOLAR ENERGY: No zoning ordinance shall prohibit or unreasonably
regulate the installation of solar energy systems or the building of
structures that facilitate the collection of solar energy, except where
necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
N.
AMATEUR RADIO ANTENNA: No zoning ordinance shall prohibit
construction or use of an antenna structure by a federally licensed
amateur radio operator; however, reasonable regulations regarding
location and height may be imposed.
O.
Mid-block lots: For new residential structures proposed for mid-block
lots, the front wall shall be aligned so it is not located behind the rear
wall of any existing abutting residential structure (Figure 1).80
A.
Corner lots: For new residential structures proposed for corner lots or
for lots abutting corner lots where the existing principle building fronts
on the cross street, the front wall of the new building shall be located:
Within the average alignment of the existing buildings, where
existing buildings within 300 feet on each side of the lot, on the
same side of the street, and within the same block and district, are
set back less than the required minimum in their zoning district.
However, all buildings, including porches and other parts of the
building, must be set back a minimum of 10 feet; or
(1)
Between the minimum front setback requirement for its zoning
district and the rear wall of the abutting principle building fronting
the same street (Figure 2).81
(2)
B.
Waivers: The City Council, by special permit, can waive the
requirements of § 275-36 if the applicant can demonstrate that the
location of proposed building will not have a negative impact on
abutting properties. See § 275-9 for special permit filing requirements.
C.
79.Editor's Note: Former § 275-36, Churches and educational uses, was repealed 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-35.
80.Editor’s Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
81.Editor’s Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 275-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-37
1:651
Any increase in area, frontage, width, yard or depth requirements
through a Zoning Ordinance amendment shall not apply to a lot for
single- or two-family residential use from the time of recording or
endorsement, whichever occurs sooner, which was not held in common
ownership with any adjoining land, which conformed to then existing
requirements at the time of its creation and which has less than the
amended requirements but at least 5,000 square feet of area and 50
feet of frontage.
A.
If a definitive plan or a preliminary plan followed within seven months
by a definitive plan has been submitted to the Planning Board for
approval under the Subdivision Control Law and written notice for such
submission has been given to the City Clerk before the effective date
of the chapter, the land shown on such plan shall be governed with
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of the first
submission (if such a definitive plan or amendment thereof is finally
approved) for five years from the date of the approval and endorsement.
Where such plan was submitted or submitted and approved before
January 1, 1976, it shall be governed by such provisions for seven years
from the date of the endorsement of such approval.
B.
When approval of a plan under the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Law is not required and the plan has been submitted to the Planning
Board with written notice of such submission given to the City Clerk,
use of the land shown on such a plan shall be governed by applicable
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of submission
while such plan is being processed under the Subdivision Control Law,
including the time required to pursue or wait for the determination of
appeal, and for a period of three years from the date of endorsement.
C.
Disapproval of a plan shall not serve to terminate any rights which
shall have accrued under the provisions of this section, provided that
an appeal from the decision disapproving said plan is made under
applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Law. Such appeal shall
stay, pending the order or the decree of the court of final jurisdiction,
the applicability to land shown on said plan of the provisions of any
Zoning Ordinance which becomes effective after the date of first
submission.
D.
All adjacent land in common ownership must be combined to meet
minimum lot setback and yard requirements. No new lot can be created
which does not meet minimum requirements for the district within
which it lies, except as provided for above.
E.
§ 275-37 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-37
1:652
§ 275-38. (Reserved)82
§ 275-39. Drive-in restaurants. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Drive-in restaurants are allowed in Business A and Business B Districts
subject to the issuance of a special permit by the City Council and in
Business A, Business B and Business C zones subject to the following
conditions:
§ 275-40. Parking and loading. [Amended 7-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-37; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 11-16]
The record owner of the land shall have the right to record an
instrument in the registry of deeds to waive the five- or seven-year
grace period provisions of this section, in which case the ordinance
then or thereafter in effect shall apply.
F.
Drive-in restaurants shall be located on a lot with a minimum of two
acres in size.
A.
Drive-in restaurants shall be a minimum of 200 feet in distance from
any church, school or residence.
B.
Any building used for dispensing food shall have a minimum setback of
100 feet.
C.
Containers for debris shall be kept in easily accessible areas for the
purpose of disposal.
D.
Purpose. The purposes of parking standards are to:
(1) Provide adequate parking to support the uses served;
Minimize the detrimental impact of off-street parking on adjoining
properties;
(2)
Minimize parking to encourage the use of public transit or other
alternatives to the automobile;
(3)
A.
82.Editor's Note: Former § 275-38, Wetlands, was repealed 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-35.
§ 275-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-40
1:653
Ensure the proper and uniform development of parking areas
throughout the City;
(4)
Ensure safe and convenient circulation of pedestrians and bicycles
within parking areas;
(5)
(6) Ensure proper loading configurations and access; and
(7) Minimize stormwater runoff from parking lots and structures.
Applicability. These regulations shall apply to:
New construction, including new site developments and additions
to existing structures.
(1)
(2) Any change of use as a result of voluntary rezoning.
Conversion of commercial, business, or industrial space to
residential use by special permit.
(3)
(4) Expansion or reduction of existing parking areas.
(5) Development of new parking lots as commercial enterprises.
B.
General requirements for all parking lots.
Automobile off-street parking and loading areas cannot be reduced
in area or encroached upon by buildings, vehicle storage, loading
or unloading, or any other use where such reduction or
encroachment will reduce the area below that required by this
section.
(1)
Any additional off-street parking and loading facilities required as a
result of an expansion of any use must be likewise established and
maintained or such use is required to cease until such facilities are
provided.
(2)
Site plan review and landscaping shall be conducted in accordance
with Chicopee City Code § 275-6, Site plan review.
(3)
Stormwater management. Stormwater management shall be
designed and installed in accordance with Chicopee City Code
Chapter 231, Stormwater Management.
(4)
Pavement directional arrows and/or signs must be provided in
sufficient quantities and locations so as to ensure safe and efficient
on-site traffic circulation.
(5)
Parking stall dimensions: Parking spaces shall have minimum
dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet.
(6)
Interior travel lanes:
(a) Two-way circulation: minimum width of 24 feet.
(7)
C.
§ 275-40 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-40
1:654
(b) One-way circulation: minimum width of 14 feet.
Pavement setbacks: Paved areas shall not extend within:
(a) Ten feet of land zoned for residential uses.
(b) Eight feet from a street lot line.
(8)
Snow storage: Provisions shall be made for storage of snow. Snow
melt shall be directed away from abutting property.
(9)
Driveways: Driveways connecting new off-street parking to streets
for all uses, except residential buildings containing six or fewer
units, shall have a curb radius of at least 20 feet. The closest
curbline of all driveways shall be offset from the curbline of all
adjacent streets and driveways a minimum of 35 feet. Vehicles
exiting from parking areas shall have an unobstructed view of 300
feet in either direction.
(10)
Screening: All parking lots must be screened from abutting
residentially zoned or occupied property by a fence or evergreen
hedge at least six feet in height. Fences must be "solid" in
appearance; plants for screening hedges must be set close enough
together to eliminate gaps in coverage. Screening materials must
be maintained with no gaps in coverage due to disrepair or
unhealthy or dead plantings. Screening shall not be located to
obstruct driver sight lines so as to impair safety at intersections or
driveway entrances or exits.
(11)
Lighting. Lighting shall be installed so that it does not glare onto
residential properties or interfere with the safe operation of motor
vehicles on public roads.
(12)
Maintenance of parking areas. All parking areas shall be kept clean
and free from snow, refuse and debris.
(13)
All parking spaces must be separated from walkways, sidewalks,
roads, streets, or alleys by curbing, and all roads, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, walkways, and lot lines must be protected from
vehicular overhang by wheel bumpers or curbs. Wheel bumpers or
curbs must be installed at least five feet from a street right-of-way
line.
(14)
Setback from buildings: Except for parking within an enclosed
structure, no parking space shall be located within eight feet of a
building wall. No access aisle, entrance or exit driveway shall be
located within five feet of a building. Loading docks are exempt
from this requirement.
(15)
Due to the hazards of backing up emergency vehicles to both the
public and fire personnel, the Fire Department would prefer not
to have dead-end aisles in parking lots. However, if that is not
avoidable, dead ends in parking lots shall not exceed 150 feet in
(16)
§ 275-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-40
1:655
length measured from the center of the travel lane that accesses
that parking aisle.
Open-air parking lots shall be constructed to Department of Public
Works standards, shall be capable of supporting emergency
vehicles, shall have adequate means of ingress and egress for the
anticipated vehicles capable of being parked at the facility and
shall have vehicle travel lanes clearly marked and defined and sized
for emergency vehicles.
(17)
Access to a reliable fire protection water source is a concern of
the Fire Department for both parking lots and parking structures.
A reliable fire hydrant connected to the City water main system
may be required to be located at the entrance to a parking lot, and
additional hydrants may be required on the property. The following
criteria shall be considered for locating fire hydrants on or near the
property: the total number of vehicles capable of parking on the
property; type of vehicles parking on the property; and the type,
size and number of structures on the property.
(18)
(19) "No Parking" signs shall be posted on travel lanes.
The Fire Chief reserves the right to designate fire lanes on the
property and require that they be properly marked and maintained.
(20)
Residential use parking restrictions. No camper, trailer or recreational
vehicle of any kind may be used for dwelling purposes or accessory to
any residential use except as provided for in §§ 275-35L and 275-55.
D.
Commercial, business, and industrial zones: requirements.
Off-street loading facilities. Adequate off-street loading and
receiving areas shall be provided for all new business, commercial,
industrial and retail service uses. Off-street loading and receiving
areas shall be designed so that their use does not interfere with
parking and traffic circulation.
(1)
Grades: Parking spaces must not be installed on a grade in excess
of 5%. Interior driveways may not be installed on a grade in excess
of 14%. Interior drive aisles in commercial and industrial areas
cannot be installed on a grade of more than 10%.
(2)
All parking spaces must be separated from walkways, sidewalks,
roads, streets, or alleys by curbing, and all roads, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, walkways, and lot lines must be protected from
vehicular overhang by wheel bumpers or curbs. Wheel bumpers or
curbs must be installed at least five feet from a street right-of-way
line.
(3)
Setback from buildings: Except for parking within an enclosed
structure, no parking space shall be located within eight feet of a
building wall. No access aisle, entrance or exit driveway shall be
(4)
E.
§ 275-40 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-40
1:656
located within five feet of a building. Loading docks are exempt
from this requirement.
Handicapped parking: Parking spaces for the physically handicapped
shall be designed in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the
Architectural Barriers Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Public Service, as such standards may be amended.
Handicapped spaces shall be clearly identified by a sign stating that
such spaces are reserved for physically handicapped persons. The
handicapped spaces shall be located in the portion of the parking lot
nearest the entrance to the use or the structure which the parking lot
serves. Adequate access for the handicapped from the parking area to
the structure shall be provided.
F.
Flexible parking standards. The City Council may by special permit
approve reductions in the number of required parking spaces, if certain
standards and requirements are met as set forth below.
Where reduction of parking may enhance or preserve the
environment, such as preservation of significant trees or avoiding
impact on sensitive environmental areas, without placing an undue
burden on on-street parking or public parking lots.
(1)
There are one or more bus routes in the immediate vicinity of the
building or buildings.
(2)
There is a public parking facility available to the public within
1,000 feet of a building entrance adequate to meet a designated
amount of the parking requirement.
(3)
Where the size of the lot is so small that meeting the parking
requirement would prevent redevelopment.
(4)
Where there is a bikeway in close proximity to the site and the
applicant demonstrates that the uses in the proposed development
are conducive to bicycle use.
(5)
Where the applicant has demonstrated that the use served does not
need the number of spaces required by this section.
(6)
Where the applicant has demonstrated that demand for multiple
uses on the site peaks at different hours, allowing parking to be
shared.
(7)
Where the applicant has demonstrated a shared parking agreement
with an abutting property that has more parking than required for
the use to be served.
(8)
Where the applicant has secured a lease for off-site parking spaces
that is suitably located in the neighborhood in which it is proposed,
and is practically located so it will be used by customers or
employees of said business as deemed appropriate by the permit
granting authority.
(9)
G.
§ 275-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-40
1:657
(10)For any other good cause shown.
Location of parking and loading facilities.
All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this section
for any use must be located on and entirely within the same record
lot with that use or on any other lot associated with the premises
(owned by the same individual or entity) within 400 feet of the
principal use building.
(1)
Off-street parking and loading facilities that make it necessary for
vehicles to back out directly into a public road are prohibited,
except that this prohibition does not apply to the off-street parking
area of one single-family detached or semidetached dwelling units.
(2)
All garages or other space allocated for parking of vehicles within
buildings are considered part of the required off-street parking
facilities and may be included as such in computing the
requirements outlined in this section.
(3)
H.
Loading facilities.
For any building in any industrial, or mixed-use zone, adequate offstreet
space for the loading and unloading of goods and materials
must be provided, taking into consideration the size of the building
and the uses allowed in such zone.
(1)
Each loading space provided must have a minimum width of 12
feet, clearance height of at least 14 feet, and a depth sufficient to
accommodate the maximum length of delivery trucks reasonably
likely to serve the building. In the event that intermediate tractortrailer
loading or unloading is reasonably likely, a depth of 60 feet
must be provided. Loading space shall be located so that trucks will
not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement or project into
any public right-of-way. Maneuvering areas must provide a turning
radius of not less than 48 feet.
(2)
I.
Parking structures design.
Parking garages must be designed so as to be as open as possible,
have sufficient lighting, and easily visible compatible stairways
and elevator lobbies. The exterior design should match or be
compatible with the other structures on the site or adjacent to the
garage.
(1)
Entry to a garage not having direct access to a public street must
be indicated by sufficient signage on site.
(2)
Where an automated directional sign system is installed, there
must be a readily legible indication from the street of the status of
available parking within the structure.
(3)
J.
§ 275-40 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-40
1:658
Where a parking structure abuts (beside, behind or across the
street from) a residential development, the design must not allow
headlights to shine through the structure.
(4)
Parking structures shall comply with all applicable National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) codes, Massachusetts General Laws
(MGL) and Massachusetts Fire Codes (CMR).
(5)
K. (Reserved)
L. (Reserved)
M. (Reserved)
Required number of spaces. (Parking in on-site garages may be incuded
in the calculation.)
Residential.
One-, two-, and three-family dwellings and mobile homes: two
spaces per unit.
(a)
Multifamily dwellings, four or more units: 1.5 spaces per unit
plus two guest spaces per 10 units.
(b)
Age-restricted dwellings.
Nursing and convelescent homes: one space per five beds
plus two spaces per three employees on the largest shift.
[1]
Assisted living: one space per four units plus two spaces
per three employees on the largest shift.
[2]
Age restricted (55 and over) with services: 1.5 spaces per
unit plus two spaces per three employees on the largest
shift.
[3]
Age restricted (55 and over) with no services: 1.5 spaces
per unit.
[4]
(c)
(1)
Nonresidential: Sufficient spaces shall be provided to store the
vehicles used in the conduct of business, in addition to the
following requirements:
Hotels and motels, boardinghouses: one space per rentable
bedroom.
(a)
(b) Churches: one space per four seats.
Educational services, except nursery schools: one space per
three students' capacity as determined by the design
occupancy load of the facility plus one space per two
employees.
(c)
(2)
N.
§ 275-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-40
1:659
Elementary, junior high and middle schools, public and private:
one space for each employee anticipated during normal school
hours.
(d)
High schools, public and private: one space for each employee
anticipated during normal school hours plus one space for each
five students in the senior class or one space for every three
seats in the main auditorium or stadium, whichever is greater.
(e)
Day-care centers, nursery schools: one space per two
employees.
(f)
Welfare and charitable institutions.
Isolation, drug and alcoholic clinics that provide overnight
accommodations: one space per three beds, plus one space
per two employees on the largest shift.
[1]
Isolation, drug and alcoholic clinics that provide daily
services but no overnight stay: one space per 250 square
feet in public use plus one space per 500 square feet of
other gross area.
[2]
(g)
Hospitals and sanitariums: one space per two beds plus one
space per four employees on the largest shift.
(h)
Membership clubs: one space per two persons' capacity as
determined by the design occupancy load.
(i)
(j) Mortuaries and funeral parlors: 10 spaces per reposing room.
Eating and drinking places, drive-in restaurants, take-out
restaurants: two spaces per five persons' capacity as
determined by the design occupancy load plus one space per
two employees on the largest shift. A minimum of five spaces
shall be provided in all cases.
(k)
Entertainment assembly, sports assembly, commercial
recreation: one space per three persons' capacity as
determined by the design occupancy load.
(l)
Retail stores: one space per 250 square feet in public use plus
one space per 500 square feet of other gross area.
(m)
Personal services, nonautomotive repair services: one space
per 250 feet in public use plus one space per 500 square feet
of other gross area.
(n)
Professional services: one space per 400 square feet of floor
area plus one space per two employees.
(o)
Finance, insurance and real estate: one space per 300 square
feet of floor area plus one space per two employees.
(p)
§ 275-40 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-40
1:660
§ 275-41. Home occupation. [Amended 6-19-1984; 12-20-1988]
Business services: one space per 500 square feet in public use
plus one space per two employees.
(q)
(r) Motor vehicle repair service: two spaces per repair stall.
Industrial uses and manufacturing: one space per two
employees on the largest shift.
(s)
Wholesale trade: one space per two employees on the largest
shift.
(t)
Warehousing and storage: one space per two employees on the
largest shift.
(u)
(v) Utilities: one space per two employees on the largest shift.
Communications: one space per two employees on the largest
shift.
(w)
Motor freight transportation: one space per two employees on
the largest shift.
(x)
Contract construction services: one space per two employees
on the largest shift.83
(y)
Special license required. [Amended 6-6-1989]
A special license from the City Council is required for a home
occupation. Special license requests require immediate abutter
notification, legal advertisement, a public hearing, a fee as set
by the City Council84 and yearly renewal. Applications may be
obtained and filed in the City Clerk's office. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
The procedure for obtaining a home occupation special license is
as follows: [Added 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-1]
(a) Obtain an application from the City Clerk's office.
Submit the completed application together with the required
fee85 and a copy of the Assessor's Map to the City Clerk's office.
(b)
A hearing will be held by the Zoning Committee of the City
Council on the application for the special license in accordance
with this chapter. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(c)
(2)
A.
83.Editor's Note: Formner Sec. 18/III/21, Group care facilities, which immediately followed,
was repealed 7-3-1984.
84.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
85.Editor's Note: The current fees are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 275-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-41
1:661
The City Council will thereafter upon approval of the Zoning
Committee's action vote to issue the special license.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(d)
Once this special license is granted, a certificate of occupancy
must be obtained from the Building Inspection Department and
a copy forwarded to the Board of Assessors.
(e)
All home occupation special licenses shall expire on April 30th
of each year, unless revoked. Any applications for renewal of
the home occupation special license may be made in the month
of April and shall take effect on May 1 next ensuing.
(f)
If a nonowner of the property is the applicant, permission must
be obtained, in writing, and submitted with the application.
(g)
The City Council may in its discretion grant a waiver to allow
one employee who is not a member of the family if there is
a specific finding by the City Council that the waiver will not
cause any undue hardship to the neighborhood nor disrupt the
residential nature of the residence. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(h)
The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for maintaining
records of home occupations. If a special license for a home
occupation has expired and the holder of such license has not
received a renewal of the license from the City Council, the
Building Commissioner shall forthwith notify the license holder
that the license has expired, and the operation of the home
occupation must cease within five days, and the holder must renew
his license through the License Committee of the City Council.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(3)
Performance standards. A special license for home occupation may be
granted only if all of the following performance standards are met:
[Amended 6-6-1989]
No alteration of the principal building shall be made which changes
the character as a dwelling. In no way shall the appearance of
the structure be altered or the occupation within the residence be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ
from its residential character, either by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, signs or the emission of sounds, noises or
vibrations.
(1)
No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare,
electrical interference, health hazard or any other hazard or
nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually
experienced in an average residential dwelling.
(2)
Only one nameplate shall be allowed. It may display the name of
the occupant and/or the name of the home occupation. It shall
not exceed two square feet in area, shall be nonilluminated and
(3)
B.
§ 275-41 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-41
1:662
attached flat to the main structure, visible through a window or
posted in front of the building with a maximum height of four feet.
The limitation to one nameplate is intended to apply to all lots,
including corner lots.
No traffic shall be generated in greater volume than would
normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. The activity
involved shall not assume a commercial or public character or
constitute a health or safety hazard to the neighborhood.
(4)
The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the dwelling
and dwelling purposes and shall not change the character of use as
a dwelling. [Added 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-286]
(5)
There shall be no exterior storage on the premises of material
or equipment used as a part of the home occupation. [Added
3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2]
(6)
The total area used for the home occupation shall not exceed 1/2
the floor area of the user's living unit. [Added 3-16-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-2]
(7)
A home occupation, including studios or rooms for instruction, shall
provide off-street parking area adequate to accommodate needs
created by the home occupation. [Added 3-16-1999 by Ord. No.
99-2]
(8)
Any other conditions which the Council shall impose relating to the
health, safety and welfare of abutting property owners. [Added
3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 99-2; amended 9-1-2009]
(9)
Special conditions. The City Council may impose special conditions
upon a home occupation to ensure that the business is conducted in
a manner which is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to the following:
[Amended 9-1-2009]
A requirement for fencing and/or screening of the subject property
from neighboring residences.
(1)
A limitation on the number of vehicles related to the occupation
which may be stored on the premises or parked on an adjacent
right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A restriction on the hours of operation for the home occupation.
A requirement that the permit be renewed after a designated
period of time.
(4)
Any other conditions which the City Council shall impose relating
to the health, safety and welfare of abutting property owners.
(5)
C.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection B(5).
§ 275-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-41
1:663
§ 275-42. Corner lots.
Uses on corner lots must observe setback requirements on all facing
streets. Rear yard requirements must be observed for one yard, but only the
side yard requirements must be observed for the other. However, for oneand
two-family houses, front yard setback requirements must be observed
on only one street. The setback on the other street may be the average
alignment of all buildings within 300 feet on either side, on the same side of
the street and in the same block and district, provided that such a setback
shall be at least 15 feet.
§ 275-43. Governmental services.
The location of governmental services, including such uses as schools, office
buildings, essential services, storage and maintenance buildings, parks,
recreation areas and service installations, are not controlled by this chapter.
All applicable lot size, density, setback, side and rear yard, parking and sign
requirements must be adhered to.
§ 275-44. Fences.
Fences, including hedges, may be no higher than 3 1/2 feet between the
street and the setback line where, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, they would obstruct visibility and no higher than eight feet
at any point. Fences shall be of a safe, nonhazardous construction not likely
to endanger the health or safety of the public, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner.
Grounds for revocation. Failure to meet the definition in § 275-4 or any
of the performance standards outlined in Subsection B above or any
condition imposed by the City Council in accordance with Subsection
C shall be grounds for denial of a special license for home occupation
or for revoking such a special license if one has already been granted.
[Amended 6-6-1989; 9-1-2009]
D.
Enforcement of home occupation regulations. The City Building
Inspector shall have the authority and responsibility to investigate and
enforce issues of unlicensed home occupations. The Building Inspector,
given a question as to whether a hobby or a home occupation is
involved, will make the initial determination and will notify the parties.
If a home occupation is determined, the party involved will be given 60
days to obtain a license or to cease and desist. The determination by the
Building Inspector may be appealed as provided for herein. A “hobby”
is normally a pastime that is engaged in for pleasure as opposed to
profit. Any individual found to be in violation of the Home Occupation
Ordinance will be subject to fines up to $25 per day for each violation
after a determination has been made. The effective date is June 15,
1989. Renewal shall be annually prior to December 31. The fee shall
be as set by the City Council. [Added 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-20;
amended 9-1-2009]
E.
§ 275-41 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-45
1:664
§ 275-45. (Reserved)87
§ 275-46. Keeping of horses. [Amended 9-1-2009]
The City Council may grant a special permit for the keeping of horses and/
or ponies in accordance with the following conditions:
§ 275-47. Scientific research and development. [Amended 9-1-2009]
Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a
matter of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which
activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific
development or related production, may be permitted upon the issuance
of a special permit, provided that the City Council finds that the proposed
necessary use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
§ 275-48. Lots without sanitary sewers. [Amended 8-4-1987]
No residential lot shall be laid out on a street or way, wherein a sanitary
sewer has not been installed or wherein provisions have not been made for
the installation of a sanitary sewer, with an area less than 12,500 square
feet and with dimensions of less than 100 feet by 125 feet. All such lots shall
be subject to Health Department approval prior to construction.
§ 275-49. Smokehouse. [Added 11-20-1984]
The minimum acreage required for the keeping of not more than one
equine or stable shall be 1 1/2 acres. One additional equine shall be
permitted for each 10,890 square feet (1/4 acre). (Foals under six
months are not to be counted.)
A.
The location of the stable shall be not less than 100 feet from any street
line, not less than 30 feet from any side lot line and not less than 25
feet from a rear lot line, with a minimum distance of 60 feet from any
dwelling.
B.
Fences must be adequate to contain the animals within the corral or
stable area. Such corral or stable area shall be a minimum of 5,000
square feet.
C.
Stables, corrals, paddocks or yards shall be properly drained and
reasonably free from excessive odor, dust or mud so as not to create a
nuisance or health hazard to surrounding property owners.
D.
Maintenance of the stable and property used in the keeping of equines
shall conform to all regulations of the local Board of Health and the
state health authorities.
E.
87.Editor's Note: Former § 275-45, Mobile homes as temporary shelter, was repealed
9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-35.
§ 275-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-49
1:665
§ 275-50. Signs. [Added 8-2-1983; amended 3-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-10; 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 04-73; 6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 05-160A;
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
On land other than for farms, the use of a smokehouse may be
permitted with the approval of the Board of Health and the Building
Inspector and, as such, may be considered as an accessory use, located
75 or more feet from any street line and 100 or more feet from any
dwelling. Such accessory use shall not include any activity conducted
for gain.
A.
In residential zones the use of a smokehouse may be allowed by special
permit, subject to the following criteria: [Added 6-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 05-152
(1) Smokehouses are allowed as accessory uses only.
Such accessory use shall not dominate the site or include any
activity conducted for gain.
(2)
A smokehouse must be located a minimum of 75 feet from any
street line and 100 or more feet from any dwelling.
(3)
No use of a smokehouse shall create smoke or fire hazard to
adjacent buildings or property.
(4)
All smokehouses shall conform to Massachusetts State Building
Code requirements for fire-resistance rated construction.
(5)
Applications for smokehouse special permits shall be made to the
City Council in accordance with Chicopee City Code § 275-9. All
provisions of state and local regulations regarding special permits
shall apply. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(6)
(7) Farms are exempt.
B.
Billboards. The purpose of this subsection is to preserve and promote
the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Chicopee by
maintaining and enhancing the visual environment, by protecting areas
of scenic beauty or of historic interest, by minimizing the possible
adverse effect of nonaccessory signs on nearby residences, public
resources or private property.
General requirements:
The number of billboards in the City of Chicopee shall be
limited to 59 faces. A face consists of a single-sided advertising
area or space. [Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-19C]
(a)
All billboards must be properly permitted by both the City
of Chicopee and the Outdoor Advertising Division of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 275-49 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-50
1:666
Billboards and nonaccessory signs shall be governed by special
permit.
(c)
All existing billboards which are properly permitted may be
maintained and repaired but may not be enlarged. A petition
to enlarge or change location shall be subject to the same
requirements as a new application.
(d)
All billboard applications, including, but not limited to,
requests to enlarge or change location, shall be subject to
the general regulations regarding special permits found in
the Chicopee City Code Chapter 275 in addition to the
requirements of this section.
(e)
The City Council, when granting a special permit, may waive
distance requirements, provided the applicant submits its
request in writing and can demonstrate the proposed sign will
not create a traffic hazard or visual nuisance. The City Council
reserves the authority to require the applicant to produce
necessary documentation, including photographic simulations
or balloon-type tests to determine visibility. The heights of
signs shall be governed by the special permit and are not
subject to sign height limitations in the zoning district in which
they are located. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(f)
Evaluation of billboard proposals is based on distance from
public land uses, residential land uses, aesthetics and public
safety.
For billboards that do not exceed 144 square feet on a
surface(s), the following criteria apply:
The billboard may not be located within 1,500 feet of
a park or the main building entrance of a school or
church.
[a]
The billboard may not be located within 500 feet of
residentially zoned land.
[b]
The billboard may not be located within 350 feet of
any other freestanding billboard or nonaccessory sign.
[c]
The billboard may not obstruct the view of and may
not be confused with any traffic control devices and
may not cause a traffic hazard.
[d]
The billboard may not obstruct any scenic or
important view.
[e]
The billboard may not contain or project any flashing
or distracting lights or images.
[f]
[g] The billboard must be aesthetically pleasing.
[1]
(g)
§ 275-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-50
1:667
For billboards greater than 144 square feet but less than
800 square feet on a surface(s), the following criteria
apply:
The billboard may not be located within 1,500 feet of
a park or the main building entrance of a school or
church.
[a]
The billboard may not be located within 500 feet of a
residentially zoned land.
[b]
The billboard may not be located within 750 feet of
any other freestanding billboard or nonaccessory sign.
[c]
The billboard may not obstruct the view of and is not
confused with any traffic control devices and does not
cause a traffic hazard.
[d]
The billboard may not obstruct any scenic or
important view.
[e]
The billboard may not contain or project any flashing
or distracting lights or images.
[f]
[g] The billboard must be aesthetically pleasing.
[2]
Each applicant, at the time of application, shall pay a
nonrefundable application fee totaling $100, payable to the City
Clerk.
(2)
An annual inspection fee totaling $100 per face shall be paid by
each permit holder on or before January 15 of each calendar year.
(3)
Maintenance.
The maintenance and repair of all billboards and accessory
signs shall be the responsibility of the permit holder and shall
adhere, at a minimum, to the following standards:
If the sign consists of paper or paper product, such paper
shall not be peeled or ripped.
[1]
[2] If the sign is painted, the paint shall not be chipped.
The trim or frame shall not have any missing pieces or
broken parts.
[3]
The so-called uprights, any structural portion, i.e., frame
and superstructure, shall be stained or painted.
[4]
There shall not be any overgrowth of vegetation on the
ground within 10 feet of the so-called uprights or
superstructure of the sign so long as the cutting of such
vegetation is within the control of the sign owner.
[5]
(a)
(4)
§ 275-50 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-50
1:668
Any continuing violation of this maintenance requirement for
a period of 30 days after written notice from the Building
Inspector to the sign owner describing the nature of the
violation shall be cause for a fine of $100.
(b)
Any continuing violation of this maintenance requirement for
a period of 45 days after written notice from the Building
Inspector to the sign owner describing the nature of the
violation shall be cause for an additional fine of $250.
(c)
Any continuing violation of this maintenance requirement for
a period of 60 days after written notice from the Building
Inspector to the sign owner describing the nature of the
violation shall be cause for removal of such sign by the City at
the owner's expense.
(d)
This special permit shall be construed to include a warranty by
the applicant to maintain the subject billboard or nonaccessory
sign in good repair to the reasonable satisfaction of the Building
Commissioner. Should said permit lapse, be revoked or not be
renewed by the City Council, the City, after notice to the permit
holder, may remove said sign, and the cost of the removal shall be
at the owner's expense. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(5)
Temporary signs. The purpose of this subsection is to accommodate
temporary signage where and when appropriate while reducing visual
blight and ensuring public safety. Temporary signs will be permitted as
follows:
Restrictions.
Size. Temporary signs may not exceed nine square feet total in
a residential zone and may not exceed four feet by eight feet
in a nonresidential zone. [Amended 11-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-76]
(a)
Height. No temporary sign may be more than eight feet from
the ground when erected or posted.
(b)
Number of signs. Not more than two of the same type of
temporary sign which advertises for the same person, place or
thing may be placed on any one piece of private property at
any one time. Information may not be continued from one sign
to another, thus creating the illusion of a larger sign by placing
signs together.
(c)
Public property. No temporary sign may be erected or posted
on or over public property, including but not exclusive of signs
on public property, including but not exclusive of those
attached to utility poles or boxes, other legal signs, trees or
shrubs, or placed in the roadway median or island.
(d)
(1)
B.
§ 275-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-50
1:669
Public ways. No temporary sign may be placed in or over
a public way without permission from the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(e)
Duration of placement. Temporary signs may be placed 60 days
prior to an event or promotion and must be removed within
seven days following an event or promotion.
(f)
Public safety. Temporary signs are prohibited from interfering
with a corner view clearance (§ 275-33) or obstructing visibility
of an adjacent driveway.
(g)
Lighting. No temporary sign is to have any type of artificial
lights, including flashing lights, on any part of the sign or near
the sign.
(h)
Responsibility. All temporary signs erected on private property
shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or lessee of said
property.
(i)
Violations.
Any person or persons violating any part of this chapter are
subject to penalties for each and every day this Zoning
Ordinance is violated. The fine shall be $25 per day after
written notification by the Building Commissioner.
(a)
Any person and/or organization placing signs pursuant to this
chapter shall register the name, address and telephone
number of a contract person with the Building Commissioner.
Temporary signs placed without contact information will be
considered in noncompliance.
(b)
Any sign determined by the Building Commissioner to be either
in noncompliance or on public property shall be removed by
the Building Commissioner or his designee. Upon renewal, the
Building Commissioner or his designee shall notify the contact
person so designated as to the location of the removed sign.
If the contact person fails to pick up the removed sign within
seven days after notification or attempted notification of its
removal, said sign shall be destroyed.
(c)
(2)
Exceptions.
Emergency signs or signs for road or bridge construction shall
be excluded from the provisions of this subsection. Further,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Chicopee Police
Department, Chicopee Fire Department and Chicopee
Emergency Management personnel shall be exempt from this
section. [Amended 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-53]
(a)
(3)
C. Accessory signs. [Amended 9-1-2009]
§ 275-50 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-50
1:670
Relief from accessory sign regulations. The City Council may grant
a special permit for relief of zoning district accessory sign
requirements for size, height, location and numbers of freestanding
signs. The application shall be made in accordance with Chicopee
City Code § 275-9 and shall demonstrate the following:
Owing to unusual and distinctive physical conditions of a site
or structures thereon or due to other encumbrances or
restrictions, enforcement of the sign regulations will impose a
substantial hardship on the petitioner.
(a)
The size of the sign, location, design, color, texture, lighting
and materials will complement the architectural and natural
setting.
(b)
(1)
Signs requiring a special permit. In addition to the general
requirements set forth in the individual zoning districts contained
in the Chicopee City Code Chapter 275, the following accessory
signs shall require a special permit issued by the City Council.
Signs with visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement or any description or other apparent
visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or
mechanical means, and all animated and electronically
activated changeable signs except for time, temperature and
date signs.
(a)
Signs that are animated with lights or illuminations which
flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in intensity,
vary in color or use intermittent electronic pulsations.
(b)
Signs on privately owned property that extend over public
property or a public right-of-way.
(c)
(2)
All accessory sign faces shall be removed in their entirety or the
sign covered with plastic material that is opaque that meets the
approval of the Building Department within 30 days after said
business ceases to do business. The provision of this section shall
be enforceable against the property owner, and any property owner
violating this section shall be subject to a per-day violation of $25
after receiving written notification by the Building Commissioner.
[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 10-31]
(3)
Signs, general.
Prohibited signs.
Any signs using the word "stop" or "danger" or which
otherwise present or imply the need or requirement of
stopping, or a caution for the existence of danger, or which
are a copy of, or which for any other reason are likely to be
confused with any municipally approved official sign.
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 275-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-50
1:671
Any sign that obstructs any door, fire escape, stairway, ladder
or openings intended to provide air, ingress or egress for any
building as required by law.
(b)
Any sign placed in any location where, by reason of its location,
it will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal
or other traffic control device; nor may any sign, by reason
of its shape, position or color, interfere with or be confused
with any authorized traffic signal, sign, or device. Further, no
sign shall be placed in the site distance triangle or any other
location where it will obstruct vision of the public right-of-way
to a vehicle operating during ingress to, egress from, or while
traveling on the public right-of way.
(c)
(d) Any sign with more than two sides.
Any signs placed on or over public property, including but
not exclusive of signs on public property, including but not
exclusive of those attached to utility poles or boxes, or other
legal signs, trees or shrubs, or placed in the roadway median
or island.
(e)
Temporary banners. The purpose of this subsection is to accommodate
temporary banners where and when appropriate while reducing visual
blight and ensuring public safety. Temporary banners will be permitted
as follows: [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01]
Restrictions.
(a) Location. Banners will not be permitted in a residential zone.
Size. Temporary banners may not exceed four feet by eight feet
in a nonresidential zone.
(b)
Number of banners. Not more than two of the same type of
temporary banner which advertises for the same person, place
or thing may be placed on any one piece of private property at
any one time. Information may not be continued from one sign
to another, thus creating the illusion of a larger sign by placing
signs together.
(c)
Duration of placement. Temporary banners may be placed 60
days prior to an event or promotion and must be removed
within seven days following an event or promotion. Banners
that are temporarily being used to advertise a new business
may be placed for no more than 30 days from the date the
business opens.
(d)
Public ways. No temporary banner may be placed in or over
a public way without permission from the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(e)
(1)
E.
§ 275-50 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-50
1:672
§ 275-50.1. (Reserved)88
§ 275-50.2. (Reserved)89
§ 275-51. Motor vehicle repair and storage. [Added 12-20-1988]
Public property. No temporary banner may be erected or
posted on or over public property, including but not exclusive
of those attached to utility poles or boxes, other legal signs,
trees or shrubs, or placed in the roadway median or island.
(f)
Public safety. Temporary banners are prohibited from
interfering with a corner view clearance (§ 275-33) or
obstructing visibility of an adjacent driveway.
(g)
Responsibility. All temporary banners erected on private
property shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or lessee
of said property.
(h)
Enforcement. The Building Department will be the enforcing
authority.
(2)
(3) The penalty for violations of said subsection shall be $25 per day.
No owner of residentially zoned land shall permit his property to be
used for the purpose of motor vehicle repair, auto body repair, storage
or repair of stock cars used for racing, storage of tractor-towed trailers
or storage of construction or any other equipment not used as an
accessory use for the maintenance of property.
A.
Excluded are maintenance and general repairs to motor vehicles which,
in the opinion of the Building Commissioner, would not create noise,
dust, vibration, odors, smoke, glare, electrical interference, dire hazard
or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent
than that usually experienced in any average residential zoned district.
Adverse opinions of the Building Commissioner are subject to appeal to
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B.
C. No spray painting or welding using bottled gas shall be permitted.
No more than one unregistered vehicle that is operable or inoperable
or not currently registered or with a current state inspection sticker
on each residentially zoned property A and B shall be permitted. The
Building Department, upon notification of a violation of this section,
shall visit the property and give the property owner 30 days from the
date of the written notice of violation to either have the vehicle or
vehicles currently/legally registered or removed from the property. The
D.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 275-50.1, Prohibited signs, added 6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 05-160A,
was repealed 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 07-49.
89.Editor’s Note: Former § 275-50.2, Accessory signs requiring special permit, added
6-21-2005 by Ord. No. 05-160A, as amended, was repealed 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 11-10.
§ 275-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-51
1:673
§ 275-51.1. Membrane-covered structures. [Added 2-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-06]
fine for violation of this section shall be $25 per day to conform to this
chapter. This section excludes operable antique vehicles and vehicles
properly garaged. [Added 11-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-54; amended
4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-20]
No person shall erect a membrane-covered structure in any residential,
commercial or business zoned district without first obtaining a special
permit from the City Council. Excluded from this requirement are
membrane-covered greenhouses used for residential or commercial
horticulture and temporary membrane-covered structures used for
special events. [Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
No special permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are
met:
In the judgement of the City Council, the visual impact of the
structure will not adversely impact the area in which it is located.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
The use of the structure is consistent with the intent of the district
in which the use is located and the general purpose and intent of
Chapter 275.
(2)
The structure complies with the dimensional requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located and the requirements of the
Massachusetts Building Code.
(3)
The special permit application and site plan shall include the
following:
(a) The structure shall be clearly shown on the site plan.
A rendition of the structure with dimensions (footprint and
height) and a description of the construction materials shall be
provided.
(b)
(4)
(5) The special permit will not go with the land.
B.
Pursuant to the Massachusetts State Building Code, any membranecovered
structure erected for more than 90 days requires a building
permit. Any existing membrane-covered structure that had not been
issued a building permit prior to the adoption of this section requires a
special permit.
C.
§ 275-51 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-51.1
1:674
ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 275-52. Residential A Districts.
Permitted uses in Residential A Districts shall include: [Amended
12-20-1988]
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Churches and other places of worship.
(3) Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries.
(4) Private schools and colleges.
(5) Greenhouses accessory to a farm or private residence.
(6) Governmental services.
(7) Farms, nurseries and truck gardens.
(8) Utilities transmission facilities and rights-of-way.
(9) Golf courses.
(10)Accessory uses.
A.
Special permits. Special permit uses in Residential A Districts which
may be granted by the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended
9-1-2009]
(1) Membership clubs.
(2) Charitable institutions.
Garages and stables which are not accessory uses to the principal
structure.
(3)
(4) New cemeteries.
(5) (Reserved)90
(6) Hospitals.
(7) Isolation, drug and alcoholic clinics.
(8) (Reserved)91
(9) (Reserved)92
B.
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), Day-care centers, was repealed 9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-37.
91.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(8), Nursing homes, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-02.
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(9), Group care facilities, was repealed 9-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-37.
§ 275-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-52
1:675
(10)Parking facilities. [Added 10-4-1983; amended 5-7-1985]
(11)Home occupations. [Added 12-20-1988]
Permit for more than one unregistered vehicle. [Added 5-21-1996
by Ord. No. 96-32]
(12)
(13)Animal kennels. [Added 5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-34]
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.
Minimum setback: 25 feet to foundation and 15 feet to a porch or
other part of the building. Where existing buildings within 300 feet
on each side of the lot, on the same side of the street and within
the same block and district, are set back less than the required
minimum, new structures may be erected at the average alignment
of the existing buildings. However, all buildings, including porches
and other parts of the building, must be set back a minimum of 10
feet.
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
Yards and maximum coverage shall be as follows: [Amended
9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-37; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(percent)
Heights
(feet)
Permitted uses 6 25* NR 40
Accessory
buildings
3 3 40% of
rear yard
30
Membership
clubs
10 25 NR 40
Hospitals 25 35 NR 40
Charitable
institutions
10 25 NR 40
Isolation, drug
or alcoholic
clinics
25 35 NR 40
Garages and
stables not
accessory to
permitted use
10 15 40% of
rear yard
30
(5)
C.
§ 275-52 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-52
1:676
§ 275-53. Residential B Districts.
NOTES:
NR: No requirement.
*Except that a ground-story rear yard projection on the building
may extend to within 15 feet of the rear lot line.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
D.
Permitted uses in Residential B Districts shall include: [Amended
12-20-1988]
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family residences.
(3) Churches and other places of worship.
(4) Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries.
(5) Private schools and colleges.
(6) Greenhouses accessory to a farm or private residence.
(7) Governmental services.
(8) Farms, nurseries and truck gardens.
(9) Utilities transmission facilities and rights-of-way.
(10)Golf courses.
(11)Accessory uses.
A.
Special permits. Special permit uses in Residential B Districts which
may be granted by the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended
9-1-2009]
(1) Membership clubs.
(2) Charitable institutions.
(3) Garages which are not accessory to the principal structure.
(4) (Reserved)93
(5) (Reserved)94
B.
93.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding group homes, was repealed 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-36.
§ 275-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-53
1:677
(6) New cemeteries.
(7) Boardinghouses.
(8) Hospitals or sanitoriums.
(9) Isolation, drug and alcoholic clinics.
(10) (Reserved)95
(11)Parking facilities. [Added 10-4-1983; amended 5-7-1985]
(12)Home occupations. [Added 12-20-1988]
Permit for more than one unregistered vehicle. [Added 4-16-1996
by Ord. No. 96-21]
(13)
(14)Animal kennels. [Added 5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-33]
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
Minimum lot size: single-family dwelling, 7,500 square feet; other
uses, 10,000 square feet.
(1)
Minimum setback: 25 feet to foundation line and 15 feet to a porch
or other part of the building. Where existing buildings within 300
feet on each side of the lot, on the same side of the street and
within the same block and district, are set back less than the
required minimum, new structures may be erected at the average
alignment of the existing buildings. However, all buildings,
including porches and other parts of the building, must be set back
a minimum of 10 feet.
(2)
Minimum lot frontage: single-family residence, 75 feet; other uses,
100 feet.
(3)
(4) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
Yards and maximum coverage. [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord. No.
03-36; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(percent)
Heights
(feet)
Permitted
uses
6 20* NR 40
Accessory
buildings
3 3 40% of rear
yard
(5)
C.
94.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), Day-care centers, was repealed 9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-36.
95.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(10), Nursing homes, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-02.
§ 275-53 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-53
1:678
§ 275-54. Residential C Districts. [Amended 3-16-1982; 10-4-1983;
5-7-1985; 6-4-1985; 8-4-1987; 1-15-1991; 2-19-1991 by Ord. No.
91-1; 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 96-22; 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21;
5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-32; 9-1-2009; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-04]
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(percent)
Heights
(feet)
Membership
clubs
10 20 NR 40
Hospitals 25 35 NR 40
Charitable
institutions
10 25 NR 40
Isolation,
drug or
alcoholic
clinics
25 35 NR 40
Garages
and stables
not
accessory to
permitted
uses
10 15 40% of rear
yard
30
NOTES:
*Except that a ground-story rear yard projection on the building
may extend to within 15 feet of the rear lot line.
NR: No requirement.
Waivers. The City Council may waive dimensional requirements
upon written request of the applicant for a development which, in
the opinion of the City Council, serves to preserve a unique natural
area, historical building, or is determined to be compatible with the
neighborhood in which it is proposed. [Added 6-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-6]
(6)
D. (Reserved)96
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
E.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Enforcement of home occupation regulations, added
12-20-1988, as amended, was repealed 5-20-2003 by Ord. No. 03-21.
§ 275-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-54
1:679
Permitted uses in Residential C Districts include:
(1) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Three-family dwellings.
(4) Multifamily dwellings (four or more units).
(5) Governmental services.
(6) Accessory uses.
A.
Special permit.
Uses which may be allowed in Residential C Districts by special
permit by the City Council shall be as follows:
Uses allowed in a Commercial A District which are clearly
subordinate to the multifamily dwellings. Total floor area of
Commercial A uses may not exceed 30% of the total floor area
of the multifamily use.
(a)
(b) Membership clubs.
(c) Charitable institutions.
(d) Parking facilities.
(e) Permit for more than one unregistered vehicle.
(f) Animal kennels.
(g) Cemeteries.
(h) Hospitals.
(i) Home occupations.
(1)
B.
Waivers. The City Council may waive dimensional requirements upon
written request of the applicant for a development which, in the opinion
of the City Council, serves to preserve a unique natural area, historical
building, or is determined to be compatible with the neighborhood for
which it is proposed.
C.
Dimensional requirements.
Lot area. Required minimum lot area.
(a) One-family dwellings: 7,500.
(b) Two- and three-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Multifamily dwellings: 30,000 square feet.
(d) Governmental services: 30,000 square feet.
(1)
D.
§ 275-54 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-54
1:680
(e) Uses by special permit: 30,000 square feet.
Distance between buildings: all principal buildings shall be
separated by a minimum of 25 feet.
(2)
Yards. Required minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks.
Front yard setback:
One-, two-, and three-family: 25 feet to closest portion of
the structure and 15 feet to a porch.
[1]
Multifamily, governmental services, uses by special
permit: 25 feet. On a corner lot, one setback may be 20
feet where there is no parking between the building and
the street.
[2]
Setback exemption: Where existing buildings within 300
feet on each side of the lot, on the same side of the
street and within the same block and district, are set back
less than the required minimum, new structures may be
erected at the average alignment of the existing buildings.
However, all portions of structures must be set back a
minimum of 10 feet.
[3]
(a)
Side yard setbacks.
One-family: six feet; two-family: 10 feet; and three-family:
15 feet.
[1]
Multifamily, governmental services, uses by special
permit: 20 feet.
[2]
(b)
Rear yard setbacks.
[1] One-, two-, and three-family: 20 feet.
[2] Multifamily: 30 feet.
[3] Governmental services, uses by special permit: 35 feet.
(c)
(3)
Frontage. The following minimum lot frontage shall be required:
(a) Single-family: 75 feet.
(b) Two- and three-family: 100 feet.
Multifamily, governmental services, uses by special permit:
150 feet.
(c)
(4)
Depth. The following minimum lot depth shall be required:
Multifamily, governmental services, uses by special permit:
200 feet.
(a)
(b) One-, two- and three-family: 100 feet.
(5)
§ 275-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-54
1:681
(6) Height. Height shall be limited to 40 feet for all principle uses.
Accessory structures:
Attached: Accessory structures attached to principle
structures shall comply with height limitations and setbacks
for principle structures.
(a)
Detached: side and rear yard setback minimum requirement,
maximum height:
Accessory to one-, two-, and three-family: Minimum side
and rear setbacks are three feet.
[1]
Accessory to multifamily, governmental services, uses by
special permit: Minimum side and rear setbacks are 10
feet.
[2]
[3] Accessory to all uses: Maximum height is 20 feet.
(b)
(7)
Signs: Multifamily, governmental services, uses by special permit:
One freestanding sign no larger than 20 square feet on a side may
be allowed for each project. Location and size of signs on buildings
and ground sign locations shall be approved as part of the site plan
and/or special permit. Attached signs extending more than three
feet above the roofline are prohibited.
(8)
(9) Parking facilities. See Chicopee City Code, § 275-40 (parking).
Fencing and screening. (See also Chicopee City Code, § 275-44,
Fences.)
Multifamily: Fencing is required where multifamily housing
developments abut nonresidentially zoned or occupied
property. Fences may not exceed four feet within front
setbacks, eight feet in side yards, and eight feet in rear yards.
On corner lots, fences, walls, and shrubbery may not exceed
the height restrictions identified in Chicopee City Code,
§ 275-33, Corner view clearance.
(a)
Governmental services, uses by special permit: Fencing is
required where governmental services or special permit uses
abut residentially zoned or occupied property. Security fences
may not excede eight feet on front, side or rear setbacks.
Decorative or screening fences may not exceed four feet in
front setbacks, eight feet in side yards, and eight feet in rear
yards. On corner lots, fences, walls, and shrubbery may not
exceed the height restrictions identified in Chicopee City Code,
§ 275-33, Corner view clearance.
(b)
(10)
Open Space. Multifamily developments (four units or more) shall
provide a minimum of 500 square feet of open space per unit. The
open space shall be a contiguous area or multiple areas, provided
(11)
§ 275-54 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-54
1:682
no area is less than 2,000 square feet. Open space areas must
contain landscaping and open areas for outdoor recreation. Land
between the property line and building setbacks cannot be counted
toward the total open space requirement for the project.
Uses
Minimum
Area
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Setback
*[a][b]
(feet)
Minimum
Side
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear
Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Single-family
dwelling
7,500
square
feet
1 unit 75 100 25 6 20 40
Two-family
dwelling
10,000
square
feet
2 units 100 100 25 10 20 40
Three-family
dwelling
10,000
square
feet
3 units 100 100 25 15 20 40
Multifamily 30,000
square
feet
4+
units
150 200 25 20 30 40
Governmental
services
30,000
square
feet
150 200 25 20 35 40
Accessory
One-, two, and
three-family
25 3 3 20 feet
detached
Multifamily,
all other
N/a N/a N/a 25 10 10 40 feet
detached
Membership
clubs
30,000
square
feet
100 100 25 20 35 40
Hospitals 30,000
square
feet
100 100 25 20 35 40
Charitable
institutions
30,000
square
feet
100 100 25 20 35 40
Parking facilities See Chicopee City Code, § 275-40 (parking); § 275-6, Site plan review.
NOTES:
N/a = Not applicable
* See also setback exemption in § 275-54D(3)(a)[3].
§ 275-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-54
1:683
§ 275-55. Residential D Districts.
NOTES:
[a] See also corner lot setback in § 275-42.
[b] Corner lot exception: Multifamily dwellings may observe 20 feet on one street if no
parking between building and street.
Plan approval. All proposed multifamily developments shall follow
review, submission, and approval requirements in accordance with
Chicopee City Code, § 275-6, Site plan review.
E.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
F.
All mobile homes, including relocated units, shall be located in a
Residence D District. A Residence D District shall have a minimum of
five acres in total land area.
A.
Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall include mobile homes, accessory
buildings, recreation buildings, management and maintenance
buildings.
B.
Density requirements. The density of development or mobile homes per
acre of land shall not exceed seven units per acre.
C.
Open space. Mobile home parks shall have at least 20% of total land
area in landscaped and recreational space. At least 50% of this
requirement shall be in usable open space. This requirement may not
be filled by landscaped areas within mobile home lots or in required
setbacks.
D.
Setbacks. No mobile home or accessory building shall be within 25 feet
of a public right-of-way. All mobile homes shall be set back a minimum
of 15 feet from any street within the development. No mobile home
shall be within 20 feet of any other mobile home.
E.
All proposed mobile home developments shall follow all review,
submission and approval requirements as set down by the Planning
Board in the Subdivision Regulations after appropriate zoning has been
confirmed or attained.
F.
All residential units shall be installed on foundations, without wheels,
in a permanent manner.
G.
Owners of existing mobile home parks as of the date of adoption of this
subsection or any mobile home park owner with an approved mobile
home park pursuant to this chapter, within a Residence D District, shall
be permitted to convey individual lots to individual owners within the
mobile home park, provided that: [Added 9-5-1989]
H.
§ 275-54 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-55
1:684
§ 275-56. Commercial A Districts.
Any lot so conveyed, purchased or sold shall be subject to an
agreement obligating the owner of said lot to join an association
of unit owners, which association should be responsible for the
centralized management of the mobile home park in its entirety
and provide for the maintenance and improvement of common
areas, common streets and ways within the mobile home park
and common utilities within the mobile home park, hence said
association shall provide for control of its actions by a one-vote-perlot
rule and shall have the ability to enforce as equitable lien on
said lots for the cost of said common areas, common streets, ways
and common utilities.
(1)
Use of any lot within a Residence D District is hereby restricted to
mobile homes and appurtenant storage sheds, garages and other
appurtenant uses.
(2)
The minimum lot frontage of any lot so conveyed by the owner of
a mobile home park, on either a public or private way shall be 35
feet, and the minimum square footage of any lot so conveyed shall
be 3,500 square feet; (Mobile Home Parks in existence prior to the
enactment of this subsection need only comply with 3,200 square
feet.)
(3)
The Planning Board for the City of Chicopee has approved said
lots on either an approval-not-required or an approval-required
plan submitted in accordance with the Massachusetts Subdivision
Control Law, and said lots shall be subject to any regulations or
covenants imposed by the Planning Board of the City of Chicopee
pursuant to the provisions of the Massachusetts Subdivision
Control Law.
(4)
In no event shall the space occupied by a mobile home on any lot
so conveyed by the owner of a mobile home park exceed 50% of the
individual lot area.
(5)
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
I.
This district is designed for business uses that are intended to serve a
neighborhood and to be compatible with residential areas.
A.
Permitted uses in Commercial A Districts shall include:
(1) Accessory.
(2) Commercial greenhouses.
B.
§ 275-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-56
1:685
(3) (Reserved)97
(4) Educational services.
(5) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
(6) Membership clubs.
(7) Personal services.
(8) Professional services.
Repair services other than for automobiles, trucks and
motorcycles.
(9)
(10)Retail trade without outdoor storage.
(11)Welfare and charitable services.
Special permits. Uses which may be granted in Commercial A Districts
by the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended 10-4-1983;
5-7-1985; 9-1-2009]
(1) Automobile service stations.
(2) Up to four dwelling units in a commercial building.
(3) Eating and drinking places without live entertainment.
(4) (Reserved)98
(5) Parking facilities.
C.
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size: no requirements.
Minimum setback: 25 feet. Where parts of existing buildings within
300 feet on each side of the lot, on the same side of the street
and within the same block and district, are set back less than the
required minimum, new structures and additions may be erected
at the average alignment of the corresponding parts of existing
buildings. No outdoor storage may be within 10 feet of the street
line.
(2)
Yards and maximum coverage: side and rear yard requirements
apply only to land abutting residential districts. [Amended
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(3)
D.
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), Day-care centers, was repealed 9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-34.
98.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), Nursing homes, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-02.
§ 275-56 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-56
1:686
§ 275-57. Commercial A-1 Districts. [Added 12-1-1981]
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(percent)
Height
(feet)
Permitted uses 10 15 65 40
Accessory uses 5 15 15 30
Auto service
stations
25 25 50 25
Ground signs 5 15 NR 15
NOTES:
NR: No requirement.
Maximum size for all business uses shall be 3,000 square feet of
floor area for each business unit.
(4)
Special conditions.
Signs. One ground sign may be allowed for each building set back
at least 25 feet. Ground signs may be no larger than 35 square
feet on each side nor have a total surface area greater than 70
square feet. No sign over six square feet in area on each surface
may extend over a sidewalk when attached to a building. Signs
extending above the roofline are prohibited. Signs on a store shall
be no wider than 75% of the width of the storefront or wall of
the premises which is occupied by the store erecting the sign.
Billboards are prohibited. [Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-11G]
(1)
Screening. Any principal or accessory building or use abutting
residentially zoned land must be screened by a solid wall, fence or
hedge at least eight feet in height.
(2)
Dwelling units. No residential unit may be located on the first floor
of a building also used for commercial or business purposes.
(3)
E.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
F.
This district is designed for businesses that are intended to enhance
a neighborhood's cultural, historic and aesthetic environment while
retaining commercial activity compatible with residential areas.
A.
B. Permitted uses in Commercial A-1 Districts shall include:
§ 275-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-57
1:687
(1) Accessory.
(2) Finance, insurance and real estate services.
(3) Personal services.
(4) Professional services.
(5) Welfare and charitable services.
Special permits. Uses which may be granted in Commercial A-1
Districts by the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended 10-4-1983;
5-7-1985; 9-1-2009]
(1) Up to four dwelling units in a commercial building.
(2) Retail trade without outdoor storage.
(3) Parking facilities.
C.
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot size: no requirements.
Minimum setback: 25 feet. Where parts of existing buildings within
300 feet on each side of the lot, on the same side of the street
and within the same block and district, are set back less than the
required minimum, new structures and additions may be erected
at the average alignment of the corresponding part of existing
buildings. Outdoor storage may be allowed only as an accessory
use and shall be restricted to the rear lot. Such storage may not
cover more than 20% of the rear lot area.
(2)
Yards and maximum coverage: Side and rear yard requirements
apply only to land abutting residential districts.
Use
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(percent)
Height
(feet)
Permitted
uses
10 15 65 40
Accessory
uses
5 15 15 30
Ground signs 5 NR NR 10
NOTES:
NR: No requirement.
(3)
Maximum size for all business uses shall be 3,000 square feet of
floor area for each business unit.
(4)
D.
E. Special conditions.
§ 275-57 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-57
1:688
§ 275-58. Business A Districts.
Signs. One ground sign may be allowed for each building set back
at least 25 feet. Ground signs may be no larger than five square
feet on each side nor have a total surface area greater than 10
square feet. No sign over six square feet in area on each surface
may extend over a sidewalk when attached to a building. Signs
extending over the roofline are prohibited. Signs on a store shall
be no wider than 5% of the width of the storefront or wall of the
premises occupied by the store erecting the sign. Billboards are
prohibited. [Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
(1)
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
F.
This district is designed for general businesses located in areas of high
traffic volume that are intended to serve an area-wide population.
A.
Permitted uses in Business A Districts shall include:
(1) Accessory uses.
(2) Automobile parking.
(3) Automobile service stations.
(4) Automotive trade.
(5) Business and professional services.
(6) Commercial greenhouses.
(7) Communications.
Eating and drinking places without the consumption of alcohol,
with or without live entertainment.
(8)
(9) Educational services.
(10)Entertainment assembly.
(11)Finance, insurance and real estate.
(12)Funeral and crematory services.
(13)Hotels and motels.
(14)Membership clubs.
(15) (Reserved)99
(16)Personal services.
B.
§ 275-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-58
1:689
(17)Repair services other than for automobiles and trucks.
(18)Retail trade with or without outdoor storage.
(19)Welfare and charitable institutions.
(20)Lodging house. [Added 8-4-1987]
Motor vehicle repair services. [Added 7-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-38]
(21)
(22)Animal kennels. [Added 5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-31]
Special permit. Uses which may be granted in Business A Districts
by special permit by the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended
3-6-1984; 12-4-1984; 7-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-35; 2-16-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-4; 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-36; 3-19-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-12; 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 02-46; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
06-19A; 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-79; 9-1-2009]
(1) Commercial recreation.
(2) 100Billboards.
(3) Drive-in restaurants.
Eating and drinking places with the consumption of alcohol, with
or without live entertainment.
(4)
(5) Up to four dwelling units in a business building.
Small-scale production facilities where the Council finds that the
use, number of employees, size of operation, hours of operation,
structural and land improvements will improve the general, social,
physical and economic conditions of the neighborhood in which it
is located.
(6)
Towing and storage of motor vehicles.
Towing and storage services are businesses that includes
towing and/or storage of towed vehicles, trailers or anything
mounted on trailers. These operations include office, dispatch
center, parking for towing vehicles and any other towing
equipment, employees and patrons of a towing business, and
storage of vehicles, trailers or anything mounted on trailers
which have been towed from accidents, abandonment or for
reasons other than automotive and truck repair services
normally contracted for by individuals.
(a)
(7)
C.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(15), which listed nursing homes as a permitted use,
was repealed 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-79. For current provisions on nursing homes, see
Subsection C(10).
100. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2), Motor vehicle repair services, was repealed
7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-41.
§ 275-58 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-58
1:690
No towing service based in the City of Chicopee shall operate
without a special permit issued by the City Council.
(b)
All existing towing services conducting business within the
City of Chicopee shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subsection if they are legally in existence at the time of
adoption of this subsection.
(c)
All towing services doing business within City limits shall
possess the ability to store a minimum of 10 motor vehicles
within the City of Chicopee in addition to the provision of two
parking spaces per employee on the largest shift, a minimum
of three parking spaces for customers, and one space for each
business vehicle.
(d)
All outdoor storage facilities shall be located within a Business
A, Business B, or Industrial Zoning District.
(e)
All outdoor storage facilities shall be secured and fully
enclosed by a sturdy privacy fence having a minimum height of
six feet, with a lockable gate for ingress and egress, and shall
be lighted from dusk to dawn.
(f)
All towing service operators shall maintain a complete and
accurate list of all tow truck operators, all of whom shall be
licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. Said list shall be available to the Building
Inspector for the City of Chicopee upon demand.
(g)
All towing companies shall maintain a complete list of all tow
trucks owned and operated by the company, including the
make, model, color, year, and VIN number. Said list shall be
available to the Building Inspector for the City of Chicopee
upon demand.
(h)
All tow trucks shall be properly registered and insured at all
times.
(i)
(8) Housing of taxicabs, limousines and car rentals.
Adult uses. The City Council, in granting a special permit, may
provide that the adult uses listed below be located no less than
500 feet from any district designated by the Zoning Ordinance
for any residential use, including those residential uses allowed
by a special permit or grandfathered within business zones, or
any public, private or parochial school, library, park, playground,
recreational area, church or other area in which large numbers
of minors regularly travel or congregate, or be located within
1,000 feet of any other adult use or within 1,000 feet of any
establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138, § 12.
No advertisement, display or other promotional material is to be
visible to the public from a public way, including but not limited to
(9)
§ 275-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-58
1:691
pedestrian walkways. Signage is limited to ordinance restrictions
in this section. If an adult use allows for the showing of films, videos
or other entertainment within the premises, any and all booths,
cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls must be clearly
visible from the center of the establishment and be closed off or
obscured by curtains, drapes, doors, screens, partitions, dividers or
any obstruction.
(a) Adult bookstore.
(b) Adult theater.
(c) Adult club.
(d) Adult entertainment establishment.
(10) (Reserved)101
Dimensional requirements. [Amended 3-6-1984; 9-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-17; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(1) Minimum lot size: no requirement.
Minimum setback: 25 feet. Where parts of existing buildings within
300 feet on each side of the street and within the same block
and district are set back less than the required minimum, new
structures and additions may be erected at the average alignment
of the corresponding parts of existing buildings. No outdoor
storage may be within 10 feet of the street line.
(2)
Yards, height and maximum coverage. Side and rear yard
requirements apply only to land abutting residential districts or
residential uses. [Amended 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 15-42]
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(percent)
Height
(feet)
Permitted
uses other
than
automobile
service
stations
15 25 60% 40
Accessory
uses
10 15 NR 30
Ground signs 10 15 NR 20
Auto service
stations
25 25 NR 40
(3)
D.
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(10), regarding nursing homes and assisted living and
over 55 age-restricted housing, as amended, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02.
§ 275-58 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-58
1:692
§ 275-59. Business B Districts.
NOTES:
NR: No requirement.
Special conditions.
Signs. One ground sign may be allowed for each building set back
at least 25 feet. Ground signs may be no larger than 40 square
feet on each surface nor have a total surface area greater than
80 square feet. No sign greater than 12 square feet on a side
may extend over a sidewalk when attached to a building. Signs
extending more than three feet above the roofline are prohibited.
Signs on a store shall be no wider than 75% of the width of the
storefront or wall of the premises or that portion of the premises
occupied by the store erecting the sign. [Amended 3-19-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-13; 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
(1)
Screening. Any principal or accessory building or use abutting
residentially zoned or occupied land must be screened by a fence
or hedge at least six feet in height.
(2)
E.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
F.
This district is intended for heavy businesses that generate high
volumes of traffic and are incompatible with residential and many
general business uses.
A.
Permitted uses. Only the following uses are permitted in Business B
Districts:
(1) Accessory uses.
(2) Automobile parking.
(3) Automotive service stations.
(4) Automotive trade.
(5) Business and professional services.
(6) Commercial greenhouses.
(7) Communications.
(8) Contract construction services.
Eating and drinking places without the consumption of alcohol,
with or without live entertainment.
(9)
B.
§ 275-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-59
1:693
(10)Educational services.
(11)Entertainment assembly.
(12)Finance, insurance and real estate.
(13)Funeral and crematory services.
(14)Hotels and motels.
(15)Membership clubs.
(16)Motor freight transportation.
(17) (Reserved)102
(18)Personal services.
(19)Repair services other than for automobiles and trucks.
(20)Retail trade, with or without outdoor storage.
(21)Utilities: offices, equipment storage and maintenance.
(22) (Reserved)103
(23)Welfare and charitable institutions.
(24)Wholesale trade.
(25)Lodging houses. [Added 8-4-1987]
Motor vehicle repair services. [Added 7-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-39]
(26)
(27)Animal kennels. [Added 5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 99-30]
Special permit. Uses which may be granted in Business B Districts
by special permit by the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended
12-4-1984; 7-7-1992 by Ord. No. 92-35; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-4; 7-5-1994 by Ord. No. 94-36; 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-20;
3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12; 9-3-2002 by Ord. No. 02-46;
12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 06-19B; 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-80;
9-1-2009]
(1) Sport assembly.
(2) Commercial recreation.
(3) Industrial uses.
C.
102. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(17), which listed nursing homes as a permitted use,
was repealed 3-17-2009 by Ord. No. 09-80. For current provisions on nursing homes, see
Subsection C(10).
103. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(22), listing warehousing and storage as a permitted
use, was repealed 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-68. See now Subsection C(11).
§ 275-59 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-59
1:694
(4) 104Billboards.
(5) Drive-in restaurants.
Eating and drinking places with the consumption of alcohol, with
or without live entertainment.
(6)
Towing and storage of motor vehicles.
Towing and storage services are businesses that includes
towing and/or storage of towed vehicles, trailers or anything
mounted on trailers. These operations include office, dispatch
center, parking for towing vehicles and any other towing
equipment, employees and patrons of a towing business, and
storage of vehicles, trailers or anything mounted on trailers
which have been towed from accidents, abandonment or for
reasons other than automotive and truck repair services
normally contracted for by individuals.
(a)
No towing service based in the City of Chicopee shall operate
without a special permit issued by the City Council.
(b)
All existing towing services conducting business within the
City of Chicopee shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subsection if they are legally in existence at the time of
adoption of this subsection.
(c)
All towing services doing business within City limits shall
possess the ability to store a minimum of 10 motor vehicles
within the City of Chicopee in addition to the provision of two
parking spaces per employee on the largest shift, a minimum
of three parking spaces for customers, and one space for each
business vehicle.
(d)
All outdoor storage facilities shall be located within a Business
A, Business B, or Industrial Zoning District.
(e)
All outdoor storage facilities shall be secured and fully
enclosed by a sturdy privacy fence having a minimum height of
six feet, with a lockable gate for ingress and egress, and shall
be lighted from dusk to dawn.
(f)
All towing service operators shall maintain a complete and
accurate list of all tow truck operators, all of whom shall be
licensed to operate a motor vehicle within the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. Said list shall be available to the Building
Inspector for the City of Chicopee upon demand.
(g)
All towing companies shall maintain a complete list of all tow
trucks owned and operated by the company, including the
(h)
(7)
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which listed motor vehicle repair services as a
special permit use, was repealed 7-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-42.
§ 275-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-59
1:695
make, model, color, year, and VIN number. Said list shall be
available to the Building Inspector for the City of Chicopee
upon demand.
All tow trucks shall be properly registered and insured at all
times.
(i)
(8) Housing of taxicabs, limousines and car rentals.
Adult uses. The City Council, in granting a special permit, may
provide that the adult uses listed below be located no less than
500 feet from any district designated by the Zoning Ordinance
for any residential use, including those residential uses allowed
by a special permit or grandfathered within business zones, or
any public, private or parochial school, library, park, playground,
recreational area, church or other area in which large numbers
of minors regularly travel or congregate, or be located within
1,000 feet of any other adult use or within 1,000 feet of any
establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138, § 12.
No advertisement, display or other promotional material is to be
visible to the public from a public way, including but not limited to
pedestrian walkways. Signage is limited to ordinance restrictions
in this section. If an adult use allows for the showing of films, videos
or other entertainment within the premises, any and all booths,
cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls must be clearly
visible from the center of the establishment and be closed off or
obscured by curtains, drapes, doors screens, partitions, dividers or
any obstruction. For the purposes of the distance requirements of
this chapter, measurements shall be from boundary to boundary,
that is, from the outer limits of the boundary for the use involved,
to the outer limits of the boundary or district for any other use
referred to.
(a) Adult bookstore.
(b) Adult theater.
(c) Adult club.
(d) Adult entertainment establishment.
(9)
(10) (Reserved)105
Warehousing and storage. [Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-69]
(11)
Dimensional requirements. [Amended 10-17-2006 by Ord. No.
06-11G; 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-18; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
11-02]
D.
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(10), regarding nursing homes and assisted living and
over 55 age-restricted housing, as amended, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02.
§ 275-59 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-59
1:696
§ 275-60. Business C Districts.
(1) Minimum lot size: no required minimum.
Minimum setback: 25 feet. Where parts of existing buildings within
300 feet on each side of the lot, on the same side of the street
and within the same block and district, are set back less than the
required minimum, new structures and additions may be erected
at the average alignment of the corresponding parts of existing
buildings. No outdoor storage may be within 10 feet of the street
line.
(2)
Minimum side and rear yards: no principal structure or accessory
structure or use may be located within 15 feet of any residentially
zoned land. Any principal or accessory structure or use abutting
residentially zoned land must be screened by a fence or hedge at
least six feet in height.
(3)
Height: The maximum height of all buildings and accessory uses
shall be 40 feet. Freestanding signs shall be no taller than 20 feet.
(4)
Signs: One ground sign may be allowed for each building set back
at least 25 feet. Ground signs shall be no larger than 60 square feet
on each side (surface) nor have a total surface area greater than
120 square feet. No sign greater than 12 square feet, on a side may
extend over a sidewalk when attached to a building. Attached signs
extending more than three feet above the roofline are prohibited.
Signs on a store shall be no wider than 75% of the width of the
storefront or wall of the premises or that portion of the premises
occupied by the store erecting the sign.
(5)
This district is intended for business development in the vicinity of
highway interchanges where it is desirable to encourage interstatehighway-
created business.
A.
Permitted uses in the Business C Districts shall include:
(1) Motor freight transportation.
(2) Warehouse and storage.
(3) Hotels and motels.
Eating and drinking places without the consumption of alcohol,
with or without live entertainment.
(4)
(5) Drive-in restaurants.
(6) Automotive service.
(7) Automotive trade.
(8) Lodging houses. [Added 8-4-1987]
B.
§ 275-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-60
1:697
Motor vehicle repair services. [Added 7-6-1995 by Ord. No.
95-37]
(9)
Special permits. Uses which may be granted in Business C Districts by
special permit from the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended
10-4-1983; 5-7-1985; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-4; 7-5-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-36; 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12; 9-1-2009]
(1) 106Billboards.
(2) Industrial uses.
(3) Wholesale trade.
Eating and drinking places with the consumption of alcohol, with
or without live entertainment.
(4)
(5) Parking facilities.
Adult uses. The City Council, in granting a special permit, may
provide that the adult uses listed below be located no less than
500 feet from any district designated by the Zoning Ordinance
for any residential use, including those residential uses allowed
by a special permit or grandfathered within business zones, or
any public, private or parochial school, library, park, playground,
recreational area, church or other area in which large numbers
of minors regularly travel or congregate, or be located within
1,000 feet of any other adult use or within 1,000 feet of any
establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138, § 12.
No advertisement, display or other promotional material is to be
visible to the public from a public way, including but not limited to
pedestrian walkways. Signage is limited to ordinance restrictions
in this section. If an adult use allows for the showing of films, videos
or other entertainment within the premises, any and all booths,
cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls must be clearly
visible from the center of the establishment and be closed off or
obscured by curtains, drapes, doors screens, partitions, dividers or
any obstruction.
(a) Adult bookstore.
(b) Adult theater.
(c) Adult club.
(d) Adult entertainment establishment.
(6)
C.
Dimension requirements shall be as follows:
Minimum setback: 25 feet. Where parts of existing buildings within
300 feet on each side of the lot, on the same side of the street
(1)
D.
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Motor vehicle repair services, was repealed
7-6-1995, by Ord. No. 95-40.
§ 275-60 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-60
1:698
§ 275-61. Central Business District.
and within the same block and district, are set back less than the
required minimum, new structures and additions may be erected
at the average alignment of the corresponding parts of existing
buildings. No outdoor storage may be within 10 feet of the street
line.
Minimum side and rear yards: No principal or accessory structure
or use may be located within 15 feet of any residentially zoned or
used land. Uses must be screened from such areas by a solid wall,
fence or hedge at least eight feet in height above the property line.
(2)
Maximum height: 40 feet for buildings and accessory uses and 20
feet for signs.
(3)
Signs. One freestanding sign may be allowed for each building set
back at least 25 feet. Freestanding signs shall be no larger than
60 square feet on each side (surface) nor have a total surface area
greater than 120 square feet. No sign greater than 12 square feet
on a side may extend over a sidewalk when attached to a building.
Attached signs extending more than three feet above the roofline
are prohibited. Signs on a store shall be no wider than 75% of the
width of the storefront or wall of the premises or that portion of
the premises occupied by the store erecting the sign. [Amended
3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-13; 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
(4)
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
E.
This district is intended for the mixed use of pedestrian-oriented
commercial districts found in the center of the established
neighborhoods.
A.
Permitted uses in the Central Business District shall include:
(1) Retail uses without outdoor storage.
(2) Personal, business and professional services.
(3) Automobile parking.
Eating and drinking places, with or without live entertainment,
without the consumption of alcohol.
(4)
(5) Repair services other than for automobiles and trucks.
(6) Educational services.
(7) Entertainment assembly.
B.
§ 275-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-61
1:699
(8) Hotels and motels.
(9) Welfare charitable institutions.
(10)Membership clubs.
Residential uses in a building used for business or commercial
purposes.
(11)
(12)Accessory uses.
Special permits. Uses allowed in the Central Business District only by
special permit from the City Council shall be as follows: [Amended
3-6-1984; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-4; 7-5-1994 by Ord. No.
94-369-1-2009]
(1) Multifamily residential.
(2) Automotive service stations.
Eating and drinking places, with or without live entertainment,
with the consumption of alcohol.
(3)
Small-scale production facilities where the Council finds that the
use, number of employees, size of operation, hours of operation,
structural and land improvements will improve the general, social,
physical and economic conditions of the neighborhood in which it
is located.
(4)
Adult uses. The City Council, in granting a special permit, may
provide that the adult uses listed below be located no less than
500 feet from any district designated by the Zoning Ordinance
for any residential use, including those residential uses allowed
by a special permit or grandfathered within business zones, or
any public, private or parochial school, library, park, playground,
recreational area, church or other area in which large numbers
of minors regularly travel or congregate, or be located within
1,000 feet of any other adult use or within 1,000 feet of any
establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138, § 12.
No advertisement, display or other promotional material is to be
visible to the public from a public way, including but not limited to
pedestrian walkways. Signage is limited to ordinance restrictions
in this section. If an adult use allows for the showing of films, videos
or other entertainment within the premises, any and all booths,
cubicles, rooms, studios, compartments or stalls must be clearly
visible from the center of the establishment and be closed off or
obscured by curtains, drapes, doors screens, partitions, dividers or
any obstruction.
(a) Adult bookstore.
(b) Adult theater.
(5)
C.
§ 275-61 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-61
1:700
§ 275-62. Industrial Districts.
(c) Adult club.
(d) Adult entertainment establishment.
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
Minimum setback: New structures shall be set back the average
alignment of existing buildings in the same block within 300 feet in
either direction.
(1)
Side and rear yards: Where properties abut one- or two-family
residential units or Residence A or B Districts, a minimum side or
rear yard of 10 feet shall be observed, plus two feet for every story
above the first.
(2)
Height: No building shall exceed a height of 60 feet, except by
special permit from the City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(3)
(4) Maximum building coverage: 80% of the lot. [Amended 3-6-1984]
D.
Residential requirements.
Any new residential unit (newly constructed) shall be provided with
a minimum of 100 square feet of open space and/or recreation per
unit. Such open space or recreation may be provided in, adjacent
to or on top of the building.
(1)
The layout, arrangement and recreation open space requirements
of new residential units shall be approved by the Planning Board.
(2)
No residential unit may be located on the first floor of a building
also used for commercial or business purposes.
(3)
Buildings constructed exclusively for multifamily residence must
meet Residence C District requirements.
(4)
E.
Signs. One freestanding sign no larger than 35 square feet on a side
may be allowed for each building set back at least 25 feet from the
property line. Signs on stores shall be no wider than 75% of the width
of the storefront or wall of the premises or that portion of the premises
occupied by the store erecting the sign. Attached signs extending more
than three feet above the roofline are prohibited. [Amended
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
F.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
G.
Permitted uses shall be industrial uses and any use allowed as a
permitted use in Business A or B Districts and accessory uses.
A.
§ 275-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-62
1:701
Special permits. Within any Industrial District, as indicated on the
Building Zone Map, no building or other structure nor any premises
shall be used, and no building or other structure or part of a building
shall be erected which is intended or designed to be used (except as an
incidental or accessory use) for any of the following specified purposes,
except with the issuance, by the City Council, of a special permit:
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(1) Abattoirs.
(2) Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(3) Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(4) Celluloid manufacture, except in isolated, fire-resisting buildings.
(5) Coal tar products manufacture.
(6) Creosote manufacture.
(7) Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
(8) Explosives or fireworks manufacture.
(9) Fat rendering.
(10)Fertilizer manufacture or potash refining.
Glue or size manufacture or processes involving recovery from fish
or animal offal.
(11)
(12)Gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture.
Sites for dumping grounds (assigned in accordance with MGL c.
111, § 150A).
(13)
(14) Junkyards and junk storage, auto salvage yards.
(15)Linoleum manufacture.
(16)Petroleum refining.
Pyroxylin plastic manufacture or the manufacture of articles
therefrom.
(17)
(18)Radium extraction.
Rubber or gutta-percha manufactured from crude or scrap
material.
(19)
Sewage disposal plant, except where controlled by the
municipality.
(20)
(21)Sulphurous, sulphuric nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(22)Tar distillation.
B.
§ 275-62 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-62
1:702
(23)Tar roofing manufacture.
(24)Sports assembly.
(25)Any use allowed by special permit in Business A or B Districts.
Medical marijuana facilities: See Chicopee City Code § 275-70,
Medical marijuana facilities. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No.
13-21]
(26)
Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
Height. No buildings shall be erected to a height in excess of 60
feet.
(1)
Minimum setback: 25 feet. Where parts of existing industrial
buildings within 200 feet on each side of the lot, on the same side
of the street and within the same block and district, are set back
less than the required minimum, new structures and additions may
be erected at the average alignment of the existing buildings.
(2)
Side yards: No side yard is required, except that for buildings
adjacent to a residence building or district, side yards shall be a
minimum of 25 feet.
(3)
Rear yards: No rear yard is required except that a building adjacent
to a residence shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet.
(4)
Chimneys or flues may be erected within a rear yard, provided that
they do not exceed five square feet in aggregate external area and
do not obstruct free ventilation. An open or lattice-enclosed iron
fire escape or a fireproof open balcony to a fire tower may project
not more than five feet into a rear yard. Any principal or accessory
use abutting residentially zoned or occupied land must be screened
by a solid wall, fence or hedge at least eight feet in height. No
cornice shall project more than three feet into a rear yard.
(5)
C.
Signs. One freestanding sign may be allowed for each building set back
at least 25 feet. Freestanding signs shall be no larger than 60 square
feet on each side (surface) nor have a total surface area greater than
120 square feet. No sign greater than 12 square feet on a side may
extend over a sidewalk when attached to a building. Attached signs
extending more than three feet above the roofline are prohibited. Signs
on a store shall be no wider than 75% of the width of the storefront
or wall of the premises or that portion of the premises occupied by the
store erecting the sign. [Amended 3-19-2002 by Ord. No. 02-13;
10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11G]
D.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
E.
§ 275-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63
1:703
§ 275-63. Garden Industrial Planned Unit Development (IPUD).
[Amended 8-4-1981; 7-3-1984; 4-18-1989; 7-6-1989]
Description. Industrial planned unit development (IPUD) shall mean an
area of land served by sanitary sewer and public water, which is to
be developed as a single entity for one or more industrial buildings,
in which a mixture of industrial uses, as permitted hereunder, are
determined to be advantageous.
A.
Purposes. The purpose of allowing industrial planned unit development
is to provide flexibility in the design and siting of multiple industrial and
office buildings on a single site, thereby promoting aesthetic sensitivity;
the preservation of land for open space; the efficient use of municipal
services; and minimization of the overall impact of development on the
immediate environment, while maximizing the use of the site's natural
characteristics, wherever possible.
B.
Permitted uses. The following uses will be permitted in an industrial
planned unit development:
Industrial uses, except those uses described in § 275-62B,
Industrial Districts, Special permits [excluding item § 275-62B(25)
only as it pertains to §§ 275-58C(6) and 275-59C(3)].
(1)
(2) Office uses, including research and development activities.
(3) Business and professional services.
(4) Financial, insurance and real estate services.
(5) Aviation or aviation services.
(6) Warehouse and distribution.
(7) (Reserved)107
(8) Contract construction services.
(9) Communications.
(10)Accessory uses.
C.
Special permits. The following uses shall be allowed by special permit
from the City Council: [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1) Educational services.
(2) Civic center.
(3) Eating and drinking places.
D.
E. Dimensional and density requirements.
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(7), Day-care/nursery school, was repealed 9-18-2003
by Ord. No. 03-34.
§ 275-63 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-63
1:704
The minimum parcel size for a principal building is 50,000 square
feet.
(1)
Maximum height of structures shall not exceed three stories or
45 feet, excluding projections above the third story for ventilators,
elevators, cooling towers, antennae and mechanical equipment.
Such features shall not exceed 25% of the roof area nor extend 15
feet above the roof level.
(2)
Maximum aggregate building coverage shall not exceed 33% of the
total parcel area.
(3)
Minimum parcel or tract frontage shall be 125 feet for a single
building parcel and 150 feet for multiple building parcels.
(4)
Minimum setback from any street line shall be 50 feet. No
structure, parking area or service yard shall be permitted within
the fifty-foot setback. Pedestrian walkways, driveways and passive
use amenities will be allowed.
(5)
Minimum rear and side setbacks for principal structures shall be
25 feet. However, minimum abutting, rear and/or side setback shall
be 100 feet as measured from residential property line.
(6)
No accessory structure, parking area or service yard shall be
permitted within 15 feet of a side or rear lot line except where a
common driveway is shared by adjoining parcels.
(7)
Corner lots shall comply with a minimum setback of 50 feet from
all street lines.
(8)
Buffer area/screening. No permanent construction of building
structures or parking area shall be permitted within 30 feet of
any abutting land zoned or used for residential purposes; provided
that any permitted use does not create any dangerous, injurious,
noxious or otherwise objectionable condition; fire, explosive,
radioactive or other hazardous condition; noise or vibration,
smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; electrical or other
disturbance; glare or heat; or other conditions or element in a
manner or amount to adversely effect the surrounding area. Any
principal or accessory building or use, including parking or storage
facilities, abutting land used or zoned for residential use shall be
screened by a solid wall, earthen berm or a fence and natural
planting area, which shall be no less than six feet in height when
erected and planted. Any outdoor storage shall be similarly
screened from view. All required screenings shall be maintained in
good condition at all times.
(9)
(10)A maximum of 70% of the total tract can be rendered impervious.
F. Nondimensional requirements.
§ 275-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63
1:705
The industrial planned unit development shall be served by both
sanitary sewer and public water distribution system.
(1)
Minimum parking requirements shall be in accordance with
§ 275-40.
(2)
Landscaping.
Industrial planned unit developments shall be landscaped in
such a manner as to provide an aesthetically pleasant and
cohesive environment.
(a)
The placement and design of the landscaping shall target
functional areas, such as site entrances, signs, parking areas
and building entrances. These plantings shall integrate the
project with the natural existing environment, through the
retention of existing plantings and the use of native plant
species.
(b)
The minimum ratio of planting materials for noncorner
locations shall be as follows:
Three trees (two-inch caliper or more) for every six
parking spaces for the first 80% of the spaces provided.
[1]
Three trees (two-inch caliper or more) or shrubs (eighteeninch
to twenty-four-inch height and spread) for every six
parking spaces in the remaining 20% of the spaces
provided.
[2]
(c)
If the IPUD is located on a corner lot, then the minimum ratio
of planting materials shall be as follows:
Four trees (two-inch caliper or more) for every six parking
spaces, for the first 80% of the spaces provided.
[1]
Four trees (two-inch caliper or more) or eight shrubs
(eighteen-inch to twenty-four-inch height and spread) for
every six parking spaces in the remaining 20% of the
spaces provided.
[2]
(d)
(3)
Loading docks and facilities for handling shipping by rail and
surface shall be located on those sides of each building which do
not front on the street, insofar as possible. Screening either natural
or man-made shall be provided for these areas.
(4)
Outside storage may not exceed 2% of the area of the principal use
or building. However, a special permit may be issued on a parcelby-
parcel basis for up to 5%.
(5)
Signage may be provided as follows:
Attached signs. Signs on the exterior wall of each building shall
not exceed one square foot in area for every five linear feet
(a)
(6)
§ 275-63 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-63
1:706
of building frontage occupied by a tenant; no single dimension
shall exceed seven feet. No attached sign shall be greater
than 42 square feet in area. Each tenant shall have only one
attached sign. Attached signs shall not project more than one
foot from the building wall and shall not extend or project
above the top of the wall to which they are attached. No sign
shall project into or over a sidewalk in such a manner as to
endanger the health and safety of pedestrians.
Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be no larger than
42 square feet in surface area, with no dimension larger than
seven feet. The top of any freestanding sign shall not exceed
12 feet above the ground level at the base of said sign. No
freestanding sign shall be located within 35 feet of the street
pavement edge. No more than two freestanding signs for each
building within the IPUD shall be allowed.
(b)
Prohibited signs shall be as follows:
Any sign, artificial light or reflecting device connected or
used with a sign or otherwise located or displayed where
such light competes for attention of the driver of a vehicle
or may be mistaken for a traffic signal.
[1]
Flashing and rotating or blinking signs or optically
projected slide signals which are changed periodically.
[2]
Lights with such brightness as to cause glare to roads or
neighboring businesses or residences.
[3]
Strings of lights or flag-like devices hung from any part of
a building or residences.
[4]
[5] Billboard signs.
(c)
Finished construction. The exterior walls of each building are to
be finished with stone or other materials exhibiting aesthetic and
durable quality.
(7)
Project review. Any IPUD shall be reviewed by the Department of
Planning and Development, Building Commissioner and the
Department of Pubic Works for compliance with this section and with
the parking requirements of this Zoning Chapter. Any industrial
planned unit development shall meet any and all other review and
approval requirement which are established by ordinance.
G.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
H.
§ 275-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63.1
1:707
§ 275-63.1. Garden Industrial Planned Unit Development (IPUD),
Type II. [Added 5-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-30; amended 4-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-21; 7-7-1998 by Ord. No. 98-49]
Description. Industrial Planned Unit Development (IPUD), Type II, shall
mean an area of land served by sanitary sewer and public water, which
is to be developed as a single entity for one or more industrial buildings,
in which a mixture of industrial uses, as permitted hereunder, has been
determined to be compatible both within the proposed development
and with the adjacent land uses.
A.
Purposes. The purpose of establishing this Industrial Planned Unit
Development (IPUD), Type II District is to provide an appropriate
location for the development of multiple permitted land uses on a site
and to promote economic diversity and stability within the City while
encouraging flexibility in the design and siting of multiple industrial
and office buildings, thereby promoting aesthetic sensitivity,
preservation of land for open space, the efficient use of municipal
services and minimizing the overall impact of development on the
immediate environment and the site's natural characteristics, where
possible.
B.
Permitted uses. The following uses will be permitted in an Industrial
Planned Unit Development, Type II: [Amended 9-18-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-34; 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-52]
Industrial uses involving the manufacture, processing, assembly,
fabrication, packaging, and/or storage of materials or products;
excluding those uses described in § 275-62B(1) through (23),
Industrial Districts, special permits, and excluding the following
principal uses: motor vehicle repair, motor vehicle washing
facilities, drive-in restaurants, residential uses, motor vehicle
towing, motor vehicle storage services and adult entertainment
uses.
(1)
(2) Office uses, including research and development activities.
(3) Business and professional services.
(4) Financial, insurance and real estate services.
(5) (Reserved)
Communications, telecommunication uses, call centers and
telemarketing uses.
(6)
Recreational and sporting uses, including instructional and
commercial uses, excluding sports assembly.
(7)
(8) Aviation or aviation services.
Retail sales (with or without eating and drinking places as a
component):
(9)
C.
§ 275-63.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-63.1
1:708
In a mixed-use, multistory structure with a minimum of three
retail storefronts on the first floor; or
(a)
(b) As an accessory to another permitted principal use.
Urban agriculture and food processing, limited to the following
indoor operations:
(a) Horticultural operations.
(b) Hydroponic and aquaponic facilities.
Nursery stock producers, defined as businesses that raise
herbaceous or small woody plants for wholesale or retail.
(c)
(d) Food processing operations.
Food hubs, defined as entities that facilitate the aggregation,
storage, distribution, and/or marketing of locally produced
food products.
(e)
(10)
Educational services, limited to the following:
(a) Colleges and professional schools.
(b) Vocational and business schools.
(c) Tutoring operations.
Makerspaces, defined as centers that:
Provide community access to shared facilities, tools, and
technologies; and
[1]
Facilitate educational opportunities, either through
organized classes or peer-to-peer collaboration; and
[2]
Cultivate an atmosphere of curiosity, innovation and
entrepreneurship.
[3]
(d)
(11)
"Last-mile" courier and logistics businesses, defined as entities
that:
Receive and sort freight for delivery to end users or retail
points-of-sale;
(a)
Coordinate, contract, and/or perform such deliveries as
defined in Subsection C(12)(a);
(b)
Limit courier operations to a service area not greater than 50
miles in radius; and
(c)
Whose on-site building coverage does not exceed 75,000
square feet or 33% of the total parcel area, whichever is
smaller.
(d)
(12)
§ 275-63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63.1
1:709
(13)Accessory uses.
The following principal uses shall be allowed by special permit from
the City Council following a determination by the City Council that
such use can be integrated into the accepted development scheme and
surrounding developed area: [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1) Educational services.
Eating and drinking places, with or without the consumption of
alcohol, as a principal use.
(2)
(3) Warehouse and distribution.
(4) Sports assembly.
Riverfront activities, which shall consist of fishing piers and
nonmotorized boat launches.
(5)
D.
Dimensional and density requirements. [Amended 5-20-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-18]
The minimum tract size shall be six acres for projects consisting of
more than one principal structure. The minimum parcel size within
said tract for a principal building shall be 50,000 square feet.
(1)
The maximum height of structures shall not exceed three stories or
45 feet, excluding projections above the third story for ventilators,
elevators, cooling towers, antennas and mechanical equipment.
Such features shall not exceed 25% of the roof area nor extend 15
feet above the roof level.
(2)
The maximum aggregate building coverage shall not exceed 33%
of the total parcel area.
(3)
The minimum parcel frontage shall be 125 feet for a single building
parcel and 150 feet for a parcel with multiple buildings.
(4)
The minimum setback from any interior park street line shall be
50 feet. The minimum setback from streets exterior to the park
shall be 75 feet. No structure, parking area or service yard shall
be permitted within the first 50 feet of the front setback areas
as measured from the street line. Pedestrian walkways, bikeways,
driveways, utilities, including storm drainage facilities, plantings
and passive use amenities are allowed within all setback areas.
(5)
Minimum rear and side setbacks for principal structures shall be
45 feet. However, when rear, side or front yards abut residentially
zoned property the setback to principal structures shall be a
minimum of 150 feet as measured from the residential property
line. A mixed conifer buffer area shall be planted and maintained
abutting the residentially zoned property. The minimum height of
the plantings shall be six feet when initially planted.
(6)
E.
§ 275-63.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-63.1
1:710
Buffer area/screening. No permanent construction of accessory
structures and/or any parking areas shall be permitted within 100
feet of any abutting land zoned for residential purposes as
measured from said residential property line. Any principal or
accessory building or use, including parking or storage facilities,
abutting land zoned for residential use shall be screened by either
a solid wall, earthen berm or a fence, which shall be enhanced by
a mixed conifer planting area which shall be no less than six feet
in height when erected and planted. All outdoor storage shall be
screened from view. All required screenings shall be maintained
in good condition at all times or replaced. Pedestrian walkways,
bikeways, driveways, utilities, including storm drainage facilities,
plantings and passive use amenities are allowed within all buffer
areas.
(7)
No accessory structure, parking area or service yard shall be
permitted within 15 feet of a side or rear lot line except where a
common driveway is shared by adjoining parcels.
(8)
Corner lots shall comply with a minimum setback of 50 feet from all
interior street lines and 75 feet from streets exterior to the project.
(9)
No more than 70% of the total tract or any subdivision thereof
may be rendered impervious, excluding streets. An adequate
stormwater management system shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with provisions of this chapter. In cases where a
stormwater system cannot accommodate 70% impervious
coverage, then the impervious coverage must be reduced to
coincide with the stormwater system's capabilities. In no case shall
the total impervious coverage of any parcel exceed 70% within the
IPUD.
(10)
Nondimensional requirements. [Amended 12-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-53]
The Industrial Planned Unit Development, Type II, shall be served
by both sanitary sewer and public water distribution systems.
(1)
All impervious surfaces shall provide for adequate drainage of
stormwater. Site stormwater drainage systems shall be designed
for two- and ten-year, twenty-four-hour storm events. Drainage
calculations prepared by a licensed Massachusetts professional
engineer shall be provided for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and onehundred-
year storm events. Post-development peak discharge rates
of the total tract shall not exceed predevelopment rates of the
tract, either at the point of discharge or the downgradient property
boundary.
(2)
(3) Minimum parking requirements shall be as follows:
F.
§ 275-63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63.1
1:711
No parking space shall be less than 8 1/2 feet in width and
17 1/2 feet in length. All parking spaces shall be properly lined
and maintained.
(a)
All aisles shall provide acceptable clearance for fire and
emergency vehicles. The typical aisle width shall be 26 feet,
unless otherwise approved by the City Fire Chief.
(b)
Continuous parking areas over two acres in size shall be
divided by landscape areas. Such parking areas shall have
storage areas for snow removal purposes. All parking shall
be designed using current stormwater management practices,
and on-site stormwater retention/detention facilities shall be
provided to control downstream and off-site flooding and
erosion.
(c)
All parking areas shall provide for adequate drainage of
stormwater as referenced in Subsection F(2).
(d)
Driveways connecting off-street parking to streets shall have
a minimum curb radius of 25 feet. The closest curbline of
any driveway shall be offset from the curbline of all adjacent
streets and driveways a minimum of 35 feet. Vehicles exiting
from parking areas shall have an unobstructed view of 300 feet
in either direction insofar as possible.
(e)
Lighting. All required off-street parking shall have adequate
lighting. Lighting shall be installed so that it does not cause
glare onto residential properties or interfere with the safe
operation of motor vehicles on abutting roads.
(f)
Maintenance of parking areas. All parking areas shall be
maintained in an attractive manner and kept clean and free of
snow, refuse and debris. All site stormwater drainage systems
shall be maintained as designed and approved. All parking
areas shall have a dust-free surface; the use of dirt, gravel, trap
rock or screenings as a final wearing surface is prohibited.
(g)
The number of parking spaces to be provided shall be
calculated in accordance with § 275-40N.
(h)
Landscaping.
Industrial Planned Unit Development, Type II, shall be
landscaped in such a manner as to provide an aesthetically
pleasant and cohesive environment.
(a)
The placement and design of the landscaping shall target
functional areas, such as site entrances, signs, parking areas
and building entrances. These plantings shall integrate the
project with the natural existing environment through the
enhancement and retention of existing plantings and the use
(b)
(4)
§ 275-63.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-63.1
1:712
of native plant species. Quality existing plantings should be
maintained wherever possible.
The minimum number and type of plantings required for
noncorner lots or sites shall be calculated as follows. In all
cases, native species are recommended.
Three trees (two-inch caliper or more) for every six
parking spaces for the first 80% of the spaces provided.
[1]
Three trees (two-inch caliper or more) or six shrubs
(eighteen-inch to twenty-four-inch height and spread) for
every six parking spaces in the remaining 20% of the
spaces provided.
[2]
(c)
If the IPUD, Type II, is located on a corner lot, then the
minimum number of plantings required shall be as follows. In
all cases, native species are recommended.
Four trees (two-inch caliper or more) for every six parking
spaces for the first 80% of the spaces provided.
[1]
Four trees (two-inch caliper or more) or eight shrubs
(eighteen-inch to twenty-four-inch height and spread) for
every six parking spaces in the remaining 20% of the
spaces provided.
[2]
(d)
Loading docks and facilities for receiving, handling and shipping
by rail and surface shall be located on those sides of each building
which do not front on a street, insofar as possible. Screening, either
natural or man-made, shall be provided and maintained for these
areas in all cases.
(5)
Outside storage may not exceed 5% of the area of the principal
building. The use of trailers or trailer bodies for temporary or
permanent storage is prohibited. Only construction trailers are
exempt from this provision, and then only for a limited time period
approved by the Building Commissioner. Construction trailer
locations shall be approved in advance by the plan review
committee established hereafter.
(6)
Signage may be provided as follows:
Attached signs. Signs on the exterior wall of each building shall
not exceed one square foot in area for every five linear feet
of building frontage occupied by a tenant; no single dimension
shall exceed seven feet. No attached sign shall be greater
than 42 square feet in area. Each tenant shall have only one
attached sign. Attached signs shall not project more than one
foot from the building wall and shall not extend or project
above the top of the wall to which they are attached. No sign
(a)
(7)
§ 275-63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-63.1
1:713
shall project into or over a sidewalk in such a manner as to
endanger the health and safety of pedestrians.
Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be no larger than
42 square feet in surface area, with no dimension larger than
seven feet. The top of any freestanding sign shall not exceed
12 feet above the ground level at the base of said sign. No
freestanding sign shall be located within 35 feet of the street
pavement edge. No more than two freestanding signs for each
building within the IPUD, Type II, shall be allowed.
(b)
Prohibited signs shall be as follows:
Any sign, artificial light or reflecting device connected or
used with a sign or otherwise located or displayed where
such light competes for the attention of the driver of a
vehicle or may be mistaken for a traffic signal.
[1]
Flashing and rotating or blinking signs or optically
projected slide signals which are changed periodically.
[2]
Lights with such brightness as to cause glare to roads or
neighboring businesses or residences.
[3]
Strings of lights or flag-like devices hung from any part of
a building or residence.
[4]
[5] Billboard signs.
(c)
Finish construction. The exterior walls of each building are to be
finished with quality metal panels, stone, brick, block or other
materials exhibiting aesthetic and durable qualities. Combinations
of the above materials are also permitted.
(8)
Project review. Development of any property designated IPUD Type II
shall proceed as follows:
Designation of a tract as IPUD II zoning is subject to zone change
and special permit approvals granted through the City Council.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
The developer shall submit to the City Planning Board a Master
Plan, Development Plan and Development Restrictions. New road
construction shall be subject to Chicopee Planning Board review
and approval in accordance with current subdivision regulations of
the City of Chicopee. Subdivision proposals shall incorporate the
Master Plan, Development Plan and Development Restrictions or
Covenants.
(2)
Development of individual sites within any IPUD, Type II project
shall be subject to site plan review. Site plan review shall be
conducted by a committee consisting of department heads from
Planning and Development, Building, Public Works, Water, Fire and
(3)
G.
§ 275-63.1 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-63.1
1:714
§ 275-64. Floodplain Overlay District. [Amended 4-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-21; 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 13-4]
the CELD Plant Manager. This Committee shall, with input from
other City departments as it deems necessary, review, approve
or require amendments to site plans prior to the issuance of a
building permit by the Building Commissioner. Site plans shall
be consistent with the approved Master Plan, Development Plan
and Development Restrictions or Covenants. Plan submission
requirements shall be established by the IPUD Type II Site Plan
Committee.
Any IPUD Type II project shall meet all other review and approval
requirements established by ordinance.
(4)
Hazard restrictions. No permitted use shall create any dangerous,
injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions. Permitted uses
shall not create flammable, explosive, radioactive or other hazardous
environments or conditions. Noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor or
other forms of air pollution and electrical or other disturbances, glare
or heat or other conditions shall be prohibited if they adversely affect
the surrounding area.
H.
Purpose. The purpose of the Floodplain District is to promote sound
management and appropriate use of land subject to periodic flooding;
to protect the public health and safety of persons and property against
the hazards of flooding; and to ensure the City's compliance with the
rules and regulations of the Federal Insurance Administration so as to
assure the City's continued eligibility for participation in the National
Flood Insurance Program. All development projects, including public
and private utilities and facilities, drainage, and infrastructure, must be
designed to minimize and reduce exposure to flood damage.
A.
Floodplain District boundaries, base flood elevation and floodway data.
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district.
The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the City
of Chicopee designated as Zone A or Zone AE on the Hampden
County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration
of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the
Hampden County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the
City of Chicopee are panel numbers 25013C0192E, 25013C0194E,
25013C0203E, 25013C0204E, 25013C0208E, 25013C0209E,
25013C0211E, 25013C0212E, 25013C0213E, 25013C0214E,
25013C0216E, 25013C0217E, 25013C0218E, and 25013C0401E,
dated July 16, 2013. The exact boundaries of the district may
be defined by the one-hundred-year base flood elevations shown
on the FIRM and further defined by the Hampden County Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2013. The FIRM and
(1)
B.
§ 275-63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-64
1:715
FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with
the Department of Planning and Development.
Base flood elevation and floodway data.
In Zones A and AE along watercourses that have a designated
regulatory floodway, encroachments are prohibited in the
regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood
levels within the community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
(a)
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had
a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal,
state, local or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any
increase in flood levels within the communities during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b)
Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals
or other developments greater than 50 lots or five acres,
whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones.
(c)
(2)
Regulations: existing, uses.
Existing regulations.
The Floodplain Overlay District is established as an overlay
district to all other districts. All development in the district,
including structural and nonstructural activities, whether
permitted by right or by special permit, must be in compliance
with MGL c. 131, § 40, and with Subsection C(1)(a)[1] through
[4] as follows. Any variance for the provisions and
requirements of the below-referenced state regulations may
only be granted in accordance with the required variance
procedures of these state regulations.
Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780
CMR) which address floodplain and coastal high hazard
areas;
[1]
Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), 310 CMR 10:00;
[2]
Inland Wetlands Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), 310 CMR 13:00;
[3]
Minimum Requirements for Subsurface Disposal of
Sanitary Sewage, Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP), 310 CMR 15, Title 5.
[4]
(a)
(1)
Use regulations: The following uses shall be permitted within the
Floodplain District:
(2)
C.
§ 275-64 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-64
1:716
Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife, including
wildlife management shelters.
(a)
Outdoor recreation, including but not limited to play areas,
nature study, boating, fishing and hunting where otherwise
legally permitted.
(b)
Foot, bicycle or horse paths and bridges, provided that such
uses do not affect the natural flow pattern of any watercourse.
(c)
(d) Agriculture of all types.
(e) Forestry, landscaping, lawns and fences.
Uses allowed in the underlying district, except mobile homes
and mobile home parks and subject to the conditions in
Subsections D through G.
(f)
Building permits. In the Floodplain District, a building permit may be
granted for the construction or substantial improvement of any use or
structure, subject to the following conditions:
All new construction, substantial improvement or other
development, including fill, is prohibited in the floodway. Boat
marinas and other accessory uses to water recreation may be
allowed, provided that such construction must not raise the base
flood level nor impede the flow of the one-hundred-year flood.
(1)
Any permitted structures and any portable structures, vehicles or
vessels which are permitted shall be fully anchored against both
flotation and currents.
(2)
When base flood data has not been provided in accordance with
Subsection B, the Building Commissioner shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from
federal, state and other sources as criteria for meeting the
standards of this section.
(3)
D.
No development shall take place in any flood hazard district until all
necessary local, state and federal permits have been obtained and
evidence of such permits has been submitted to the Building
Commissioner.
E.
Utilities.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(1)
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharge from the system into floodwaters.
(2)
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment or contamination from them during the flooding.
(3)
F.
§ 275-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-64
1:717
§ 275-65. Mixed Use MXD District. [Added 7-6-1989]
Site plan approval. The purpose of this review is to determine the
viability of projects proposed in flood hazard districts. Viable projects
are then subject to all applicable federal, state and local approvals
and permits, including but not exclusive of Planning Board Subdivision
Regulations and Chicopee City Code § 275-6, site plan review
regulations.
Seven copies of a site plan at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet shall
be submitted to the Department of Planning and Development. The
site plan shall show the following:
(a) The location, boundaries and dimensions of each lot.
(b) Two-foot contours of the existing and proposed land structure.
(c) The base flood elevation.
The location of existing and proposed structures,
watercourses, drainage easements, means of access, leaching
fields, drainage and sewage disposal facilities and other
facilities.
(d)
(1)
The Department of Planning and Development shall forward a copy
of the site plan to the City Engineer, Highway Department, Water
Department, Department of Planning and Development, Electric
Light Department and Conservation Commission for review. The
Building Commissioner shall not take final action on such plan
until he has received a report thereon from said Departments
and Commissioners or until said Departments and Commissioners
have allowed 15 days to elapse after receipt of such plan without
submission of a report thereon.
(2)
Records of the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor and/or level of floodproofing, as well as certification of
floodproofing, shall be maintained by the Building Commissioner,
to be available for public inspection.
(3)
The City Engineer shall provide benchmarks, as needed, when
requested by the Building Commissioner.
(4)
G.
Alteration of watercourses. Adjacent communities, the Pioneer Valley
Planning Commission and appropriate state agencies, including the
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation and
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Region 1, shall be
notified by the Planning Director or Development Manager prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and evidence of such
notification shall be submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration.
Such alteration or relocation shall not diminish the flood-carrying
capacity of said watercourse.
H.
§ 275-64 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-65
1:718
General provisions.
The purpose of the Mixed Use MXD District is to provide for
large-scale developments of at least 50 acres gross with flexibility
and high standards which are master-planned within the bounds
of a district and which require a minimum of three allowable
land uses situated in locations favorable to the accommodation of
such projects. The district, while originally owned by one entity,
may, during development phases, be subdivided into smaller lots
for specific uses allowed within this district or for conveyance
purposes. Consistent with this purpose, uses in a Mixed Use
District shall be subject to the following provisions, in addition
to those contained elsewhere in this chapter. In all instances, the
requirements of the Chicopee Subdivision Rules and Regulations
will be followed.
(1)
Development shall be guided by an approved master plan and
through the use of the special permit review process.
(2)
By the use of the public review and planning powers, the provisions
of this section also shall be intended to do the following:
Help create major new residential and mixed-use areas in
planned locations at appropriate densities, heights and
mixtures of uses.
(a)
Encourage the preservation and rehabilitation of structures of
merit in the district.
(b)
Encourage areas devoted primarily to pedestrians by
separating pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns and
by requiring off-street parking spaces in accordance with this
objective and with the objectives of specific area plans.
(c)
Encourage flexibility in architectural design and building bulk,
provided that the designs and building bulk shall be compatible
and harmonious with adjoining development over the district
as a whole.
(d)
Make recreation areas more accessible to the district's
residents and visitors.
(e)
In a variety of ways, create environments conducive to a higher
quality of life and environment for residents, businesses,
employees and institutions in the City of Chicopee, as specified
in the district plans and policies.
(f)
(3)
In certain areas, as designated now or in the future by public
plans and policies, a mixture of uses and building densities shall
be intended to promote and protect the public health, safety,
convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the
community as best accomplished by the MXD District.
(4)
A.
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:719
No building or premises shall be used and no building shall be
erected or altered that is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, except for one or more of the uses listed in Subsection B.
(5)
The following uses shall be permitted as a matter of right in the MXD
District:
(1) Dwellings or multiple dwellings.
(2) Community centers.
(3) Hotels or inns.
(4) Churches, synagogues or other places of worship or religious use.
(5) Offices.
Private trades, businesses, professional or technical schools or
colleges or other educational institutions or uses.
(6)
Private clubs, restaurants or fast-food restaurants, provided that a
fast-food restaurant shall not include a drive-through.
(7)
(8) Artist's studio.
(9) Private or public theaters.
(10)Recreational buildings or uses.
(11)Parks or open spaces.
(12)Municipal government or institutional uses.
(13) (Reserved)108
Outpatient or inpatient hospitals, surgical centers or medical
facilities.
(14)
(15) (Reserved)109
(16)Medical office buildings, clinics or testing laboratories.
Business, commercial or office buildings with or without dwellings
above the first floor.
(17)
Light manufacturing, assembly or other light industrial or research
operation.
(18)
(19)Warehousing.
B.
C. The following uses shall be specifically prohibited in the MXD District:
108. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(13), Day nurseries, nursery schools, kindergartens
and day-care centers, was repealed 9-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-34.
109. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(15), Nursing homes or congregate-care or life-care
facilities, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02.
§ 275-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-65
1:720
(1) Outdoor, animal kennels.
(2) Car washes, as a principal use.
(3) Chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution.
Drive-in establishments (any establishment where goods or
services are rendered directly to occupants of motor vehicles while
in the vehicles).
(4)
Enameling plating or painting (except an artist's studio), as a
principal use.
(5)
(6) Material salvage.
(7) Outdoor advertising or billboards, as a principal use.
(8) Open outdoor material storage.
(9) Packing or crating operations, as a principal use.
(10)Commercial parking lot.
(11)Gasoline service stations or repair service stations.
(12)Smelting or rendering.
Carting, express, moving or hauling terminals or yards, except
a cooperative central delivery or pickup system for goods or
merchandise solely to serve businesses in the area.
(13)
(14)Any heavy industrial uses.
(15)Sexually oriented business establishments.
Applications to the MXD are limited to those districts of 50 acres gross
or more.
D.
Application process and requirements; concept plan.
An MXD shall require the issuance of a special permit by the
City Council. Procedures for consideration of the special permit
application shall be in compliance with those set forth in MGL c.
40A, §§ 9 and 11. [Amended 9-1-2009]
(1)
Prior to submittal of a formal application and to minimize expense
and delay for the developer, the Planning Board requests the
presentation of informal drawings of the MXD at a regular meeting
of said Board. The Board and the developer may review such pencil
sketches and informal drawings, without prejudice, to identify
potential areas of concern and agreement. This meeting does not
need to be advertised as a formal public hearing.
(2)
E.
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:721
An application for a special permit shall be submitted to the City
Council, accompanied by 25 copies of the following additional
documents: [Amended 9-1-2009]
A master plan, conceptual in nature, that explains the
purposes, goals and objectives, estimated time of completion
and phasing if required.
(a)
A development plan, which shall be functionally equivalent to a
preliminary plan under the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules
and Regulations.
(b)
A statement and description of the location, amount and
intensity of proposed land uses.
(c)
An assessment of on- and off-site pedestrian and traffic
patterns relating to the proposed project and general
conditions and solutions for any problem areas identified.
(d)
A description of the intended open space areas, to include
permanent open space, landscaped areas and environmentally
sensitive areas.
(e)
A plan view of the overall project indicating the general
location of proposed structures, roads and parking, as well
as existing topography, wetlands and any other significant
features.
(f)
The proposed locations of buildings and a statement of the
proposed uses within the MXD, their location therein and the
conformance of such uses with the Zoning Ordinance.
(g)
The identification of wetlands resource areas as defined by
MGL c. 131, § 40.
(h)
A description of vegetation, important natural features, stone
walls and wildlife habitats.
(i)
A discussion of the type of sewage disposal system, water
supply lines and sources, electrical lines and other utilities.
(j)
(k) A discussion of site drainage methods and layout.
A conceptual discussion of road layout and construction
details.
(l)
Where requested by the Planning Board, a traffic impact report
prepared by a professional traffic engineer and paid for by the
applicant.
(m)
If the MXD does not require subdivision of land, an
environmental assessment shall be submitted pursuant to the
Subdivision Regulations.
(n)
(3)
§ 275-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-65
1:722
Nothing in this provision shall be deemed to waive the
requirements for submission of a definitive plan for the subdivision
of land, where applicable.
(4)
Procedural steps. Within five days after receipt of the application for
approval of a concept plan, the City Council shall transmit a copy
thereof to the Planning Board, Board of Health, Conservation
Commission, Public Safety Committee, Building Department,
Engineering Department, Department of Public Works and Water
Department. The Boards and/or officer shall review the application and
submit their comments, in writing, to the City Council within 21 days.
Failure of these Boards to comment within the 21 days shall be deemed
to be lack of opposition. The City Council shall not take final action
until receipt of these comments or said 21 days have elapsed. The City
Council shall approve or disapprove the concept plan within 60 days
of the receipt of the application for approval. If the Council fails to
take action within said sixty-day period, then the concept plan shall be
deemed approved by the Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
F.
Approval of the special permit. Approval of the special permit will be
based upon the following:
Whether the proposed uses further the objectives of the Mixed Use
District.
(1)
The relationship of the proposed uses to other planning
considerations for the area and the City of Chicopee as a whole,
including the plans, programs and policies of other departments
and agencies of the City.
(2)
The impact of the proposed concept plan, including the relationship
of different uses on the site.
(3)
(4) Consideration of the traffic to be generated and its impact.
(5) The location and design of vehicular access and parking facilities.
(6) The number of parking and loading facilities.
(7) The treatment of open space.
(8) The availability of sewer and water capacities.
(9) The impact on air quality.
(10)The potential noise from commercial, industrial and traffic sources.
An assurance that all permits or licenses that may be required by
federal, state or local law have been obtained or will be obtained
before construction proceeds.
(11)
G.
H. Site plan approval process.
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:723
A site plan submitted for review shall conform to the concept plan
for which approval has been issued by the City Council. If the
Planning Board determines that a substantial change has occurred
in the concept plan, it shall require a new plan for which approval
by the City Council must be obtained. A substantial change shall
include one or more of the following: [Amended 9-1-2009]
(a) An increase of more than 10% in the floor area ratio.
(b) Changes in proposed use categories or types.
A location change of any proposed use which, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, has a significant impact on the project as
master-planned.
(c)
(1)
Within five days after receipt of the application by the Planning
Department, the Department will forward copies to the City
Engineer, Board of Health, Fire Department, Police Department,
Conservation Commission, Water Department, Building
Commissioner and the Department of Public Works, which shall
review and submit comments to the Planning Board. Failure of
these Boards to comment within 21 days of the referral of the
application shall be deemed to be lack of opposition.
Simultaneously, the Department will forward a copy of the
application form to the Mayor and the City Council. [Amended
9-1-2009]
(2)
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 65 days
of the receipt of an application and shall take final action within
90 days from the time of hearing, unless an extension is mutually
agreed upon by the applicant and the Board. All costs of the notice
requirements shall be at the expense of the applicant.
(3)
Any application for use requiring said approval and site plan review
shall otherwise conform to the requirements of the site plan review
process of the City.
(4)
Required site plan contents. All plans submitted for site plan review and
approval under this section shall be prepared by qualified professionals,
including a registered engineer, registered architect and/or registered
landscape architect, and shall include the following items and
information:
A site plan at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or other scale
acceptable to the Planning Board, which indicates, at a minimum,
the following:
The location and boundaries of the district and the location of
existing and proposed structures.
(a)
The existing and proposed topography, including contours and
the location of wetlands, streams, water bodies, drainage
(b)
(1)
I.
§ 275-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-65
1:724
swales, areas subject to flooding, easements and unique
natural land features.
The existing and proposed location of water, storm and
sanitary sewer systems and other public utilities on and
adjacent to the site.
(c)
The location of parking and loading areas, driveways,
walkways and access and egress points.
(d)
The location, dimensions, height and characteristics of
proposed signs and lighting.
(e)
(f) The location of proposed open space or recreation areas.
(g) An indication of all yard requirements.
(h) Any plans for phasing of the development.
A landscape plan showing the limits of work, existing tree lines
and all proposed landscape features and improvements, including
planting areas with size and type of vegetation.
(2)
A locus plan showing the entire project and its relation to existing
areas, buildings and roads for a distance of 1/4 mile from the
project boundaries or such other distance as may be approved by
the Planning Board.
(3)
Building elevations at the scale of 1/8 inch or 1/4 inch equals one
floor or perspective drawings, showing typical elevations.
(4)
A brief accompanying report which:
Summarizes the content of the detailed site plans and
development phasing.
(a)
Highlights key development constraints and issues requiring
resolution and/or mitigation.
(b)
(c) Shows the intended methods of open space protection.
(5)
Site plan review criteria shall include:
Evidence that the development will be integrated into the existing
terrain and surrounding landscape and shall be designed to protect
abutting properties and community amenities.
(1)
Evidence that the development will be served with adequate
parking, drainage, water supply and waste disposal systems.
(2)
Evidence of adequate parking and vehicular and pedestrian
movement within the site and in relation to adjacent ways.
(3)
J.
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:725
Assurance that outdoor lighting, including lighting on the exterior
of a building or lighting in parking areas, is arranged to minimize
glare and light spillover to neighboring properties.
(4)
Modifications. Before approval of a site plan, the Council may request
the applicant to make modifications in the proposed design of the
project to ensure that the above criteria are met. [Amended
9-1-2009]
K.
Final action. The Planning Board's final action shall consist of either
approval or disapproval. Prior to granting approval or disapproval,
the Planning Board shall make a written finding with documentation
supporting its final decision. Upon rendering a decision, the Planning
Board shall forward a copy of said decision to the City Clerk, Building
Commissioner, Mayor and City Council. [Amended 9-1-2009]
L.
Use restrictions.
Commercial and office uses.
Business and professional offices may include multiple uses or
a unitary corporate user within a single structure.
(a)
Ancillary commercial uses are permitted within a single office
building as long as they are wholly contained within the office
structure and are predominantly intended to service the
employees or businesses in the structure. Such uses may
include but are not limited to a snack bar, convenience store,
eating/drinking establishment, branch bank and/or automated
teller station, barber- or beauty shop, travel agency and
newsstand. Further restrictions are as follows:
Size of Office Building
(gross square feet)
Ancillary Commercial Uses
(maximum percentage)
Up to 120,000 20
Greater than 120,000 10
(b)
(1)
Hotels. Permitted ancillary facilities are conference meeting rooms,
restaurants, lounges, small specialty or convenience shops and
health clubs or other indoor recreation facilities.
(2)
Residential uses.
Attached row houses (townhouses) shall not contain more than
10 dwelling units per structure.
(a)
No other multifamily structure shall contain more than 50
dwelling units. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-02]
(b)
A mix of single, duplex, townhouse and multifamily housing,
each in a defined and approved area, is permitted, provided
that the maximum of any one of the above categories is no
(c)
(3)
M.
§ 275-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-65
1:726
more than 40% of the total residential use. In the case where
there are two housing types, the maximum of one type is 60%
of the total residential use.
Light industrial uses. Any industrial use shall be entirely contained
within its own structure which shall be separate from any other
structure. No outdoor storage of materials or products shall be
permitted.
(4)
Retail and service businesses, commercial complex.
A commercial complex is a retail and service center of the
MXD that is wholly contained within one or several contiguous
buildings.
(a)
The gross square footage of all retail and service businesses
will not exceed 5% of the gross square footage of the entire
district.
(b)
All retail and service buildings will be located in a commercial
complex with the exception of those described in Subsection
M(1)(b).
(c)
The allowed uses in the commercial complex are:
Retail stores for merchandise but not for auto or truck
sales or service.
[1]
[2] Stationery or office supply stores.
[3] Barber- or beauty shops.
[4] Laundries.
[5] Convenience food stores.
[6] Shoe repair shops.
[7] Bookstores.
[8] Pharmacies.
[9] Newsstands.
[10]Eating or drinking establishments (nonfreestanding).
[11]Government post offices.
[12]Storefront medical clinics.
[13]Travel agencies.
[14]Other businesses of similar nature and scale.
[15]Branch banks.
(d)
(5)
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:727
All residential units in the commercial complex are to be sited
above the ground floor in a penthouse configuration.
(e)
Residential units in the commercial complex shall not exceed
50% of the total square footage in the commercial complex.
(f)
Churches and synagogues. Freestanding churches, synagogues or
other houses of worship are allowed, provided that they have
adequate off-street parking and a landscape buffer between their
location and all surrounding uses.
(6)
Accessory uses. Accessory structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal uses identified in Subsection B shall be
permitted.
(7)
Overall dimension requirements.
(1) The minimum district size is 50 acres gross.
(2) The maximum floor area ratio for the entire district is 30%.
The maximum district coverage (buildings, parking areas, drives,
roads and accessory structures) is 50%.
(3)
The district setback shall comply with the City's Subdivision
Regulations for the use in question.
(4)
The maximum total impervious lot coverage will be in accordance
with the following:
(a) Residential: 40%.
(b) Nonresidential: 80%.
(5)
The minimum lot size (when subdivided) will be as follows:
(a) Nonresidential: two acres.
(b) Single-family: 10,000 square feet.
(c) Duplex: 10,000 square feet.
Any housing complex of 50 units or more will be allowed on
7,500 square feet per lot, provided that an equal amount of
open space is provided contiguous to the complex and will
remain open in perpetuity. Said open space will be configured
so that its primary purpose is the recreational use for those
persons in the complex.
(d)
(6)
The maximum units per acre for multifamily units is 20 dwelling
units per acre.
(7)
(8) Individual lot requirements shall be as follows:
N.
§ 275-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-65
1:728
Use
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Frontage
on a Way
(feet)
Minimum
Setback
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Office 40 150 50 20 25
Hotel 40 150 35 20 25
Light industrial 40 200 50 20 25
Retail and
service
40 150 30 20 25
Laboratory or
testing, office,
educational or
training facility
40 150 30 20 25
Single-family,
duplex and
townhouses
35 100 25 15 251
Multifamily 40 100 25 20 251
Parking structure 40 150 30 20 20
Recreational
structure
35 100 30 20 20
Church (not
including
steeple)
35 150 30 30 30
Accessory uses 35 N/A N/A 6 6
NOTES:
1Porches and decks may extend 10 feet into the permitted
setback.
The distance between principal buildings shall be as follows:
Minimum distance set forth below or 1/2 the height of the
structure, whichever is greater.
[1] Nonresidential: 40 feet minimum.
Residential.
[a] Single, duplex and townhouse: 25 feet minimum.
[b] Multifamily: 35 feet minimum.
[2]
[3] Accessory uses: no minimum distance required.
(a)
(9)
§ 275-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-65
1:729
§ 275-66. Burnett Road. [Added 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 99-79;
amended 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. 08-18; 9-1-2009; 9-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 14-21]
The purpose of this section is to regulate new development on Burnett Road
and appurtenant streets due to the negative impact of increasing traffic and
until such time as the City takes measures to manage traffic in the area.
§ 275-67. Mill Conversion and Commercial Center Overlay District.
[Added 8-3-2004 by Ord. No. 04-74; amended 9-1-2009; 9-21-2017
by Ord. No. 17-39]
There shall be no minimum distance required between existing
structures in a Mixed Use District.
(b)
Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Indoor recreation facilities shall have one parking space for
every 10 members.
(a)
Townhouse complexes and multifamily structures shall have
2.0 parking spaces per unit. Congregate-care or life-care
facilities shall have one parking space per two units.
(b)
The parking bay size is 8 1/2 feet by 18 feet except in lots or
structures containing more than 50 cars, in which case up to
50% of the spaces may be eight feet by 16 feet to accommodate
smaller cars.
(c)
Commercial/retail facilities shall have one parking space per
250 square feet of public use.
(d)
(10)
(11)Signage. The City's signage requirements shall apply.
Distance requirements. For the purposes of the distance requirements
specified in this Zoning Ordinance, measurements shall be from
boundary to boundary or from the outer limits of the boundary from one
district to the outer limits of any of the boundary or district involved.
[Added 4-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
O.
No further business, commercial or industrial development shall occur
on Burnett Road from the Ludlow/Chicopee line to the intersection of
New Lombard Road and Burnett Road and any appurtenant street for a
period of one year commencing on January 1, 2017, and terminating on
December 31, 2017, except by special permit. [Amended 8-4-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-40; 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-31]
A.
In addition to the special permit submission requirements of Chicopee
City Code § 275-9, all special permit applications shall be accompanied
by a traffic study.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of the Mill Conversion and Commercial Center
Overlay District is to promote the economic health and vitality of the
A.
§ 275-65 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-67
1:730
City by encouraging the preservation, reuse and renovation of
underutilized or abandoned industrial properties and commercial
centers through mixed-use development that includes compatible
industrial, commercial, municipal, and residential uses.
Designated districts. Riverfront Redevelopment District, adopted 2004.
A map of the district is on file in the City Clerk's office, and it is also
identified on the Zoning Maps available in the Building Department and
the Department of Planning and Development.
B.
Applicability. The Mill Conversion and Commercial Center Overlay
District may be superimposed over any other district established in this
chapter, subject to an approved zone change in accordance with the
provisions of Chicopee City Code, § 275-14. Land in the overlay district
may be used for any purpose permitted in the underlying district and
is subject to the underlying district restrictions. Exercise of Mill
Conversion and Commercial Center Overlay District regulations is
subject to a special permit from the City Council in accordance with
Chicopee City Code, §§ 275-9 through 275-13, and the additional
submission requirements described in this section. All aspects of the
project, including authorized uses, building occupancy, and intensity of
use, shall remain in substantial conformance with the plans and other
documents submitted to the City Council as part of the special permit
proceeding, unless modification of the special permit is authorized,
after public hearing, by the City Council. Wherever there is a conflict
between the underlying zoning district regulations and the overlay
district regulations, the overlay district regulations shall prevail.
C.
Review Committee.
A review committee, hereby Overlay District Review Committee,
shall be established to meet with developers prior to application
for an overlay district or mill conversion or commercial center
revitalization project within an established overlay district and to
provide recommendations to the City Council for overlay district
zone change and special permit applications.
(1)
The Overlay District Review Committee shall consist of
representatives from the following:
Site Plan Review Advisory Committee, which includes
representatives from the following departments: Building, CEL
(Chicopee Electric Light), Conservation, Fire, Health, Planning
and Development, Police, Public Works (Highway, Engineering,
Waste Water), and Water.
(a)
(b) Office of Community Development.
(c) School Department.
(d) Assessor's Office.
(2)
D.
§ 275-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-67
1:731
(e) Commission on Disability.110
Member(s) of the City Council, and any other City department,
board, commission or agency representative requested by the
City Council.
(f)
Permitted uses:
Within an overlay district, there shall be no restriction on
combining different categories of use within the same building,
inclusive of multifamily and assisted living residences with
associated programming, except any imposed by the State Building
Code or other federal or state regulations.
(1)
Multifamily or assisted living residences with associated
programming individually or in conjunction with one or more of the
uses permitted in the underlying district.
(2)
Residential uses combined with studios with an emphasis on arts
and crafts.
(3)
E.
Application procedure for establishing an overlay district. An overlay
zone is a type of zoning district. To establish an overlay district zone,
apply for a zone change in accordance with Chicopee City Code,
§ 275-14.
F.
Application procedure for an overlay district project. An overlay district
project takes place within a designated overlay district zone, subject to
a special permit granted by the City Council.
Preapplication. The applicant is required to attend a preapplication
review with the Overlay District Review Committee. Preapplication
review meetings with the developer and representatives cited
above will be coordinated by the Department of Planning and
Development. The purpose of a preapplication review is to
introduce the developer to the municipal staff members who will be
reviewing the project and exchange information about the site and
surrounds that may be applicable to the success of the project. This
meeting is intended to save time for the developer and the City. At
this time the City may also determine if the scope of the project will
warrant, at the expense of the applicant, a registered professional
engineer or other professional consultant(s) to advise the City
Council on any aspect of the application. At the preapplication
review, the applicant may outline the proposed project and seek
preliminary feedback from the City. No formal filings are required
for the preapplication review; however, the applicant is encouraged
to prepare sufficient preliminary architectural and/or engineering
drawings to inform the Overlay District Review Committee of the
scale and overall design of the proposed project.
(1)
G.
110. Editor's Note: The name of this Commission was changed 9-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-38.
§ 275-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-67
1:732
Application. The City Council's authority to review special permits
is established in Chicopee City Code, § 275-9. Special permit
applications under this section shall also include the following:
Number of copies: One original and 17 copies of a special
permit application form available from the Department of
Planning and Development shall be submitted to the City
Council.
(a)
Fees:
[1] A nonrefundable special permit filing fee.
Engineering and/or consultant fee. If it has been
predetermined that an engineering review fee shall be
required, the applicant shall submit an engineering review
fee in accordance with the City Council Fee Schedule.
The unexpended balance of the engineering review fee
shall be returned to the applicant within 30 days from
issuance of approval or disapproval. To the extent that the
engineering review fee shall prove insufficient to pay for
the evaluation and review of the site plan by independent
technical experts, the charges, if any, shall be billed to the
applicant. The applicant shall pay all invoices submitted by
the City Council within 30 days.
[2]
(b)
Plans required:
Site plan and all supporting documents as set forth in
Chicopee City Code, § 275-6.
[1]
Special features plan, showing vegetation, wetlands,
perennial streams and ponds, waterways, waterfalls,
canals and dams, trees of more than six-inch caliper, rock
outcroppings, slopes in excess of 25%, existing and
proposed trails and paths, open vistas, structures of
historical importance, wildlife habitats, and proposed
conservation and recreation areas.
[2]
Preliminary landscaping and architectural design,
showing type, location and layout of buildings, typical
elevations, as well as the general height, bulk and
appearance of structures, inclusive of any accessory uses.
Perspective drawings may be subsequently required by the
City Council.
[3]
Exterior lighting plan, showing existing and proposed
exterior lighting, including building and ground lighting,
locations, supports, mounting heights, and orientation.
[4]
(c)
(2)
§ 275-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-67
1:733
Floor plan to scale for each floor of each building,
indicating, if applicable, number of units; number of
bedrooms; and proposed use of floor space.
[5]
Narrative report shall be submitted, including the following
components:
[1] Project summary.
[2] Proposed development schedule.
Historical narrative prepared by a preservation consultant
that includes the significance of the site, architecture and
any important associated events or persons.
[3]
Details of erosion and sedimentation controls during and
after construction.
[4]
Subsurface soil and water conditions that impact the
project and methods to be used to overcome them.
[5]
[6] Traffic impact study.
[7] Impact to public sewer system.
[8] Impacts to City water supply and distribution system.
Impacts to municipal and governmental services, including
schools.
[9]
Projected net tax and other revenues over anticipated
municipal costs should be submitted to estimate the total
fiscal impact of the proposed project upon City resources.
[10]
Information pertaining to any organization which the
applicant proposes to form, where the development is to
be a condominium or other ownership organization.
[11]
Copies of all proposed covenants, easements, and other
restrictions which the applicant proposes to grant to the
City.
[12]
Other information that the City Council may reasonably
require to assist in determining whether the applicant's
proposed development plan meets the objectives of this
section.
[13]
(d)
Waiver. Waiver of application requirements: The City Council may waive
the submission of technical information or documents where the
applicant demonstrates that, due to the simplicity of the proposal, such
information is not necessary for or applicable to the City Council's
decision pursuant to this section.
H.
I. Review procedure.
§ 275-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-67
1:734
Copies of applications, plans and supporting materials shall be
distributed to the Overlay District Review Committee. Reviewers
shall submit written recommendations to the City Council within 14
days of receiving the special permit application. Failure to submit
written comments to the City Council within the designated time
may be deemed a lack of opposition thereto.
(1)
The City Council shall hold a public hearing, for which notice is
given in accordance with Chicopee City Code, § 275-9, within 65
days of receiving the complete application. Hearing and decision
dates may be extended at the applicant's written request.
(2)
Any new building or new accessory use (not approved under the
original special permit) shall be constructed within a project except by
special permit and in accordance with Chicopee City Code, § 275-6.
J.
Standards for project submission and review.
Landscaping requirements.
Ornamental and shade trees are the preferred landscaping
element for ease of maintenance, permanency, and
contribution to environmental quality. Native trees and shrubs
are encouraged because they are adapted to the region and
support native wildlife. Guidelines for trees and shrubs
suitable for Chicopee's urban environment are available in the
Department of Planning and Development.
(a)
Screening of mechanical equipment, trash, and loading areas
shall be provided through the use of walls, fences, and/or
dense evergreen plant materials.
(b)
Berms may be used for screening along the street in
conjunction with plant materials, if they do not compromise
traffic or pedestrian safety.
(c)
Landscaping shall be provided for interior vehicular use areas
to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of
pavement and to channelize and define logical areas for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(d)
The use of porous pavement and/or perforated brick or block
shall be used to the extent feasible to increase on-site water
retention for plant material and groundwater supplies and to
reduce problems associated with runoff.
(e)
Completion of the landscaping requirements may be postponed
due to seasonal weather conditions for a period not to exceed
six months from the time of project completion.
(f)
Landscaping and screening plant materials shall not encroach
on the public walkways or roadways in a way that impedes
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(g)
(1)
K.
§ 275-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-67
1:735
Shrubs or trees shall be maintained in a healthy condition or
shall be replaced within one growing season.
(h)
Access. The principal roadway(s) within the site shall be adequate
for the intended use and vehicular traffic and shall be privately
maintained. There shall be sufficient site access for public safety
vehicles. Buildings that do not have frontage on a street must
provide access for emergency and service vehicles through the
layout and design of driveways and interior service roads.
(2)
Parking.
Number of spaces. The applicant shall provide adequate
parking to serve all anticipated uses on the property. The
minimum number of parking spaces shall be computed using
the parking requirements in Chicopee City Code, § 275-40.
Where there is more than one category of use, then the number
of spaces required shall be 70% of the sum of required spaces
for each category of use.
(a)
Shared parking. The City Council may allow a reduction of
the required number of spaces by up to 50% if it can be
demonstrated that two or more uses within a single
development can share parking spaces. In determining the
appropriate reduction, the City Council may give consideration
to the hours of operation and/or usage of the proposed uses
within the development, the opinions of merchants, residents
and municipal officials as to the adequacy of parking spaces
within the surrounding area, as well as other relevant
information. Parking spaces may be located either on or off the
site. The applicant must show proof of space and indicate if the
space is owned or leased.
(b)
Parking stall dimensions. A standard parking stall is nine feet
by 18 feet. The City Council may allow smaller spaces if they
are demonstrated to be safe and functional.
(c)
Parking areas shall be screened from view from adjacent
residentially zoned or occupied premises located outside the
site, including public ways.
(d)
Parking lots shall be located to the rear or side of all buildings
and shall not be located in front setbacks or in buffer areas.
(e)
In parking areas of 30 or more parking stalls, at least one
shade tree of 2.5 inches or greater caliper complemented by
shrubs and other planting material shall be planted for every
10 parking spaces. Adequate tree wells and irrigation shall be
provided for all parking lot landscaping.
(f)
Pedestrian access is to be taken into consideration in parking
lot design. The use of separate walkways is encouraged.
(g)
(3)
§ 275-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-67
1:736
Paving. Paving shall be textured or of different materials at
pedestrian crossings and walkways. The use of stone, brick
or cultured stone pavers for entrance walkway borders is
encouraged. The use of textured materials for walkway
borders is encouraged.
(h)
Paths. The City Council may require paths which shall be
attractively designed with proper regard for convenience,
separation of vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic, adequate
connectivity, completeness of access to the various amenities and
facilities on the site and to pathways or sidewalks to adjacent sites.
(4)
Emergency systems. The project shall have an integrated
emergency call and/or telephone and/or other communications
system for its residents and/or other tenants.
(5)
Appearance/architectural design. New construction: Architectural
design shall be compatible with the historic character and scale
of building in the neighborhood through the use of appropriate
building materials, screening, breaks in roof and wall lines and
other architectural techniques.
(6)
Noise, vibration, smoke, heat, glare, and odor. No use shall be
permitted that causes or results in dissemination of dust, smoke,
gas or fumes, odor, noise, vibration or excessive light, under
standards set forth in the performance criteria in this chapter.
Noise.
Residential units shall be constructed so that interior noise
levels do not exceed an LDN of 45 dB in any habitable
room.
[1]
Commercial uses shall be designed and operated so that
neighboring residents are not exposed to offensive noise,
especially from traffic or late-night activity.
[2]
Common walls between residential and nonresidential
uses shall be constructed to minimize the transmission of
noise and vibration.
[3]
(a)
Vibration shall not be discernible to any human's sense of
feeling for three minutes in any one hour for a total of 15
minutes in any one day, or producing an acceleration of more
than 0.1G.
(b)
Smoke shall not be visible beyond a shade darker than No. 1
on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
(c)
Heat and glare shall not be discernible from the outside of any
structure.
(d)
(7)
§ 275-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-67
1:737
Odor, dust, and fumes shall be effectively confined to the
premises or so disposed as to avoid air pollution.
(e)
Lighting. Lighting of the site shall be adequate at ground level
for the protection and safety of the public in regard to parking
lots, pedestrian and vehicular circulation. The glare from the
installation of outdoor lights and illuminated signs shall be
contained on the property and shall be shielded from abutting
properties. Lighting structures shall be integrated with the site and
surrounding uses.
(8)
Density.
The City Council shall approve the number of proposed
dwelling units upon consideration of impacts to City schools
and services, traffic, adequacy of the site, and reports from
the engineering or technical consultants employed by the City
Council, the Overlay District Review Committee and any other
department, board or commission from whom the City Council
requests a report.
(a)
Number of bedrooms. The City Council may ensure the
diversification of dwelling units within a project by establishing
the number of dwelling units with one, two, or three or more
bedrooms. Not more than 10% of the dwelling units in any
project shall consist of three or more bedrooms.
(b)
(9)
Action by the City Council. The City Council may grant a special permit
for a project if it determines that the proposed project complies with
the requirements of this section. The City Council shall consider the
following when making its determination:
Degree to which the proposed project complies with the
performance standards set forth in this section;
(1)
(2) Suitability of the site for the proposed use(s);
Social, economic or community needs which are served by the
proposal;
(3)
(4) Impact on traffic and pedestrian flow and safety;
(5) Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
(6) Impact on the neighborhood visual character;
(7) Impact on the natural environment;
Potential fiscal impact, including impact on City services, tax base
and employment; and
(8)
Special permit evaluation criteria as set forth in Chicopee City
Code, § 275-9.
(9)
L.
§ 275-67 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:738
§ 275-68. Chicopee Center 40R Smart Growth Overlay District
(CC40R). [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 10-33]
Part 1: General provisions.
Purposes. The purposes of the Chicopee 40R Smart Growth Overlay
District are:
To provide an opportunity for residential and mixed-use
development, including both new construction and renovation
of existing buildings, within a distinctive, attractive and livable
environment that supports the commercial revitalization of
Chicopee Center.
(a)
To promote continuing development and redevelopment in
Chicopee Center that is pedestrian friendly and consistent with
Chicopee history and architecture.
(b)
To ensure high quality site planning, architecture and
landscape design that enhances the distinct visual character
and identity of Chicopee Center, by providing the environment
with safety, convenience and amenities.
(c)
To provide for a diversified housing stock at a variety of costs
within walking distance of services and public transportation,
including affordable housing, and in housing types that meet
the needs of the City's population.
(d)
To generate positive tax revenue, and to benefit from the
financial incentives provided by MGL Chapter 40R, while
providing the opportunity for new business growth and
additional local jobs.
(e)
(1)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings set forth below:
AA-APPROVING AUTHORITY — The City Council acting as the
authority authorized to conduct the approval process for purposes
of reviewing project applications and issuing plan approval
decisions within the CC40R.
AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP UNIT — An affordable housing
unit required to be sold to an eligible household per the
requirements of Subsection A(8) of this section.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing that is affordable to and
occupied by eligible households.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION — A deed restriction of
an affordable unit meeting statutory requirements in MGL c. 184,
§ 31, and the requirements included in Subsection A(8) of this
section.
(2)
A.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:739
AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNIT — An affordable housing unit
required to be rented to an eligible household per the requirements
included in Subsection A(8) of this section.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — The collective reference to affordable
homeownership units and affordable rental units.
ANNUAL UPDATE — A list of all approved and currently proposed
Smart Growth Districts within the City of Chicopee, to be filed on
or before July 31 of each year with the Massachusetts Department
of Housing and Community Development pursuant to MGL c. 40R
and applicable regulations.
APPLICANT — An individual or entity that files a site plan for a
development project subject to the provisions of the Smart Growth
District.
AS-OF-RIGHT DEVELOPMENT — A development project allowable
under this section without recourse to a special permit, variance,
zoning amendment, or other form of zoning relief. A development
project that is subject to the site plan review requirement of this
section shall be considered an as-of-right development.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Services used in the conducting of
business and commerce, including but not limited to consumer and
mercantile credit reporting; news services; research, development
and testing; business management and consulting; equipment
rental; photo finishing; and automotive rental and distribution
services.
CC40R — The Chicopee Center Smart Growth Overlay District.
CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS — Nonprofit organizations
established under MGL c. 180.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Two or more contiguous or
noncontiguous lots within the CC40R shall be deemed to be in
common ownership if majority control of each is held by a common
entity.
COMMUNICATIONS — Exchanges and stations used for the
transmittal and relay of electronic communication messages,
including but not limited to facilities for telephone, telegraph,
radio, television and cable television, excluding wireless
communications services.
DEPARTMENT or DHCD — The Massachusetts Department of
Housing and Community Development, or any successor agency.
DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES — Subsection A(17) of
this section is applicable to all development projects within the
CC40R that are subject to site plan review by the approving
authority.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A residential, nonresidential or
mixed-use development undertaken pursuant to this section,
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:740
including the construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration,
relocation, enlargement or substantial rehabilitation of any
structure(s) or building(s) on a lot or lots within the CC40R.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of
one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit with cooking, living sanitary and sleeping facilities. The
following types of dwelling units are specifically defined:
EATING AND DRINKING PLACES — A building used for the
serving of food and/or drink for consumption on the premises.
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES — Privately owned and operated
facilities for instruction and education, including but not limited to
nursery schools, colleges and professional schools, vocational and
business schools and art, dancing and driving schools. It does not
include day-care centers.
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD — An individual or household whose
annual income is below 80% of the area-wide median income as
determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income
computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets.
ENABLING LAWS — MGL Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00.
ENTERTAINMENT ASSEMBLY — Theaters and other indoor places
of assembly used for entertainment and recreational activities.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as
a single household, provided that domestic employees may be
housed on the premises without being counted as a family or
families.
FINANCE, INSURANCE and REAL ESTATE — Services associated
with financial and investment needs, including but not limited to
banking services, security and commodity brokers, insurance and
real estate services.
GOVERNMENTAL SERVICES — Structures, services, utilities,
parks, playgrounds and offices commonly associated with the
operation of government.
SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential dwelling unit, other than a
mobile home, designed for occupancy by one family only.
(a)
TWO-FAMILY — A residential building containing two dwelling
units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.
(b)
THREE-FAMILY — A residential building containing three
dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than three
families.
(c)
MULTIFAMILY — A residential building containing four or
more dwelling units.
(d)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:741
HOTEL or MOTEL — Any building or group of buildings that
provides sleeping accommodations for transient motorists and
which is not licensed as a lodging house.
HOUSEHOLD INCOME, MEDIAN — The median income, adjusted
for household size, as reported by the most recent information
from, or calculated from regulations promulgated by, the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
INDUSTRIAL USES — Uses involving the processing, assembly and
fabrication of materials.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit or quasi-public use or
institution, such as a church, library, public or private school,
hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or
land, used for public purpose.
MAJOR PROJECT — Any development project other than individual
single-, two- and three-family residential.
MINOR PROJECT — A residential project limited to an individual
single-, two- or three-family structure.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A project containing a
mix of residential uses and nonresidential uses, as allowed in
Subsection A(7)(b), and subject to all applicable provisions of this
section.
MONITORING AGENT — Chicopee Office of Community
Development is designated to review and implement the
affordability requirements for projects approved in accordance
with this section.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — Facilities utilized in the provision of
services normally provided by municipalities, such as schools,
parks, playgrounds, municipal office buildings, maintenance
buildings and City-run utilities.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — Office, retail, restaurant or institutional
use, inclusive, or some combination of the same, not located within
a mixed-use development project.
OFFICE — A place for the regular performance of business
transactions and services, generally intended for administrative,
professional and clerical activities, including a medical or dental
office or health clinic.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Consumer-oriented services, including
but not limited to laundering and dry cleaning; photographic
services; beauty and barber; apparel repair, alteration and
cleaning; and shoe repair.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services performed by professional
persons for business and personal use, including but not limited
to medical and health; planning, engineering and architectural;
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:742
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping; and educational and
scientific.
PROJECT — A residential project or mixed-use development project
undertaken within the CC40R in accordance with the requirements
of this section.
REPAIR SERVICES — Repair of items used or useful in residential
structures.
RESIDENTIAL PROJECT — A project that consists solely of
residential uses and any applicable ancillary parking and accessory
uses and that is further defined in Subsection A(7)(a).
RETAIL — Business establishments selling goods and/or services
to customers on site, generally for personal, business or household
consumption. A reasonable amount of storage of said goods shall
also be assumed to be an integral part of retail use.
RETAIL TRADE — The sale of goods to consumers, including but
not limited to the sale of building materials, general merchandise,
food, automotive supplies, apparel, furniture, home furnishings,
pharmaceuticals, liquor, stationery and books, sporting goods,
garden supplies and jewelry.
SITE PLAN — A plan depicting a proposed development project for
all or a portion of the Smart Growth District and which is submitted
to the AA for its review and approval.
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The AA's authorization for a proposed
development project based on a finding of compliance with this
section and design standards after conducting a site plan review.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The review procedure established by this
section and administered by the City Council of the City of
Chicopee as the AA.
SMART GROWTH DISTRICT — An overlay zoning district adopted
pursuant to MGL c. 40R, in accordance with the procedures for
zoning adoption and amendment as set forth in MGL c. 40A and
approved by the Department of Housing and Community
Development pursuant to MGL c. 40R and applicable regulations.
SPORTS ASSEMBLY — Stadiums, arenas, racetracks and other
facilities used for the viewing of sporting entertainment events.
SUBDISTRICT — A specific and defined area of land within the
CC40R that is subject to specific requirements for allowable uses
or dimensional requirements that may differ from the requirements
for allowable uses or dimensional requirements in other specific
and defined areas within the CC40R.
UNDERLYING ZONING — The zoning requirements adopted
pursuant to MGL c. 40A that are otherwise applicable to the
geographic area in which the CC40R is located, as said
requirements may be amended from time to time.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:743
UNDULY RESTRICT — A provision of a Smart Growth District or
a design standard that adds unreasonable costs or unreasonably
impairs the economic feasibility of proposed development projects
in a Smart Growth District.
UNRESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit that is not restricted as
to rent, price or eligibility of occupants.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use subordinate to the principal use on
the same lot or in the same structure and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the principal use, and which does not, in
effect, constitute conversion of the principal use of the lot, site or
structure to a use not otherwise permitted in the Smart Growth
District. Accessory uses are permitted or prohibited in the Smart
Growth District to the same extent as if such uses were principal
uses.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a
structure, building, or lot is designed, arranged, licensed, or
intended, or for which it may be used, occupied, or maintained
under this section.
USE, SECONDARY — A use located on the same lot as a principal
use but which is of equal or lesser scale, impact, and visibility than
the principal use. A secondary use is not an accessory use, as it is
largely independent from the principal use.
WHOLESALE — The sale of goods in quantity, as to retailers or
jobbers, for resale.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Chicopee, Chapter 275 of the Chicopee City Code.
Establishment and delineation of Smart Growth Overlay District
and subdistricts. The Chicopee Center 40R Smart Growth Overlay
District, hereinafter referred to as the "CC40R," is an overlay
district having a land area of approximately 26 acres in size that is
superimposed over underlying zoning districts. Within the CC40R,
there are two subdistricts identified as Cabotville and Exchange.
The boundaries of the 40R District and the subdistricts are
delineated on a zoning map titled "CC40R Boundary, Parcel and
Subdistrict Map," dated August 3, 2010, prepared by the Chicopee
Department of Planning and Development. This map is hereby
made a part of this chapter and is on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
(3)
Applicability. The Chicopee Center Smart Growth Overlay District
is established pursuant to the authority of MGL c. 40R and
applicable regulations, and shall be deemed to overlay the parcels
as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Chicopee, as amended.
The projects proceeding under this section shall be governed solely
by the provisions of this section and shall be deemed exempt
from the standards and/or procedures of the underlying zoning,
(4)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:744
including any rate limitations or moratoriums placed on the
issuance of residential building permits.
Underlying zoning. The CC40R is an overlay district superimposed
on all underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use,
dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing
the underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except
for those development projects undergoing development pursuant
to this section. Within the boundaries of the CC40R, a developer
may elect either to develop a project in accordance with the
requirements of the Smart Growth Zoning, or to develop a project
in accordance with requirements of the regulations for use,
dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Ordinances
governing the underlying zoning district(s).
(5)
Administration, enforcement, and appeals. The provisions of this
section shall be administered by the Building Commissioner, except
as otherwise provided herein. Any legal appeal arising out of a plan
approval decision by the AA under Subsection A(9) and (10) shall
be governed by the applicable provisions of MGL Chapter 40R. Any
other request for enforcement or appeal arising under this section
shall be governed by the applicable provisions of MGL Chapter
40A.
(6)
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the CC40R
as-of-right upon site plan approval pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
Residential projects. A residential project within the CC40R
may include:
Single-family, two- and three-family, and/or multifamily
dwellings;
[1]
Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses,
including surface, garage-under and structured parking
(e.g., parking garages); and
[2]
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses. These uses are allowed subject to
subdistrict restrictions.
[3]
(a)
Mixed-use development projects. A mixed-use development
project within the CC40R may include:
Single-family, two- and three-family, and/or multifamily
dwelling(s), provided that the allowable as-of-right density
requirements for residential use specified in this section
shall apply to the residential portion of any mixed-use
development project. These uses are allowed subject to
subdistrict restrictions.
[1]
(b)
(7)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:745
Any of the following uses, provided the total gross floor
area devoted to these uses within a mixed-use
development project shall not exceed 50% of the total
gross floor area of the project.
[2]
Nonresidential uses allowed subject to subdistrict
restrictions:
[a] Accessory uses.
[b] Automobile parking.
[c] Business and professional services.
[d] Communications.
[e] Educational services.
Eating and drinking places with or without the
consumption of alcohol and with or without live
entertainment.
[f]
[g] Entertainment assembly.
[h] Finance, insurance and real estate.
[i] Hotels and motels.
[j] Personal services.
[k] Professional services.
[l] Repair services other than for automobiles and trucks.
[m] Retail trade with or without outdoor storage.
[n] Charitable institutions.
[o] Wholesale.
[p] Industrial uses – only if approved by the AA.
[3]
Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses,
including surface, garage-under, and structured parking
(e.g., parking garages).
[4]
Permitted uses by subdistrict. [Amended 11-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-56]
(c)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:746
Table A
Permitted Uses by Subdistrict
Dwelling
Units,
Single-
Family,
Detached
Dwelling
Units,
Two-
Family
Dwelling
Units,
Three-
Family
Dwelling
Units,
Multifamily
Mixed-
Use
Development
Projects
Cabotville X X
Exchange X X X X X
Prohibited uses.
Any other use dangerous to persons within or outside
the CC40R by reason of emission of odor, fumes, gases,
particulate matter, smoke, noise, vibration, glare,
radiation, electrical interference, and threat of fire or
explosion. Such uses include, but are not limited to,
manufacture of acids, gases, fertilizers, and glue,
petroleum refining, reduction of animal matter, and
manufacture of cement, gypsum, and explosives.
[1]
Any use not listed as a permitted use cannot be approved
under the terms of this section.
[2]
(d)
Regulated uses.
Drive-through windows. Any development proposal
including a drive-through window shall include
documentation that traffic entering and exiting the facility
can do so without endangering other vehicle traffic safety,
pedestrian safety or discouraging pedestrian activity in
that location.
[1]
(e)
Housing and housing affordability.
Minimum number of affordable units: A residential or mixeduse
development project may not be segmented to evade the
following affordability thresholds:
Twenty percent for all residential and mixed-use
development projects except;
[1]
Twenty-five percent of all rental and/or ownership units in
a residential or mixed-use development project in which all
of the dwelling units are limited to occupancy by elderly
persons and/or by persons with disabilities.
[2]
(a)
Fractional units: When the application of the percentages
specified above results in a number that includes a fraction,
the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number if
the fraction is 0.5 or more. If the result includes a fraction
(b)
(8)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:747
below 0.5, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole
number.
Affordable units shall comply with the following requirements:
The monthly rent payment for an affordable rental unit,
including utilities and parking, shall not exceed 30% of
the maximum monthly income permissible for an eligible
household, assuming a family size equal to the number of
bedrooms in the unit plus one, except in the event of an
eligible household with a Section 8 voucher, in which case
program rent limits shall apply.
[1]
For an affordable homeownership unit the monthly
housing payment, including mortgage principal and
interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes,
condominium and/or homeowners' association fees,
insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30% of the
maximum monthly income permissible for an eligible
household, assuming a family size equal to the number of
bedrooms in the unit plus one.
[2]
Affordable units required to be offered for rent or sale
shall be rented or sold to and occupied only by eligible
households.
[3]
(c)
Design and construction.
Design. Affordable units must be dispersed throughout a
project and be comparable in initial construction quality
and exterior design to the unrestricted units. However,
nothing in this section is intended to limit a homebuyer's
rights to renovate a dwelling unit under applicable law.
The affordable units must have access to all on-site
amenities. Affordable units shall be finished housing units.
[1]
Phasing. All affordable units must be constructed and
occupied not later than concurrently with construction
and occupancy of unrestricted units. In projects that are
constructed in phases, affordable units must be
constructed and occupied in proportion to the number of
dwelling units in each phase of the project.
[2]
(d)
Unit mix and unrestricted units.
The number of bedrooms per dwelling unit in the
affordable units shall be at least proportionate to the total
number of bedrooms in all units in the project of which the
affordable housing is part.
[1]
If only one affordable unit is required and the other units
in the project have various numbers of bedrooms, the
[2]
(e)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:748
number of bedrooms in the affordable unit shall be at least
equal to the average number of bedrooms for all other
units in the development project.
Affordable housing restriction. Each affordable unit shall be
subject to an affordable housing restriction which is recorded
with the County Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry
District of the County. The affordable housing restriction shall
contain, at minimum, the following:
A description of the affordable homeownership unit, if any,
by address and number of bedrooms; and a description of
the overall quantity and number of bedrooms and number
of bedroom types of affordable rental units in a project
or portion of a project which are rental. Such restrictions
shall apply individually to the specifically identified
affordable homeownership unit and shall apply to a
percentage of rental units of a rental project or the rental
portion of a project without specific unit identification.
[1]
The term, which shall be no less than 30 years, and other
rights regarding the affordable housing restriction shall be
as set forth in MGL c. 184, §§ 26 through 32, inclusive, as
amended from time to time.
[2]
The name and address of the monitoring agent with a
designation of its power to monitor and enforce the
affordable housing restriction.
[3]
Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection
plan, to which the affordable unit is subject, and which
includes an affirmative fair housing marketing program,
including public notice and a fair resident selection
process. If approved by DHCD, the housing marketing
and selection plan may provide for local preferences in
resident selection. The plan shall designate the household
size appropriate for a unit with respect to bedroom size
and provide that preference for such unit shall be given to
a household of the appropriate size.
[4]
A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at
the initial sale or initial rental and upon all subsequent
sales and rentals from a list of eligible households
compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and
selection plan.
[5]
Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental
unit or the maximum resale price of a homeownership unit
will be set.
[6]
A requirement that only an eligible household may reside
in an affordable unit and that notice of any lease or
[7]
(f)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:749
sublease of any affordable unit shall be given to the
monitoring agent.
Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the
terms and provisions of the affordable housing restriction
by the monitoring agent.
[8]
Provision that the restriction on an affordable
homeownership unit shall run in favor of the monitoring
agent and the City of Chicopee, in a form approved by
municipal counsel, and shall limit initial sale and resale to
and occupancy by an eligible household.
[9]
Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of affordable
rental unit(s) shall file an annual report to the monitoring
agent, in a form specified by that agent certifying
compliance with the affordability requirements of
Subsection A(8) and containing such other information
as may be reasonably requested in order to ensure
affordability.
[10]
Provision that the restriction on affordable rental units in
a rental project or rental portion of a project shall run with
the rental project or rental portion of a project and shall
run in favor of the monitoring agent and/or the City of
Chicopee, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and
shall limit rental and occupancy to an eligible household.
[11]
A requirement that residents in affordable units provide
such information as the monitoring agent may reasonably
request in order to ensure affordability.
[12]
Designation of the priority of the affordable housing
restriction over other mortgages and restrictions.
[13]
Administration. The Chicopee Office of Community
Development shall serve as the monitoring agent and ensure
the following:
Prices of affordable homeownership units are properly
computed; rental amounts of affordable rental units are
properly computed.
[1]
Income eligibility of households applying for affordable
units is properly and reliably determined.
[2]
The housing marketing and resident selection plan
conforms to all requirements and is properly administered.
[3]
Sales and rentals are made to eligible households chosen
in accordance with the housing marketing and resident
selection plan with appropriate unit size for each
[4]
(g)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:750
household being properly determined and proper
preference being given.
Affordable housing restrictions meeting the requirements
of this section are recorded with the Hampden County
Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry District of
Hampden County. The housing marketing and selection
plan may make provision for payment by the owner of
reasonable costs to the monitoring agent to develop,
advertise, and maintain the list of eligible households and
to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability
requirements. In the case where the monitoring agent
cannot adequately carry out its administrative duties,
upon certification of this fact by the AA or by the
Department of Housing and Community Development, the
administrative duties shall devolve to and thereafter be
administered by a qualified housing entity designated by
the AA.
[5]
Site plan review – plan submission and review procedures:
Plan review. The AA (approving authority) shall be aided in
its review process by a Site Plan Review Advisory Committee
composed of representatives from municipal departments,
boards and/or committees, including: Building, CEL (Chicopee
Electric Light), Conservation, Fire, Health, Planning and
Development, Police, Public Works (Highway, Engineering,
Waste Water) Water, Community Development, School
Department, Assessor's Commission for the Disabled,
member(s) of the City Council, and any other City department,
board, commission or agency as designated by the AA. This
review process shall be coordinated on behalf of the AA by the
Department of Planning and Development.
(a)
Pre-application. At the request of the applicant, the Chicopee
Department of Planning and Development will coordinate a
pre-application review with the Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee. The purpose of a pre-application review is to
introduce the developer to the municipal staff members who
will be reviewing the project and exchange information about
the site and surrounds that may be applicable to the success
of the project. This meeting is intended to save time for the
developer and the City. No formal filings are required for the
pre-application review; however, the applicant is encouraged
to prepare a concept plan that shows:
[1] Overall building envelope areas;
[2] Open space and natural resource areas;
General site improvements, groupings of buildings and
proposed land uses.
[3]
(b)
(9)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:751
(c) Fees. The application fee is $250.
Application. An application for site plan approval shall be
submitted to the City Clerk on the form provided by the AA
along with the application fee. A copy of the application,
including the date of filing certified by the City Clerk, shall
be filed forthwith with the AA. The application shall be
accompanied by such plans, project narrative, and other
documents as required by the AA as well as any materials
required verifying compliance with any of the above provisions
of this section. The application process is divided into minor
and major projects. Single-, two- and three-family residential
projects are reviewed as minor projects. All other projects shall
be reviewed as major projects.
Minor projects: Submission requirements for projects of
one-, two- and three-family dwellings on individual lots
shall include the application, application fee, 28 copies
of all supporting documents as set forth in this section,
building elevations, and a plot plan certified by a person
registered under the General Laws of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts to practice land surveying. The following
information must be shown on the plot plan:
All property corners, with type of monumentation
(identified as set or found).
[a]
Existing and proposed grading, proposed grading at
house corners and garage doors.
[b]
[c] Proposed location of the building(s) and driveway.
[d] Utilities.
Elevation of top of foundation wall F.F. (finished floor),
benchmark and datum.
[e]
Direction of stormwater runoff; the proposed grading
shall not direct runoff toward abutting properties.
[f]
Location and dimensions of existing and proposed
easements.
[g]
North arrow, street name(s), zoning district, setbacks,
side yards, lot area, and Chicopee Assessor Map and
parcel ID number.
[h]
[i] Scale: 1:20.
Lot dimensions. (Note: Lots in common ownership
shall be merged.)
[j]
[1]
[2] Major projects.
(d)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:752
All plans shall be prepared by certified architects or
engineers registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
[a]
Number of copies: The application shall be considered
as the application form, plans, narrative and any other
required supporting documents. The application form
is available from the Department of Planning and
Development. One original and 28 copies of the
application form, all plans and documents shall be
submitted to the City Clerk.
[b]
Plans required:
Plot plan as set forth in Subsection A(9)(d)[1]
above and all supporting plans and documents
identified in this section.
[i]
Special features plan, showing vegetation,
wetlands, perennial streams and ponds,
waterways, waterfalls, canals and dams, trees of
more than six-inch caliper, rock outcroppings,
slopes in excess of 25%, existing and proposed
trails and paths, open vistas, structures of
historical importance, wildlife habitats, and
proposed conservation and recreation areas.
[ii]
Preliminary landscaping and architectural design,
showing type, location and layout of buildings,
typical elevations, as well as the general height,
mass and appearance of structures.
[iii]
Exterior lighting plan, showing existing and
proposed exterior lighting, including building and
ground lighting, locations, supports, mounting
heights, and orientation.
[iv]
Floor plan to scale for each floor of each building,
indicating, if applicable, number of units, number
of bedrooms, and proposed use of floor space.
[v]
[c]
Narrative report shall be submitted, including the
following components:
[a] Project summary.
[b] Proposed development schedule.
Historical narrative that includes the significance of
the site, architecture and any important associated
events or persons.
[c]
[3]
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:753
Details of erosion and sedimentation controls during
and after construction.
[d]
Subsurface soil and water conditions that impact the
development project and methods to be used to
overcome them.
[e]
[f] Traffic impact study.
[g] Impact to public sewer system.
[h] Impacts to City water supply and distribution system.
Impacts to municipal and governmental services,
including schools.
[i]
Projected net tax and other revenues over anticipated
municipal costs should be submitted to estimate the
total fiscal impact of the proposed project upon City
resources.
[j]
Information pertaining to any organization which the
applicant proposes to form, where the development is
to be a condominium or other ownership organization.
[k]
Copies of all proposed covenants, easements, and
other restrictions which the applicant proposes to
grant to the City.
[l]
Other information that the City Council may
reasonably require to assist in determining whether
the applicant's proposed development plan meets the
objectives of this section.
[m]
Submission requirements. As part of any application for
plan approval for a project within the CC40R, the applicant
must submit the following documents to the AA and the
monitoring agent.
Evidence that the project complies with the cost and
eligibility requirements of Subsection A(8).
[a]
Project plans that demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of Subsection A(8).
[b]
An affordable housing restriction that satisfies the
requirements of Subsection A(8).
[c]
Construction details for units that are accessible to
the disabled.
[d]
[4]
Circulation to other boards. Upon receipt of the
application, the AA shall transmit to the Department of
Planning and Development. The Department of Planning
[5]
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:754
and Development shall be responsible for the immediate
distribution of plans and supporting materials to all
municipal boards, departments, commissions, officials
(and the monitoring agent if the project is subject to
affordability requirements) as determined by the AA.
These entities shall provide any written comments within
60 days of receipt of the plan and application.
Public hearing. The AA shall hold a public hearing for
which notice has been given as provided in MGL c. 40A,
§ 11.
[6]
The AA may adopt administrative rules and regulations
relative to site plan review. Such rules and regulations
must be approved by the Department of Housing and
Community Development and filed with the City Clerk.
[7]
Site plans — decisions.
Criteria for approval. The AA shall approve the development
project in accordance with the following:
The applicant has submitted the required fees and
information as set forth in applicable regulations; and
[1]
The proposed development project as described in the
application meets all of the requirements and standards
set forth in this section and applicable design standards,
or a waiver has been granted therefrom; and
[2]
Any extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the
development project on nearby properties have been
adequately mitigated.
[3]
For a development project subject to affordability
requirements, compliance with Subsection A(8)(c) above
shall include written confirmation by the monitoring agent
that all affordability requirements have been satisfied.
[4]
Conditions imposed are limited to only those necessary to
ensure compliance with this section.
[5]
(a)
Criteria for denial. A site plan approval application may be
disapproved only where the AA finds that:
The applicant has not submitted the required fees and
information as set forth in this section; or
[1]
The development project as described in the application
does not meet all the requirements and standards set forth
in this section and the AA regulations, or that a requested
waiver therefrom has not been granted; or
[2]
(b)
(10)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:755
It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse
development project impacts on nearby properties by
means of suitable conditions.
[3]
Time limit. The decision of the AA shall be made and a written
notice of the decision filed with the City Clerk within 120
days of receipt of the application by the City Clerk. This time
may be extended by mutual agreement between the AA and
the applicant by written agreement filed with the City Clerk.
Failure of the AA to take action within said 120 days or the
extended time shall be deemed an approval of the site plan
approval application.
(c)
Decisions. The AA shall issue to the applicant a copy of its
decision containing the name and address of the owner,
identifying the land affected and the plans that were the
subject of the decision and certifying that a copy of the
decision has been filed with the City Clerk and that all plans
referred to in the decision are on file with the AA. If 20 days
have elapsed after the decision has been filed with the City
Clerk without an appeal having been filed, or if such appeal
having been filed is dismissed or denied, the City Clerk shall so
certify on a copy of the decision. A copy of said decision shall
be filed with the local Registry of Deeds.
(d)
Validity. Site plan approval shall remain valid and run with the
land indefinitely, provided that construction has commenced
within two years after the decision is issued, which time shall
be extended by the time required to adjudicate any appeal
from such approval and which time shall be extended if the
project proponent demonstrates that it is actively pursuing
other required permits or there is other good cause for failure
to commence.
(e)
Waivers. Upon request of the applicant, the AA may waive
dimensional and other requirements of this section, including
design standards, in the interests of design flexibility and
overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of
such variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the
CC40R or if it finds that such waiver will allow the
development project to achieve the density, affordability, mix of
uses and/or physical character intended by this section.
(f)
Project phasing. The AA may allow a development project to
be phased at the request of the applicant, or to mitigate any
extraordinary adverse impacts on nearby properties. For a
project that is approved and developed in phases, the
proportion of affordable units shall be consistent across all
phases and the proportion of existing zoned units to bonus
units (as those terms are defined in 760 CMR 59.00) shall be
consistent across all phases.
(g)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:756
Fair housing requirement. All development projects within the
CC40R shall comply with applicable federal, state and local fair
housing laws.
(11)
Severability. If any provision of this section is found to be invalid by
a final, unappealable judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of § 275-68 shall not be affected but shall remain in
full force. The invalidity of any provision of this § 275-68 shall not
affect the validity of the remainder of the City's Zoning Ordinances.
(12)
Density and dimensional requirements.
Residential density allowances. The following residential
densities shall be allowed on all lots and within all buildings
within the designated subdistricts within the CC40R pursuant
to the requirements of this section and applicable design
standards:
Residential Density by Subdistrict
Units Per Acre
Dwelling
Units,
Single-
Family,
Detached
Dwelling
Units,
Two-
Family
Dwelling
Units,
Three-
Family
Dwelling
Units,
Multifamily
(1)
Mixed-
Use
Development
Projects
Cabotville 60 60
Exchange 8 12 16 20 20
(a)
(b) Dimensional requirements.
(13)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:757
Dimensional Requirements by Use for New Construction or Division of
Existing Parcels
Use
Ground
Floor
Elevation
Front
Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)`
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Frontage
(feet) Area
Dwelling
units:
1-family
2-family
3-family
3 feet
above
grade
Align to
abutting
principle
structures.
If no
abutting
structures,
3 feet
minimum/
15 feet
maximum.
Porches
may
encroach.
4 12 40 30
Dwelling
units:
multifamily,
4 or more
units
3 feet
above
grade
Align to
abutting
principle
structures.
If no
abutting
structures,
10 feet
maximum.
Porches
may
encroach.
4 12 40 30 No
minimum.
Lot area is
a function
of the
building
footprint
and use
requirements
for open
space,
setbacks,
travel aisle,
and
parking
Mixed
use
n/a Align to
abutting
principle
structures.
If no
abutting
structures,
8 feet
minimum.
Porches
may
encroach.
8 20 60 30
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:758
Dimensional Requirements by Use for New Construction or Division of
Existing Parcels
Use
Ground
Floor
Elevation
Front
Yard
Setback
Side Yard
Setback
(feet)
Rear
Yard
Setback
(feet)`
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Frontage
(feet) Area
Nonresidential
uses
n/a Align to
nearest
nonresidential
structures
on same
block,
same side
of street.
If no
nonresidential
structures,
2 feet
minimum/
5 feet
maximum.
0 feet
when
abutting
other
nonresidential
uses; 15
feet when
exclusively
residential
uses
20 60 40
Contiguous lots. In the CC40R, where two or more lots are
contiguous or are separated by a right-of-way, such lots may be
considered as one lot for the purpose of calculating maximum
lot coverage, parking requirements, minimum useable open
space, and dwelling units per acre.
(c)
Off-street parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
Use Required/Allowable Parking
Retail and restaurant 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Office and institutional 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Dwelling unit (1 bedroom) 1.0 space
Dwelling unit (2 bedrooms) 1.5 spaces
Dwelling unit (3 bedrooms) 2.0 spaces
Dwelling unit (4 bedrooms) 2.5 spaces
(a)
Location of parking. Any surface parking lot shall, to the
maximum extent feasible, be located at the side or rear of a
building, relative to any public right-of-way, public open space,
or pedestrian way. In no case shall surface parking for new
construction be permitted within the required setbacks
pursuant to the design standards.
(b)
(14)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:759
The AA may grant site plan approval allowing project-specific,
less burdensome standards or similarly prescribe more
economic safeguards and conditions as it deems appropriate,
provided that it finds that it is impractical to meet the
standards and that such modifications are appropriate by
reason of the proposed use and will not result in or worsen
parking or traffic problems in the CC40R.
(c)
Cooperative establishment and operation of parking areas.
Required spaces for any number of uses may be provided in
a combined lot or lots, provided that the number of spaces in
the combined facility shall not be less than the sum of those
required of the individual uses, and provided also that such
lot or lots shall be within 600 feet of the principal buildings
served.
(d)
Parking waivers. The AA may allow a reduction of the required
number of spaces by up to 30% if it can be demonstrated that
two or more uses can share parking spaces. In determining the
appropriate reduction, the AA may give consideration to the
hours of operation and/or usage of the proposed uses within
the development, the opinions of merchants, residents and
municipal officials as to the adequacy of parking spaces within
the surrounding area, as well as other relevant information.
The applicant must show proof of space and indicate if the
space is owned or leased. Required spaces shall be within 600
feet of any use on or off the site.
(e)
The AA may require additional parking beyond the allowable
number of spaces per unit if deemed appropriate given the
design, layout and density of the proposed development
project.
(f)
Parking shall be designed and constructed to comply with all
applicable disability access.
(g)
Open spaces and recreational area design and location. The site
plan design for development projects may include common open
space and facilities. Where proposed, the plans and any necessary
supporting documents submitted with an application for site plan
approval within the CC40R shall show the general location, size,
character, and general area within which common open space or
facilities will be located. The plans and documentation submitted
to the AA shall include a description of proposed ownership and
maintenance of all common open space or facilities.
(15)
Historic districts. Development projects that are located in locally
designated historic districts (all or in part) will also be subject to
the regulations of said historic district.
(16)
Design standards and guidelines. To ensure that development shall
be of high quality, and shall be compatible with the character
(17)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:760
of building types, streetscapes, and other community features
traditionally found in Chicopee, the City Council has adopted the
following design standards and guidelines. (See Subsection B, Part
2: Design Standards and Guidelines.)
Part 2: Design Standards and Guidelines.
Introduction. The Chicopee Center 40R (CC40R) is an overlay
zoning district adopted pursuant to MGL Chapter 40R, Smart
Growth Zoning and accompanying regulations at 760 CMR 59.00.
These design standards and guidelines are intended for the
following purposes:
To encourage the development of affordable and market rate
housing in the CC40R District;
(a)
To preserve and augment Chicopee's architectural qualities,
historic character and pedestrian scale;
(b)
To promote historical continuity — the relationship of built
structures over time by design that respects the scale, massing
and materials of adjacent buildings and landscape;
(c)
To ensure that future development in Chicopee will preserve
and enhance existing businesses and residences, serve to
catalyze additional investments, and promote a high quality of
architecture;
(d)
To foster a sense of belonging to an identifiable community of
residents;
(e)
(f) To encourage high-quality building design;
To create distinctive-looking buildings that complement the
architecture of the area;
(g)
To allow signage in commercial areas that is in scale and is
architecturally compatible with the storefront buildings;
(h)
To provide landscaping and pedestrian-oriented open space,
including sidewalks and courtyards;
(i)
To promote street-level commercial uses in commercial areas
that are attractive to residents and visitors;
(j)
To encourage settlement by more residents in Chicopee
Center;
(k)
To design upper-story setbacks for institutional, commercial
and mixed-use buildings;
(l)
To reduce building mass and keep in scale with the
neighborhood;
(m)
(1)
B.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:761
To improve height, massing and scale compatibility between
commercial and residential areas;
(n)
To encourage attractive parking lots and to discourage
driveways and curb cuts on commercial streets, particularly in
the Downtown Subdistrict;
(o)
To encourage Center Street development that will connect the
Gateway Subdistrict to Downtown;
(p)
To encourage development that is green, sustainable and
healthy.
(q)
Applicability. The general design standards and guidelines are
applicable in all subdistricts.
(2)
Design standards. The design standards are intended to set forth
mandatory requirements, subject to the provisions set forth in the
CC40R.
(3)
Design guidelines. The design guidelines are intended to set forth
nonbinding recommendations that will promote the objectives of
the design standards.
(4)
Height, mass and scale: standards and guidelines. The following
standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new
construction.
Design standards.
[1] New structures shall not exceed 150 feet in length.
(a)
Design guidelines.
New buildings should be sited and designed to provide
a sensitive transition to nearby, less-intensive zones.
Projects on the CC40R or subdistrict edges shall be
developed in a manner that creates a transition in
perceived height, mass and scale between the anticipated
development potential of the adjacent zones.
[1]
Building mass should be broken up by incorporating
different facade treatments at intervals to give the
impression of multiple, small-scale buildings, in keeping
with the established development pattern.
[2]
New buildings should be designed to maximize the amount
of sunshine on adjacent sidewalks throughout the year.
[3]
Color/material schemes that are integral to architectural
features and details should be used to help reduce
apparent size and mass of buildings and provide visual
interest. (See Subsection B(11), Architectural elements
[4]
(b)
(5)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:762
and materials for new buildings, for specific material
design standards and guidelines.)
Additional setbacks, modulation and screening should be
used to reduce mass where there are abrupt changes
which increase the relative height above grade along the
street or between subdistricts.
[5]
Streetscape compatibility: standards and guidelines. The following
standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new construction
and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
Street trees shall be provided with tree grates (urban
areas) or in planter strips (suburban areas), using
deciduous species to provide summer shade and winter
light. Street trees shall be a minimum of two inches caliper
and set 50 feet apart and no closer than 20 feet to an
intersection. (See Chicopee Guide to Urban Trees and
Planting Details.)
[1]
Whenever possible, vehicle entrances to buildings and
loading areas shall be located at the rear.
[2]
House, townhouse, loft and apartment structures shall
provide pedestrian entrances at the sidewalk. Accessory
dwellings to commercial development may provide
entrances at the side or rear of the parcel. (See also
Subsection B(12), Pedestrian environment.)
[3]
(a)
Design guidelines.
Renovations to existing street storefronts should be
designed with horizontal or vertical elements in alignment
with the setbacks and facade elements of adjacent building
fronts. Such elements may include columns, windows,
planters, benches, overhead weather protection, cornices
or other building features.
[1]
Renovations to existing sidewalks should be emphasized
by using mostly paving materials (urban areas) and/or
mostly landscape materials (suburban areas) that
differentiate the setback area from the sidewalk.
[2]
For buildings that span a block and front on two streets,
each street frontage should receive individual and detailed
site planning and architectural design treatments to
complement the established streetscape character in
scale, detail and mass but not necessarily in the same
style.
[3]
(b)
(6)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:763
Human activity: design guidelines. A purpose of the CC40R is to
promote vibrant, pedestrian-friendly activities in the downtown.
The following guidelines are intended to apply to new construction
and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design guidelines.
Sidewalk retail opportunities and connections are highly
encouraged. Whenever feasible, storefronts should open
to the street and display goods to the pedestrian.
[1]
In commercial areas, outdoor eating and drinking
opportunities should be provided on the sidewalk by
allowing for the opening of restaurant or cafe windows
to the sidewalk and/or installing outdoor seating while
maintaining pedestrian flow (subject to approval by the
Chicopee Department of Public Works).
[2]
Large, clear glass windows and glazed doors are preferred
along the sidewalk to provide visual access into the retail
or dining activities that occur inside. Views into the
interior spaces should not be blocked with the backs of
shelving units or with posters. Window displays of goods at
retail storefronts are an option. At these buildings, glazing
should be a minimum of 70% of the ground-level facade
area.
[3]
Sidewalk/plaza art installations and kiosks are encouraged
in urban areas as long as pedestrian flow is maintained.
[4]
Structures should provide energy-efficient building
lighting at night that highlights window displays, facade
features, signage and outdoor eating areas. The following
lighting applications are recommended:
Recessed compact fluorescent or low-voltage lamps at
window displays.
[a]
HID (high definition) floodlights mounted level with
the top of commercial awnings for signage and
architectural facade features.
[b]
HID or compact fluorescent wall sconces for outdoor
eating areas.
[c]
Fluorescent light strip or compact fluorescent wand
for blade signs.
[d]
[5]
(a)
(7)
Residential open space: design standards and guidelines. The
following standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new
construction and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
(a) Design standards.
(8)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:764
Floor levels greater than four stories shall be set back to
provide solar access to the sidewalk and/or neighboring
properties.
[1]
Trees and shrubs that are native to the region, requiring
minimal irrigation or fertilizer, shall be used.
[2]
Design guidelines.
Residential development projects should incorporate open
spaces, with special focus on landscape treatments and
courtyard entries.
[1]
New buildings should create courtyard-style open space
that is visually accessible to the public view.
[2]
Porous paving materials that minimize stormwater runoff
should be used wherever practical.
[3]
Stormwater catch basins should be installed that
supplement irrigation needs and reduce stormwater
runoff.
[4]
[5] Rooftop gardens are encouraged.
(b)
Parking and vehicle access: design standards and guidelines.
Adequate and convenient parking is important in the CC40R. The
following standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new
construction and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
Surface parking areas shall be located behind buildings
and not along street frontages.
[1]
Parking lots in development projects shall have landscape
buffers with trees and shrubs. (See Chicopee Site Plan
Landscape Guidelines, dated May 2005, for specific
requirements.)
[2]
(a)
Design guidelines.
Building design should preserve and enhance the main
frontage pedestrian environment in residential and
commercial areas by providing for continuous sidewalks.
Side streets should be minimally broken within a block to
provide vehicular access to parking.
[1]
Structured parking entrances should be located on side
streets or alleys.
[2]
Multipurpose parking areas paved with textured concrete
(paver style) or unit pavers are preferred (i.e., areas that
serve both parking and public open space needs).
[3]
(b)
(9)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:765
Corner lots: design standards and guidelines. The following
standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new construction
and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
Buildings on corner lots shall be oriented to the corner and
public street fronts.
[1]
Parking and automobile access shall be located a minimum
of 40 feet away from the corner point located at the
intersection of the front and side lot lines.
[2]
(a)
Design guidelines.
Entries to residences at corner lots should incorporate
landscaping materials such as pavers at walkways and
permanent/seasonal plantings surrounding walkways.
[1]
Retail storefronts located at intersections should provide
a prominent corner entry. A storefront door(s) with
clerestory and sidelights is preferred.
[2]
(b)
(10)
Architectural elements and materials for new buildings: design
standards and guidelines.
Design standards.
New buildings shall use materials such as brick, cast
stone, architectural stone, terra cotta, and concrete that
incorporate varied texture and color. Brick masonry is
the preferred main building material due to its durability,
although other materials that are compatible with brick
may be used. The exterior of single-family and two-family
houses may be constructed of wood, cement-fiber board or
vinyl.
[1]
Vinyl awnings that are internally illuminated shall not be
used.
[2]
Multiple awnings limited in dimension to the widths of
openings in walls shall be used. Continuous awnings
across multiple openings are prohibited.
[3]
Rooftop building systems (i.e., mechanical and electrical
equipment, antennas) shall be screened from all key
observation points by integrating them into the building
design with parapets, screens or other methods.
[4]
Building entry treatments that protect people from the
elements shall be incorporated into design.
[5]
(a)
(b) Design guidelines.
(11)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:766
Base. Ground floors or bases immediately next to
pedestrians should reflect a higher level of detail
refinement and high quality materials. Encouraged are
transparent, open facades for commercial uses at sidewalk
eye level (as an example, windows that cover 70% to 80%
of the ground floor facade area with their sills located
approximately 24 to 30 inches above the sidewalk).
[1]
Middle. Mid-level building facade elements should be
articulated to provide visual interest in a bay-by-bay scale.
Architectural features may include: belt courses or
horizontal bands to distinguish individual floors; change in
materials and color and/or texture that enhances specific
form elements or vertical elements of the building; a
pattern of windows; and/or bay windows to give scale to
the structure. Detail elements such as a cast stone, tile
or brick patterns that complement architectural features
on existing buildings should be incorporated. Spacing and
width of bays should provide intervals in the facade that
create scale elements similar to surrounding buildings.
[2]
Top. Tops of buildings in the District General and District
Edge should be distinguished from the facade walls by
including detail elements consistent with the traditional
neighborhood buildings such as steep gables with
overhangs, parapets and cornices. District General and
District Center buildings may, in addition, have towers,
belfries, cupolas and spires.
[3]
Architectural concept and consistency. Building design
elements, details and massing should create a well
proportioned and unified building form and exhibit an
overall architectural concept. Buildings should exhibit
form and features identifying the functions within the
building.
Signage that is consistent with the existing or
intended character of the building and the
neighborhood is preferred.
[a]
Solid canopies or shed-type fabric awnings over the
sidewalk are preferred.
[b]
Materials and design should be compatible with the
structures in the vicinity in order to reflect the
surrounding neighborhood character.
[c]
Distinctive features of the building, including entries,
signage, canopies, and areas of architectural detail
and interest should be illuminated at night.
Pedestrian-scale pole lights should be used along
streets and sidewalks.
[d]
[4]
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:767
Human scale. The design of new buildings should
incorporate architectural features, elements and details to
achieve appropriate human scale.
Transom or clerestory windows should be used above
entrances, display windows; projected bay windows
are encouraged.
[a]
Multiple paned windows that divide large areas of
glass into smaller parts are preferred.
[b]
Pedestrian orientation should be enhanced by using
components such as: nonreflective storefront windows
and transoms; pedestrian-scaled awnings;
architectural details at the first floor and the roofline.
[c]
[5]
Exterior finish materials. Building exteriors should be
constructed of durable and maintainable materials that
are attractive even when viewed up close. Materials that
have texture, patterns or lend themselves to a high quality
of detailing are encouraged. Organic materials are
preferred versus synthetic materials.
Consider each building as a high-quality, long-term
addition to the area; exterior design and materials
should exhibit permanence and quality appropriate to
the neighborhood.
[a]
Operable windows are preferred in all residential
units and houses.
[b]
Finish materials that are susceptible to staining,
fading or other discoloration are discouraged, except
for metals that develop a long-term patina such as
copper.
[c]
The use of applied foam ornamentation and EIFS
(Exterior Insulation and Finish System) is
discouraged, especially at ground-level locations.
Aluminum and vinyl siding is strongly discouraged. If
these are used, the trims should be a minimum of 3 1/
2 inches for head and jamb. Sills should be two inches.
[d]
[6]
Pedestrian environment: design standards and guidelines. The
CC40R is intended to provide opportunities for creating lively,
pedestrian-oriented open space. The following standards and
guidelines are intended to apply to new construction and the
rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
[1] Access to the building's entry shall be provided as follows:
(a)
(12)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:768
Entrances along the main building frontage shall be
visible from the sidewalk.
[a]
In commercial areas, signage located at the building
front entrance shall identify the tenant and/or use.
(See Subsection B(17), Signage.)
[b]
In commercial areas, entrances along the main
building frontage shall be glazed a minimum of 50%.
[c]
In commercial areas, entrance vestibules or air locks
shall not protrude beyond the front exterior of the
building.
[d]
Sidewalks, paths and entry areas shall be lighted, and
entry areas shall be protected from the weather.
[2]
At single-family and two- or three-family sites, the front
yard shall have landscaping that incorporates concrete
or paver walks, ground cover plantings, shrubs and
perennials.
[3]
Building entrances located at the main building frontage
shall emphasize pedestrian access as opposed to
accommodating vehicles.
[4]
The number of residential entrances on commercial
streets where nonresidential uses are required shall be
minimized. Where residential entries and lobbies on
commercial streets are unavoidable, minimize their impact
on retail frontage of the commercial streetscape by
adhering to the minimum dimensions required by the
building code.111
[5]
Entries for residential uses shall be from the street (rather
than from the rear of the property) to add to the activity
on the street and allow for visual surveillance for personal
safety. Accessory dwellings located at the rear of the
property may be accessed from the side street or alley.
[6]
Design guidelines.
Open spaces should be created at street level that is
connected both visually and physically to the open space
of the sidewalk.
[1]
Well-lighted, overhead weather protection is strongly
encouraged to improve pedestrian comfort and to promote
a sense of security.
[2]
(b)
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Building Construction.
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:769
Overhead weather protection should be designed with
consideration of the overall architectural concept of the
building, including:
Uses occurring within the building (such as entries
and retail spaces) or in the adjacent streetscape
environment (such as bus stops or occasional
gathering spaces);
[a]
Minimizing gaps in coverage, except to accommodate
street trees;
[b]
A drainage system that keeps rainwater off the streetlevel
facade and sidewalk;
[c]
The relationship to architectural features and
elements on adjacent development, especially if
abutting a building of historic or noteworthy
character;
[d]
The scale of the space defined by the height and depth
of the weather protection;
[e]
The illumination of undersides to increase security
after dark (excludes internally lit fabric awnings).
[f]
[3]
Blank walls: design standards and guidelines. The following
standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new construction
and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
Buildings shall avoid large blank walls facing the street,
especially near sidewalks.
[1]
Where blank walls are unavoidable, they shall receive
design treatment by use of decorative patterns, art
installations or other treatment.
[2]
(a)
Design guidelines.
Long, undifferentiated surfaces, facades or frontages are
strongly discouraged.
[1]
Ground floor windows should be located and designed to
maximize transparency of commercial facades and attract
pedestrian interest; 70% of the ground level front facade
area should be glazed.
[2]
Large windows that open to facilitate indoor-outdoor
interaction with the street are encouraged.
[3]
Windows on walls perpendicular to the street are
encouraged.
[4]
(b)
(13)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:770
Screening of dumpsters, utilities and service areas: design
standards. The following standards are intended to apply to new
construction and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
New developments shall locate service elements like trash
dumpsters, loading docks, mechanical equipment and
utility meters away from the street front.
[1]
When elements such as dumpsters, utility meters,
mechanical units and service areas cannot be located away
from the street front, they shall be screened from view and
shall not be located in the pedestrian right-of-way.
[2]
(a)
(14)
Lighting: design standards and guidelines. The following standards
and guidelines are intended to apply to new construction and the
rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
Proposed lighting shall not create overspill onto adjacent
properties.
[1]
Installation of pedestrian light fixtures as part of a
development's sidewalk improvements shall be provided.
[2]
(a)
Design guidelines.
[1] Lighting in display windows is encouraged.
Architectural lighting to complement the architecture of
the structure is encouraged.
[2]
Architectural lighting to complement landscape features is
encouraged.
[3]
Temporary, seasonal and/or holiday light fixtures are
encouraged.
[4]
Light levels at commercial locations should meet or exceed
the minimum requirements defined by the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). Light
levels should be designed to the following:
Lighting where commercial facilities are closed:
[i] Minimum of 0.2 FC.
[ii] Maximum to minimum ratio of 20:1 FC.
[a]
Lighting where commercial facilities are open:
[i] Minimum of 0.6 FC.
[b]
[5]
(b)
(15)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:771
[ii] Maximum to minimum ratio of 15:1 FC.
Landscaping: design standards and guidelines. The following
standards and guidelines are intended to apply to new construction
and the rehabilitation of existing buildings.
Design standards.
Trees shall be installed as part of a development's site and
surrounding sidewalk system.
[1]
Low-branching ornamental trees shall not be used along
storefronts or in areas of heavy pedestrian use.
[2]
(a)
Design guidelines.
A clear distinction should be made between pedestrian
traffic areas and commercial traffic areas through the use
of different paving materials, colors or landscaping.
[1]
Mature trees should be saved where feasible. Tree
removal is subject to Chicopee City Code, Chapter 257,
requirements.
[2]
Large shade tree species are encouraged where they do
not interfere with utilities and buildings.
[3]
Landscape buffers should incorporate trees, shrubs, and
perennials that are drought tolerant and require minimal
irrigation and fertilizer. Native species are preferred.
[4]
(b)
(16)
Signage: design standards and guidelines.
Design standards.
Signage shall be provided to identify nonresidential uses.
Colors should complement the colors of the building.
Neon-colored surfaces are not allowed. Signs shall not
cover over architectural features and trim elements.
Company logos are encouraged.
[1]
Allowable storefront signage shall consist of a primary
storefront sign with letters no taller than three feet and
located on a primary storefront band that is a minimum
of 12 feet above the sidewalk and a maximum of 20 feet;
awning signage that is integral to the awning fabric; blade
sign that is perpendicular to the storefront and whose
bottom edge is at least eight feet above the sidewalk;
permanent storefront glazing signage that does not cover
more than 10% of the glazed area; permanent glazed entry
door signage that does not cover more than 10% of the
glazed area of the door unit.
[2]
(a)
(17)
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-68
1:772
Blade signs may be illuminated with up to two integral
light fixtures.
[3]
Temporary signs (including seasonal displays),
noncommercial flags and City-approved banner art
installations shall be permitted in accordance with
Chicopee City Code, § 275-50B (Temporary signs), dated
9-1-2009.
[4]
Violations.
Sign manufacturers' logos and contact information on
signs are not allowed.
[a]
Electronic or mechanical signs that have moving parts
or blinking lights are not allowed.
[b]
Signs that are constructed of nondurable materials
such as paper, cardboard, decals or Styrofoam are not
allowed.
[c]
[5]
Design guidelines.
Wayfinding signage, such as signs that give direction to
parking, should be located not more than seven feet above
the sidewalk and is encouraged to serve both pedestrians
and drivers.
[1]
[2] Illumination of signage for evening hours is encouraged.
Formed plastic, injection plastic and internally illuminated
signs are discouraged.
[3]
(b)
Open space: design guidelines.
Design guidelines.
Park: The landscape should consist of paths, trails, water
bodies, boat launches and open shelters, all
naturalistically disposed.
[1]
Playground: open space equipped for children's
recreation. The playground should be fenced, except at
parks or greens where there is a minimum of 60 feet to the
nearest road. There is no size preference.
[2]
Public green: an open space available for recreation
purposes. The green is defined spatially by trees and
shrubs. The layout of landscape features, including trees,
paths, benches and shrubs, should be naturalistically
disposed and be a minimum of 1/2 acre in size.
[3]
Square: an open space available for recreation and
municipal purposes. A square is normally defined by
[4]
(a)
(18)
§ 275-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-68
1:773
§ 275-69. Senior Housing Overlay Zone. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-3]
building frontages. Landscape features should consist of
lawns, trees, shrubbery, fountains and paved paths, all
formally disposed and should be at least 1/2 acre in size.
Plaza: an open space designed for municipal and
commercial activities. A plaza is defined spatially by
building frontages. Its landscape should consist primarily
of pavement. Optional items include trees, benches and
fountains. The minimum size should be 1/3 acre.
[5]
Purpose. The purpose of the Senior Housing Overlay Zone is to provide
residential alternatives for the aged.
A.
Applicability. The Senior Overlay Zone may be superimposed over any
other district established in this chapter, subject to an approved zone
change in accordance with the provisions of Chicopee City Code,
§ 275-14. Exercise of any use allowed in a Senior Housing Overlay
Zone is subject to a special permit from the City Council in accordance
with Chicopee City Code, §§ 275-9 through 275-13, and the additional
submission requirements described in this section. All aspects of the
project, including authorized uses, building occupancy, and intensity of
use, shall remain in substantial conformance with the plans and other
documents submitted to the City Council as part of the special permit
proceeding, unless modification of the special permit is authorized,
after public hearing, by the City Council. Uses in the underlying zoning
may be exercised in accordance with the underlying zoning district
regulations.
B.
Permitted uses: nursing homes, assisted living, and over 55 agerestricted
housing. These uses are allowed only in a Senior Overlay
District.
C.
D. Designated districts. (List districts as adopted.)
Process: This is a three-step process: establishment of the overlay
district; issuance of a special permit; site plan approval. The overlay
district application and special permit application should run
concurrently. The site plan review application may run concurrently.
However, decisions may only be issued sequentially in the order of the
three steps listed above.
Procedure for establishing an overlay district. An overlay zone is
a type of zoning district. To establish an overlay district zone,
apply for a zone change in accordance with Chicopee City Code,
§ 275-14. When previewing an application for a Senior Housing
Overlay District, the City Council will consider the compatibility of
the proposed use with surrounding uses.
(1)
E.
§ 275-68 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-69
1:774
Procedure for an overlay district project. An overlay district project
takes place within a designated overlay district zone, subject to a
special permit granted by the City Council.
Special permit application. The City Council's authority to
review special permits is established in Chicopee City Code,
§ 275-9. Special permit applications under this section shall
also include one original and 17 copies of:
[1] Special permit application form.
[2] Site plan.
[3] Traffic and infrastructure impact report.
[4] Preliminary stormwater report.
Copies of all proposed covenants, easements, and other
restrictions which the applicant proposes to grant to the
City.
[5]
Other information that the City Council may reasonably
require to assist in determining whether the applicant's
proposed development plan meets the objectives of this
section.
[6]
(a)
(2)
Procedure for site plan approval. Site plans shall be submitted as
set forth in Chicopee City Code, § 275-6 (Site plan review).
(3)
Waivers. The City Council may waive:
The submission of technical information or documents where the
applicant demonstrates that, due to the simplicity of the proposal,
such information is not necessary or applicable.
(1)
Dimensional requirements upon written request of the applicant
for a development which, in the opinion of the City Council, serves
to preserve a unique natural area, historical building, or is
determined to be compatible with the neighborhood for which it is
proposed.
(2)
F.
Lighting. All lighting fixtures shall be integrated into the architectural
style of the development. All exterior light sources shall be
appropriately shielded from off-premises viewing. Access road lighting
shall be designed to prevent nuisances to abutting properties by reason
of light and glare.
G.
Traffic. The developer must demonstrate that traffic generated by the
proposed use will not generate more traffic than the maximum buildout
for the underlying zone.
H.
Loading docks. Design for minimum exposure to units and abutting
residential property for noise control.
I.
§ 275-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-69
1:775
Trash receptacles/dumpsters. Design for minimum exposure to units
and abutting residential property for odor and noise control.
J.
Screening. Dumpster pads, parking lots greater than six spaces, and
loading areas shall be screened from public view and view of residents:
minimum six-foot fence or evergreens six feet in height at time of
planting, set closely for a continuous screen.
K.
Landscaping. Plans shall be submitted as set forth in Chicopee City
Code, § 275-6 (Site plan review).
L.
Signage: one sign at access drive and public street intersection; 30
square feet maximum at ground level. See also § 275-50 (Signs).
M.
Mechanical units. Locate to minimize disturbance to abutting or nearby
residential uses.
N.
Parking. See also § 275-40 (Off-street parking).
Nursing homes: One space per three beds and one space per four
employees on the largest shift, plus adequate parking for visitors
and vehicles associated with the facility.
(1)
Assisted living: one space per three units and one space per four
employees on the largest shift, plus adequate parking for visitors
and vehicles associated with the facility.
(2)
Over 55 age-restricted housing: one space per studio and onebedroom
unit, two spaces per two bedrooms or more, and one
space per four employees on the largest shift, plus adequate
parking for visitors and vehicles associated with the facility.
(3)
O.
Open space. Open space shall be a contiguous area or multiple areas,
provided no area is less than 2,000 square feet. Open space areas
must contain landscaping and open areas for outdoor recreation. Land
between the property line and building setbacks cannot be counted
toward the total open space requirement for the project.
P.
Dimensional requirements.
Nursing Home
Assisted
Living Over 55
Frontage 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Area, minimum 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre
Depth 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet
Q.
§ 275-69 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-69
1:776
Nursing Home
Assisted
Living Over 55
Front, side and
rear yard
setbacks from
property line
for principle
and attached
accessory
buildings
25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Front, side and
rear yard
setbacks from
property line
for detached
accessory
buildings
10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Front, side and
rear yard
setbacks from
interior access
drive for
principle
buildings
25 feet,
excepting
loading docks
and passenger
pickup
25 feet,
excepting
loading docks
and passenger
pickup
25 feet,
excepting
loading docks
and passenger
pickup
Parking lot
(greater than 6
spaces)
setbacks
25 feet from
property side,
rear and street
lot lines
25 feet from
property side,
rear and street
lot lines
25 feet from
property side,
rear and street
lot lines
Height,
principle
buildings and
attached
accessory
buildings
40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Height,
accessory
buildings
20 feet detached 1 story 1 story
Density, total
buildout
No limit No limit No limit
Density, units
per building
No limit No limit No limit
Open space 10% developed
area of lot
10% developed
area of lot
500 square feet
per unit
§ 275-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-69
1:777
Nursing Home
Assisted
Living Over 55
Principal
building
spacing
25 feet minimum
between
principle
buildings
25 feet
minimum
between
principle
buildings
25 feet minimum
between
principle
buildings
Accessory
building
spacing
10 feet minimum
between
accessory and/or
principle
buildings
10 feet
minimum
between
accessory and/
or principle
buildings
10 feet minimum
between
accessory and/or
principle
buildings
§ 275-69 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-69
1:778
ARTICLE V
Additional Regulations
§ 275-70. Medical marijuana facilities. [Added 6-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-13; amended 9-1-2009; 3-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-16]
Purposes.
To provide for the establishment of medical marijuana facilities in
appropriate places and under strict conditions in accordance with
the passage of the Acts of 2012, Chapter 369, entitled "An Act for
the Humanitarian Use of Marijuana."
(1)
To minimize the adverse impacts of medical marijuana facilities on
adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools and other
places where children congregate, local historic districts, and other
land uses potentially incompatible with said facilities.
(2)
To regulate the siting, design, placement, safety, monitoring,
modification, and removal of medical marijuana facilities.
(3)
A.
Applicability.
The cultivation (unless it meets the requirements for an
agricultural exemption under MGL c. 40A, § 3), production,
processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade,
distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use is
prohibited unless permitted as a medical marijuana facility under
this section.
(1)
No medical marijuana facility shall be established except in
compliance with the provisions of this section.
(2)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede federal and
state laws governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs.
(3)
If any provision of this section or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other
than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby,
and to this end the provisions of this section are severable.
(4)
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MARIJUANA — The same substance defined as "marihuana" under
MGL, c. 94c.
MARIJUANA FOR MEDICAL USE — Marijuana that is designated and
restricted for use by, and for the benefit of, qualifying patients in the
treatment of debilitating medical conditions, as set forth in the Acts
C.
§ 275-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-70
1:779
of 2012, Chapter 369, entitled "An Act for the Humanitarian Use of
Marijuana."
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY — A facility for the cultivation,
production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale,
trade, distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use, located
inside a structure or building.
Eligible locations for medical marijuana facilities.
Medical marijuana facilities, other than agricultural operations
meeting exemption standards under MGL c. 40A, § 3, may be
allowed by special permit of the Chicopee City Council in the
Industrial Zoning District, provided the facility otherwise meets the
requirements of this section.
(1)
D.
General requirements and conditions for all medical marijuana
facilities.
All nonexempt medical marijuana facilities shall be contained
within a building or structure.
(1)
Medical marijuana facility size or gross floor area shall be
determined or delineated by the special permit granting authority.
If no such delineation is made, the facility shall not exceed 50,000
square feet.
(2)
A medical marijuana facility may not be located in buildings that
contain any medical doctor's offices or the offices of any other
professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the use of medical
marijuana.
(3)
The hours of operation of medical marijuana facilities shall be set
by the special permit granting authority, but in no event shall said
facilities be open and/or operating between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
(4)
No medical marijuana facility shall be located within 300 feet of
any residence or residential zoning district. This includes overlay
zoning districts that allow residential uses, provided that a permit
for residential use has been approved prior to the application for a
medical marijuana facility special permit.
(5)
No medical marijuana facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of
any of the following preexisting structures or uses:
(a) Any school attended by children under the age of 18;
(b) Any licensed child care facility;
(c) Any drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility;
(d) Any correctional facility, halfway house, or similar facility;
(6)
E.
§ 275-70 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-70
1:780
(e) Any other medical marijuana facility.
No medical marijuana facility shall be located within 500 feet of the
following preexisting structures or uses:
(a) Any church;
(b) Any park;
(c) Any playground;
(d) Any play field;
(e) Any youth center; or
Any other location where groups of minors regularly
congregate.
(f)
(7)
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing
marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the
premises of a medical marijuana facility.
(8)
No medical marijuana facility shall be located inside a building
containing residential units, including transient housing such as
motels and dormitories, or inside a movable or mobile structure
such as a van or truck.
(9)
Signage for the medical marijuana facility shall include the
following language: "Registration card issued by the MA
Department of Public Health required." The required text shall be
a minimum of two inches in height.
(10)
Medical marijuana facilities shall provide the Chicopee Police
Department and Building Commissioner with the names, phone
numbers and email addresses of all management staff and
keyholders to whom one can provide notice if there are operating
problems associated with the establishment.
(11)
Special permit requirements.
A medical marijuana facility may only be allowed by special permit
from the Chicopee City Council in accordance with MGL c. 40A,
§ 9, subject to the following statements, regulations, requirements,
conditions and limitations.
(1)
A special permit for a medical marijuana facility shall be limited to
one or more of the following uses that shall be prescribed by the
special permit granting authority:
Cultivation of marijuana for medical use (horticulture) (special
permit not required for sites meeting agricultural exemption
standards found in MGL c. 40A, § 3);
(a)
(2)
F.
§ 275-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-70
1:781
Processing and packaging of marijuana for medical use,
including marijuana that is in the form of smoking materials,
food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, and other products;
(b)
Retail sale or distribution of marijuana for medical use to
qualifying patients;
(c)
Wholesale sale of marijuana for medical use to other medical
marijuana facilities located in Chicopee or in another
municipality in Massachusetts or elsewhere.
(d)
In addition to the application requirements set forth in Subsections
E and F of this section, a special permit application for a medical
marijuana facility shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of each owner of the facility;
Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the
applicant by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of
its agencies for the facility;
(b)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the site or structure,
such as a deed or lease;
(c)
If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under
oath disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners,
members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly
situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of
the above are entities rather than persons, the applicant must
disclose the identity of the owners of such entities until the
disclosure contains the names of individuals;
(d)
A certified list of all parties in interest entitled to notice of the
hearing for the special permit application, taken from the most
recent tax list of the City of Chicopee and certified by the office
of the Assessor;
(e)
Proposed security measures for the medical marijuana facility,
including lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc., to ensure
the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
(f)
(3)
Mandatory findings. The special permit granting authority shall not
issue a special permit for a medical marijuana facility unless it finds
that:
The facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual or
economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as
defined in MGL c.40A, § 11;
(a)
The Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH) has
approved the applicant's Phase 1 application.
(b)
(4)
§ 275-70 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-70
1:782
§ 275-71. Renewable energy. [Added 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-27]
The applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and
requirements of Subsections E and F herein; and
(c)
The applicant has satisfied all of the special permit
requirements as outlined in Chapter 275 of the Ordinances of
the City of Chicopee.
(d)
Annual reporting. Each medical marijuana facility permitted under
this section shall, as a condition of its special permit, file an annual
report to and appear before the special permit granting authority
no later than January 31, providing a copy of all current applicable
state licenses for the facility and/or its owners.
(5)
A special permit granted under this section shall have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership of the premises
as a medical marijuana facility. A special permit granted under this
section shall run with the applicant only and may be transferred
only with the approval of the special permit granting authority in
the form of an amendment to the special permit along with all
information required in this section.
(6)
Any violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of a
special permit issued under this section.
(7)
Waiver.
The City Council, when granting a special permit under this
section, may waive setback requirements as outlined in Subsection
E above, provided the applicant submits its request in writing and
can demonstrate the proposed site will not have an adverse effect
upon the surrounding neighborhood. The City Council reserves
the authority to require the applicant to produce necessary
documentation to support its position. Further, a waiver of setback
requirements shall require both the affirmative vote of 3/4 of all of
the members of the City Council and shall require a separate vote
apart from the main vote on the proposed site.
(1)
G.
Abandonment or discontinuance of use.
A special permit granted under this section shall lapse if not
exercised within one year of issuance.
(1)
A medical marijuana facility shall be required to remove all
material, plants equipment and other paraphernalia:
(a) Prior to surrendering its state-issued licenses or permits; and
(b) Within six months of ceasing operations.
(2)
H.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
A.
§ 275-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-71
1:783
General definitions:
ADVERSE VISUAL IMPACT — When an undertaking alters, directly
or indirectly, the viewshed from a property in a manner that would
diminish that property's perceived value.
SITE PLAN REVIEW AUTHORITY — Refers to the body of local
government designated by the municipality to review site plans.
For the City of Chicopee, the Site Plan Review Advisory Committee
(SPRAC) serves as the site plan review authority.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — A body of local
government designated by the municipality to grant special
permits. In the City of Chicopee, the City Council holds such
authority.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The board charged with
enforcing the zoning bylaws. For the City of Chicopee, the Building
Commissioner serves as the zoning enforcement authority.
(1)
Definitions (photovoltaic systems):
GREENFIELD — An area of agricultural or forest land, or some
other undeveloped site.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM (also referred to as PHOTOVOLTAIC
INSTALLATION) — An active solar energy system that converts
solar energy directly into electricity.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of
electric power production of the photovoltaic system in watts of
direct current (DC).
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy received from the sun that can
be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GRID-INTERTIE — A photovoltaic
system that is connected to an electric circuit served by an electric
utility.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED — An active solar
energy system that is structurally mounted to the ground and is
not roof-mounted; it may be of any size (small-, medium- or largescale).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE-SCALE — An active solar energy
system that occupies more than 40,000 square feet of surface area
(equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 250kW DC or
greater).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MEDIUM-SCALE — An active solar
energy system that occupies more than 1,750 but less than 40,000
square feet of surface area (equivalent to a rated nameplate
capacity of about 10250 kW DC).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF-GRID — A photovoltaic solar
energy system in which the circuits energized by the solar energy
(2)
§ 275-71 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-71
1:784
system are not electrically connected in any way to electric circuits
that are served by an electric utility.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED — An active solar
energy system that is structurally mounted to the roof of a building
or structure; it may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE — An active solar
energy system that occupies 1,750 square feet of surface area or
less (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of about 10 kW DC
or less).
Definitions (wind systems):
BUILDING-INTEGRATED WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A buildingmounted
wind energy conversion system that has a manufacturer's
rating of 10 kW or less and projects no more than 15 feet above the
highest point on the roof and shall not be considered a small wind
energy system in terms of area and setback requirements. This
definition also covers, for the purposes of this zoning provision,
other wind energy systems primarily used for land-based
applications which may be permanently mounted and operated on
a building.
UTILITY-SCALE WIND ENERGY FACILITY — A commercial wind
energy facility, where the primary use of the facility is electrical
generation to be sold to the wholesale electricity markets.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — All of the equipment, machinery and
structures together utilized to convert wind to electricity. This
includes, but is not limited to, developer-owned electrical
equipment, storage, collection and supply equipment, service and
access roads, and one or more wind turbines.
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts kinetic wind energy into
rotational energy to drive an electrical generator. A wind turbine
typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or
more blades.
(3)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
Promote the use of renewable energy systems, including the
creation of new large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations and wind energy facilities.
(1)
Provide standards for the placement, design, construction,
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such
installations that address public safety and minimize impacts on
scenic, natural and historic resources and residential viewsheds.
(2)
Ensure adequate financial assurance for the eventual
decommissioning of such facilities.
(3)
B.
C. Applicability.
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-71
1:785
All renewable energy installations shall be installed in compliance
with the requirements of this section of the Chicopee City Code,
state and federal law, and the standards and procedures
established by Chicopee Electric Light (CEL) or Western
Massachusetts Electric Company (WMECO). This requirement
pertains to physical modifications that alter the type, configuration
or size of installations pre-existing this section and those
installations permitted in accordance with this section. This section
also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the
type, configuration or size of these installations or related
equipment.
(1)
Nothing in this section should be construed to prevent the
installation of accessory roof-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations.
(2)
Process. The following identifies those uses that are allowable and
those that may be allowed only by special permit. The City Council is
the special permit granting authority in accordance with Chicopee City
Code, § 275-9. The construction and operation of all solar photovoltaic
installations and wind energy facilities shall be consistent with all
applicable local, state and federal requirements, including, but not
limited to, all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and
communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part
of a solar photovoltaic installation or wind energy facility shall be
constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
D.
Utility notification.
For installations that do not require a special permit: Prior to
issuance of a building and/or electrical permit, the installation
owner or operator must enter into an interconnection agreement
with the utility company that operates the electrical grid for which
the installation connection is proposed. Proof of the
interconnection agreement shall be presented to the Building
Department with the permit application. Projects that are not
designed to connect to an electrical grid are exempt but must
comply with all other relevant requirements.
(1)
For installations requiring a special permit: No special permit
applications shall be accepted unless installation owners provide
written proof that they have notified the utility company that
operates the electrical grid for which the installation connection is
proposed.
(2)
E.
Solar.
Production for on-site use. The following conditions shall apply
to all installations designed to convert solar energy into a power
source for residential, commercial, business and industrial uses
where the primary purpose of the system is to generate power for
(1)
F.
§ 275-71 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-71
1:786
those uses. These uses are permitted in any zoning district within
the City.
Visual impact: All solar conversion installations shall be
designed and located to minimize adverse visual impacts,
defined as "an undertaking that alters directly or indirectly the
viewshed from a property in a manner that would diminish
that property's perceived value." Adverse visual impacts can be
mitigated through a variety of actions in design, construction
and maintenance. The removal of the natural or existing
vegetation is the single most noticeable visual impact of a
project and shall be held to a minimum to achieve community
acceptance. Clearing only what vegetation is necessary for
the construction can eliminate or reduce the need to mitigate.
However, proper sight distances, clear zones and horizontal
clearance requirements must be considered. All abutting
property shall be visually screened from the project through
any one or a combination of the following: location, distance,
plantings, existing vegetation (located on the same parcel as
the installation) and fencing (not to exceed six feet).
(a)
Pole-mounted installations: If solar conversion installations are
mounted on a pole or other apparatus separate from a
principal or accessory structure, said apparatus must comply
with accessory structure regulations within their respective
zoning districts and be set back from adjoining property lot
lines at a ratio of one foot of apparatus height to 0.5 foot of
setback or a minimum of the underlying setback requirement.
(b)
Rooftop installations: Rooftop solar conversion installations
that are not flush-mounted must not exceed the overall
building height limits of the underlying district. Height is
measured to the highest protruding point of the solar energy
system at its fullest extension, not to exceed five feet above the
roofline.
(c)
Wall-mounted installations: If solar conversion installations are
mounted on building walls/facades, said installations must
comply with minimum setback requirements as detailed within
the property's respective zoning district.
(d)
Utility notification: Written proof that CEL or Eversource is
in discussions with the applicant regarding an interconnection
agreement must be submitted with all permit applications.
No building or electrical permits will be issued until the
installation owner or operator enters into an interconnection
agreement with the utility company that operates the electrical
grid for which the installation connection is proposed. Proof
of the interconnection agreement shall be presented to the
Building Department with the permit application. Projects that
are not designed to connect to an electrical grid are exempt
(e)
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-71
1:787
but must comply with all other relevant requirements.
Reasonable efforts, as determined by the City Council with
guidance from the Planning Department, shall be made to
place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic
installation underground, depending on appropriate soil
conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any
requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for
utility interconnections may be aboveground if required by the
utility provider.
Production for off-site use. The construction of a solar energy
system intended for off-site generation shall be as set forth in
Chicopee City Code § 275-6 and shall comply with all requirements
set forth herein.
Section 275-66, Burnett Road: Regulations promulgated in
§ 275-66, which regulate new development on Burnett Road
and appurtenant streets, shall not apply to solar energy
projects proposed for the Burnett Road area of the City.
(a)
Screening: Structures must be shielded from view and/or
located to avoid adverse visual impacts as deemed necessary
by and in the opinion of the Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee.
Landscaping:
Plantings intended to provide screening shall be
evergreen, installed at a minimum of six feet in height
measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the
plant and spaced to create a visual barrier.
[a]
Deciduous buffers: Deciduous or mixed deciduous and
evergreen buffers shall be a minimum of 40 feet wide
and are counted as part of the setback.
[b]
[1]
Natural features: Natural features and features designed
to appear as natural features may be employed as visual
barriers. Existing vegetation (located on the same parcel
as the installation) must be at least 40 feet in width and
adequately dense to provide sufficient screening.
[2]
Fencing: Fences shall be installed at a minimum of six feet
and shall be solid in appearance.
[3]
(b)
Setbacks: The purpose of setbacks is to mitigate adverse
impacts on abutting properties. For large-scale, groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear
setbacks shall be as follows:
[1] Minimum of 50 feet.
(c)
(2)
§ 275-71 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-71
1:788
Every abutting property shall be visually screened from
the project through any one or a combination of the
following: landscaping, existing vegetation and fencing
(not to exceed eight feet). Fencing in excess of eight feet
requires a variance from the Chicopee Zoning Board of
Appeals.
[2]
Lighting: Lighting of parts of the solar energy system shall be
limited to that required for safety and operational purposes
and shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties
and be directed downward with full cutoff fixtures to reduce
light pollution. The City suggests the use of LED systems
whenever possible to conserve electricity.
(d)
Signage: Signs on the solar energy system shall comply with
the dimensional and setback requirements of the underlying
zoning regulations. Signage in districts with no signage
requirements are limited to two signs, three square feet in size,
maximum of five feet in height, and located in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view of the street from an access
drive. Signage required for safety, emergency or by code is
excluded from the signage requirements in this section.
(e)
Appurtenant structures: All appurtenant structures to largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be
subject to reasonable regulations as adopted by the Planning
Board concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area,
setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage
requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including, but
not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities,
transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally
compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures
should be shielded from view by existing vegetation or
plantings and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual
impacts.
(f)
Parking: Reasonable on-site parking is required for vehicles
that will service solar energy systems. Please refer to (parking
and loading) § 275-40N(2)(v).
(g)
Consultants: Upon submission of an application for a
renewable energy installation requiring Site Plan Review
Advisory Committee Review, the permit granting authority will
be authorized to hire outside consultants, pursuant to MGL c.
44, § 53G. As necessary, the applicant may be required to pay
the consultant's fees.
(h)
Emergency services: The applicant shall provide a copy of
the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to
local emergency service providers, as designated by the Site
Plan Review Advisory Committee. Upon request, the applicant
(i)
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-71
1:789
shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing
an emergency response plan. All means of disconnecting the
solar energy system shall be clearly marked. The applicant or
system owner shall maintain a phone number and identify a
responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries and
complaints throughout the life of the project. The owner or
operator shall be required to provide a secure, tamperproof
storage box for keys or other access tools at each locked
entrance to the facility and maintain a complete set of all keys
or devices required to gain emergency access to all areas,
buildings and equipment of the facility. The owner or operator
shall designate a representative who is available 24 hours a
day, seven days a week, to respond to emergency situations.
This individual shall be required to respond to an emergency
situation within 45 minutes of notification.
Security: The solar energy system shall be designed to prevent
unauthorized access. Access to electrical equipment shall be
locked where possible.
(j)
Operation and maintenance plan: The applicant shall submit a
plan for maintenance of access roads and stormwater controls,
as well as general procedures for operational maintenance
of the solar energy system. Site access shall be maintained
to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief, Police Chief,
Emergency Medical Services and Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee.
(k)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts: Clearing of
natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary
for the construction, operation and maintenance of the largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation and per
best management practices of natural areas or good husbandry
of the land or forest otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations and bylaws and defined by Massachusetts General
Law Chapter 131, Section 140; 310 CMR, Wetlands Protection;
and the Chicopee Stormwater Ordinance: City Code Chapter
231. The clearing of greenfields/undeveloped landscapes and
the development of such facilities is highly discouraged.
(l)
Financial surety: Proponents of renewable energy projects
shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account,
bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal or failure to
maintain in the event the City must maintain or dismantle,
remove and properly dispose of the facility and remediate the
landscape, in an amount and form determined to be reasonable
by the Site Plan Review Advisory Committee, but in no event to
exceed more than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance
with the additional requirements set forth herein, as
determined by the applicant. Such surety will not be required
for municipally or state-owned facilities. The applicant shall
(m)
§ 275-71 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-71
1:790
submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with
removal and disposal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The
amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased
removal and disposal costs due to inflation.
Abandonment and removal.
Abandonment: Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, the installation shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year.
If the owner or operator of the installation fails to remove
the installation in accordance with the requirements of
this section within 150 days of abandonment or the
proposed date of decommissioning, the City may enter the
property and physically remove the installation.
[1]
Removal requirements: Any installation which has reached
the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall be
removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove
the installation no more than 150 days after the date of
discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall
notify the City of Chicopee by certified mail of the
proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for
removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
[a]
Disposal of all solid and hazardous wastes in
accordance with local, state and federal waste
disposal regulations.
[b]
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary
to minimize erosion. The Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee may allow the owner or operator to leave
landscaping or designated below-grade foundations
in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation, at its sole discretion.
[c]
[2]
(n)
Wind.
Residential and business production - individual use. The following
conditions shall apply to all structures and devices designed to
convert wind energy into a usable power source for residential,
commercial, business and industrial uses where the primary
purpose of the system is to provide power for those uses:
(a) Pole-mounted wind conversion systems are prohibited.
Building-integrated wind conversion systems are permitted in
all zoning districts. For the purpose of this section, "building-
(b)
(1)
G.
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-71
1:791
integrated systems" refers only to systems encased within a
principal or accessory building.
Production for commercial sale. The following conditions shall
apply to all structures and devices designed to convert wind energy
into a usable power source for commercial sale:
(a) Pole-mounted wind conversion systems are prohibited.
Building-integrated wind conversion systems are permitted.
All such systems shall have a protective shroud to contain
projectiles in the event of system malfunction.
(b)
No wind energy conversion system shall be erected, used or
otherwise employed if said device interrupts or disturbs radio
or television signal reception.
(c)
As per Chicopee Noise Ordinance: City Code § 200-2, no wind
energy conversion system shall be erected, used or otherwise
employed if said device results in the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise of such
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life
or health of any individual or contrary to the public welfare.
(d)
Monitoring and maintenance. The applicant shall maintain the
wind energy facility in good condition. Maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs,
emergency braking (stopping) and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable
to the local Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services. The
project owner shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining
the wind energy facility.
(e)
Abandonment or decommissioning: removal requirements. Any
wind energy facility which has reached the end of its useful life
or has been abandoned shall be removed. The owner/operator
shall physically remove the facility no more than 150 days after
the date of discontinued operations. Decommissioning shall
consist of:
Physical removal of all wind turbines, structures,
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from
the site.
[1]
Disposal of all solid and hazardous wastes in accordance
with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
[2]
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion.
[3]
(f)
Financial surety. Applicants for commercial-scale wind energy
facilities shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow
account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal and
(g)
(2)
§ 275-71 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-71
1:792
§ 275-72. Adult use of marijuana. [Added 5-16-2017 by Ord. No.
17-12; amended 7-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-26]
disposal or failure to maintain in the event the City must
maintain or remove the facility and remediate the landscape,
in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Site
Plan Review Advisory Committee, but in no event to exceed
more than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance with
the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by
the applicant. Such surety will not be required for municipally
or state-owned facilities. The applicant shall submit a fully
inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal and
disposal prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall
include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs
due to inflation.
Wood. The Board of Health signed the following regulation on the
22nd day of March, 2007. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 111, §§ 31 and 31C, it shall be unlawful to use, install and/
or maintain outdoor wood-burning devices within the City of Chicopee,
including, but not limited to, all outdoor wood-burning stoves, boilers
and furnaces. For the purposes of this regulation, "outdoor woodburning
stoves, furnaces and boilers" shall mean wood-fired devices
that are located outdoors and separate from the indoor building,
structure or appliance to be heated, which heat water or air and then
transport the same by pipe(s) to an indoor building, structure or
appliance for the purpose of providing heat and/or hot water.
H.
If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance shall to any extent be invalid or unenforceable, the
remainder of this regulation shall not be affected thereby, and each
other provision shall be valid and be enforceable to the fullest extent
permitted by law.
I.
Purposes.
To provide for the placement of adult use marijuana establishments
in appropriate places and under specific conditions in accordance
with the provisions of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 94G,
Regulation of the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not Medically
Prescribed.
(1)
To minimize any adverse impacts of adult use marijuana
establishments on adjacent properties, dense or concentrated
residential areas, schools and other places where children
congregate, and other sensitive land uses.
(2)
To regulate the siting, design, placement, access, security, safety,
monitoring, modification and discontinuance of adult use
marijuana establishments.
(3)
A.
§ 275-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:793
To provide applicants, owners and operators with clear guidance
regarding adult use marijuana establishment siting, design,
placement, access, security, safety, monitoring, modification and
discontinuance.
(4)
Applicability.
No adult use marijuana establishment shall be permitted except in
compliance with the provisions of this section.
(1)
If any provision of this section or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other
than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby,
and to this end the provisions of this section are severable.
(2)
B.
Definitions.
Refer to Commonwealth of Massachusetts 935 CMR 500.00 (Adult
Use of Marijuana) for a comprehensive list of definitions related
to the regulation of the adult use of marijuana. These definitions
are hereby adopted by the City of Chicopee as they pertain to this
section.
(1)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS NOT CONDUCTING
SALES OPERATIONS (LICENSE GROUP C) — An entity that
engages in no adult use marijuana sales transactions of any kind.
ADULT USER — Any individual over the age of 21 years purchasing
or consuming marijuana.
BUSINESS TO BUSINESS (B2B) ADULT USE MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS (LICENSE GROUP A) — Any entity that
executes wholesale sales transactions involving adult use
marijuana or marijuana products between itself and a licensed
adult use marijuana establishment categorized as a marijuana
retailer, microbusiness, and/or social consumption operator.
BUSINESS TO CONSUMER (B2C) ADULT USE MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS (LICENSE GROUP B) — Any entity that
executes retail sales transactions involving adult use marijuana
or marijuana products between itself and the general public or
nonbusiness entities.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION — The use of land and/or buildings for
planting, tending, improving, harvesting, processing and
packaging, the preparation and maintenance of soil and other
media and promoting the growth of cannabis by a cannabis
cultivator, microbusiness, research facility, craft marijuana
cultivator cooperative, registered marijuana dispensary or other
(2)
C.
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:794
entity licensed by the Commission for cannabis cultivation. Such
use is not agriculturally exempt from zoning. The cultivation and
processing of medical marijuana in accordance with these
regulations is considered to be a manufacturing use and is not
agriculturally exempt from zoning.
COMMUNITY HOST AGREEMENT — An agreement, pursuant to
General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 3(d), between a cannabis
establishment and a municipality setting forth additional conditions
for the operation of a cannabis establishment, including
stipulations of responsibility between the parties and a up to 3%
host agreement revenue sharing.
CRAFT MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE — A marijuana cultivator
comprised of residents of the Commonwealth and organized as
a limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or
cooperative corporation under the laws of the Commonwealth. A
cooperative is licensed to cultivate, obtain, manufacture, process,
package and brand cannabis or marijuana products to transport
marijuana to marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.
INDEPENDENT TESTING AND STANDARDS LABORATORY — A
laboratory that is licensed by the Commission and is:
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate,
process and package marijuana, and to transfer marijuana to other
marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. Cultivator
licensees (except for craft marijuana cooperative licensees) may
hold up to three licenses across the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts; however, the total plant canopy area authorized
by the licenses shall not exceed 100,000 square feet. Licensees
shall be partitioned into tiers based upon total plant canopy square
footage held across all licensed cultivation facilities within the
Commonwealth as outlined in the following table:
Tier 1 Up to 5,000 square feet
Tier 2 5,001 to 10,000 square feet
Tier 3 10,001 to 20,000 square feet
Accredited to the International Organization for
Standardization 17025 (ISO/IEC 17025:2017) by a third-party
accrediting body that is a signatory to the International
Laboratory Accreditation Accrediting Cooperation mutual
recognition arrangement or that is otherwise approved by the
Commission;
(a)
Independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment
center (RMD), marijuana establishment or licensee for which it
conducts a test; and
(b)
Qualified to test cannabis or marijuana in compliance with 935
CMR 500.160 and MGL c. 94C, § 34.
(c)
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:795
Tier 4 20,001 to 30,000 square feet
Tier 5 30,001 to 40,000 square feet
Tier 6 40,001 to 50,000 square feet
Tier 7 50,001 to 60,000 square feet
Tier 8 60,001 to 70,000 square feet
Tier 9 70,001 to 80,000 square feet
Tier 10 80,000 to 90,000 square feet
Tier 11 90,001 to 100,000 square feet
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana cultivator, craft
marijuana cooperative, marijuana product manufacturer,
marijuana retailer, independent testing laboratory, marijuana
research facility, marijuana transporter, or any other type of
licensed marijuana-related business, except a medical marijuana
treatment center.
MARIJUANA PROCESS OR PROCESSING — To harvest, dry, cure,
trim and separate parts of the cannabis or marijuana plant by
manual or mechanical means, except it shall not include
manufacture as defined in 935 CMR 500.002.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed to
obtain, manufacture, process and package cannabis or marijuana
products and to transfer these products to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA RESEARCH FACILITY — An entity licensed to engage
in research projects by the Massachusetts Cannabis Control
Commission.
MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed to purchase and
transport cannabis or marijuana product from marijuana
establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer this product to
marijuana establishments and to consumers. Retailers are
prohibited from delivering cannabis or marijuana products to
consumers; and from offering cannabis or marijuana products for
the purposes of on-site social consumption on the premises of a
marijuana establishment.
MARIJUANA TRANSPORTER — An entity, not otherwise licensed
by the Commission, that is licensed to purchase, obtain, and
possess cannabis or marijuana product solely for the purpose of
transporting, temporary storage, sale and distribution to marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers. Marijuana transporters may
be an existing licensee transporter or third party transporter.
EXISTING LICENSEE TRANSPORTER — A marijuana
establishment that contracts with other marijuana
establishments to transport the establishment's marijuana and
marijuana products to other marijuana establishments.
(a)
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:796
MICROBUSINESS — A co-located marijuana establishment that
can be either a Tier 1 marijuana cultivator or product manufacturer
or both, in compliance with the operating procedures for each
license. A microbusiness that is a marijuana product manufacturer
may purchase no more than 2,000 pounds of marijuana per year
from other marijuana establishments.
SENSITIVE LAND USE — Any of the land use activities outlined
in Subsection D(4), Required land use buffers, which require that
any and all structures housing adult use marijuana establishments
must locate beyond a specified spatial buffer requirement from the
subject land use activity.
SOCIAL CONSUMPTION OPERATOR — A marijuana retailer
licensed to purchase marijuana and marijuana products from
marijuana establishment and to sell marijuana and marijuana
products on its premises only to consumers or allow consumers to
consume marijuana and marijuana products on its premises only.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The special permit
granting authority shall be defined as the City of Chicopee City
Council per City of Chicopee City Zoning Code, Article II,
Administration and Enforcement, § 275-9, Special permits.
THIRD PARTY TRANSPORTER — An entity registered to do
business in Massachusetts that does not hold another
marijuana establishment license pursuant to 935 CMR 500.050
and is not registered as a registered marijuana dispensary
pursuant to 105 CMR 725.
(b)
Eligible locations for adult use marijuana establishments.
Per 935 CMR 500: the cultivation of marijuana for adult use is
excepted from definition as an agricultural operation and therefore
does not qualify as an agricultural land use subject to City of
Chicopee Zoning Code, Article III, Regulations Applicable to All
Districts, § 275-35(B).
(1)
Any buffer requirement delineated in this section shall refer to the
distance between the closest point on a parcel line belonging to
a parcel upon which any of the sensitive land uses subjected to
buffer requirements are sited to the closest point of the adult use
marijuana facility's structural footprint.
(2)
Eligible zones (for specific zoning requirements, refer to City of
Chicopee Zoning Ordinances, Chapter 275, Article IV, District
Regulations). Adult use marijuana establishments, other than
agricultural operations meeting exemption standards under MGL
c. 40A, § 3, may be allowed by special permit issued by the special
permit granting authority in the following locations, according to
license type:
(3)
D.
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:797
License Group A [Business to Business (B2B) Establishments].
Marijuana cultivator, craft marijuana cooperative: Industrial
Zoning District (§ 275-62).
(a)
License Group B [Business to Consumer (B2C)
Establishments]. Marijuana retailer, microbusiness, social
consumption operator: Industrial (§ 275-62), Business A
(§ 275-58), Business B (§ 275-59), or Business C (§ 275-60),
Mixed Use (§ 275-65), Central Business District (§ 275-61), and
Mill Conversion and Commercial Center Overlay (§ 275-67).
(b)
License Group C (establishments not conducting sales
operations). Independent testing and standards laboratory,
marijuana research facility, marijuana transporter: Industrial
(§ 275-62), Business A (§ 275-58), Business B (§ 275-59), or
Business C (§ 275-60), Mixed Use (§ 275-65), Central Business
District (§ 275-61), Mill Conversion and Commercial Center
Overlay (§ 275-67), and Commercial A (§ 275-56).
(c)
Required land use buffers.
Land Use
Category
License
Group A
(feet)
License
Group B
(feet)
License
Group C
(feet)
School
attended by
children under
the age of 18
500 500 250
Licensed
childcare
facility
500 500 250
Municipally
owned park
(not including
nonvehicular
paths)
500 500 250
Municipally
owned park
(including
nonvehicular
paths)
501 501 501
Boat ramp/slip/
water access
facilities
501 501 501
Playground or
play field
500 500 250
Youth center 500 500 250
(4)
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:798
Land Use
Category
License
Group A
(feet)
License
Group B
(feet)
License
Group C
(feet)
Other
establishment
regularly
hosting youth
under age 18
500 500 250
Churches
(places of
worship)
500 500 250
Libraries 500 500 250
Drug
rehabilitation/
detoxification
facility
1,000 1,000 1,000
Boarding and/
or lodging
house
1,000 1,000 1,000
Prison or
detention
facility
1,000 1,000 1,000
1 Please refer to § 275-72D(4)(d)[2].
In accordance with 935 CMR 500.110(3): Security
Requirements for Marijuana Establishments, Buffer Zone, no
adult use marijuana establishment categorized under License
Group A shall be located within 500 feet of the following
preexisting structures or uses: any school attended by children
under the age of 18, licensed childcare facility, municipally
owned and operated park or recreational facilities (not
including bikeways, pedestrian paths, or other facilities
primarily used for nonvehicular modes of travel), churches or
places of worship, libraries, playground or play field, youth
center, or other establishment at which youth under the age of
18 usually congregate.
(a)
In accordance with 935 CMR 500.110(3): Security
Requirements for Marijuana Establishments, Buffer Zone, no
adult use marijuana establishment categorized under License
Group B shall be located within 500 feet of the following
preexisting structures or uses: any school attended by children
under the age of 18, licensed childcare facility, municipally
owned and operated park or recreational facilities (not
including bikeways, pedestrian paths, or other facilities
(b)
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:799
primarily used for nonvehicular modes of travel), churches or
places of worship, libraries, playground or play field, youth
center, or other establishment at which youth under the age of
18 usually congregate.
In accordance with 935 CMR 500.110(3): Security
Requirements for Marijuana Establishments, Buffer Zone, no
adult use marijuana establishment categorized under License
Group C shall be located within 250 feet of the following
preexisting structures or uses: any school attended by children
under the age of 18, licensed childcare facility, municipally
owned and operated park or recreational facilities (not
including bikeways, pedestrian paths, or other facilities
primarily used for nonvehicular modes of travel), churches or
places of worship, libraries, playground or play field, youth
center, or other establishment at which youth under the age of
18 usually congregate.
(c)
Other land use buffers.
No adult use marijuana establishment shall locate within
1,000 feet of any drug rehabilitation or detoxification
facility, boarding and/or lodging house, or prison or
detention facility.
[1]
No adult use marijuana establishment shall locate within
50 feet of any municipally owned and operated park or
recreational facilities classified as a bikeway, pedestrian
path, other facility primarily used for nonvehicular modes
of travel, or boat ramp/slip or water access facility. There
shall be no connection traversable by foot, bike, or any
mode of transportation established between any
recreational marijuana facility and any facility classified as
a bikeway, pedestrian path, or other facility primarily used
for nonvehicular modes of travel.
[2]
All adult use marijuana establishments categorized under
License Group A and License Group B shall install a
densely-planted vegetated screen spanning the entire
width of any parcel boundary abutting any residentiallyzoned
or residentially-used parcel and extending inwards
on the establishment's parcel for a depth of not less than
100 feet. Any primary use or accessory use building
related to the operations of an adult use marijuana
establishment shall not be sited within the 100-foot
screened buffer. The vegetated screen must be installed at
a height of at least eight feet at the time of installation.
The dense vegetated screen must be permanently
maintained for the duration of the establishment's
existence on the subject parcel. All adult use marijuana
establishments categorized under License Group C shall
[3]
(d)
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:800
follow screening requirements for the underlying zoning
district. Refer to City of Chicopee Zoning Code, Article II,
Administration and Enforcement, § 275-6, Site plan review,
for regulations designating design and composition of
vegetated screens.
Any and all lands or parcels owned, operated, managed or
otherwise subjected to proprietary control by the United
States Federal Government or its ancillary departments,
including the United States Military, via deed and/or title,
shall be assumed to prohibit any and all establishments
conducting operations involving adult use marijuana and
therefore shall be excluded from locational eligibility
analyses conducted by the City of Chicopee.
[4]
Co-location. An adult use marijuana retailer, social consumption
operator, or microbusiness shall not be located in:
Buildings that contain any medical doctor's offices or offices of
any other professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the
use of medical marijuana.
(a)
(b) Buildings that contain a hotel or motel.
(5)
General requirements and conditions for all marijuana establishments.
All adult use marijuana establishments shall be located within a
permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo
container, motor vehicle or other similar nonpermanent enclosure.
Adult use marijuana establishments shall not have drive-through
service.
(1)
No outside storage of marijuana, related supplies or promotional
materials is permitted.
(2)
All marijuana establishments shall be ventilated in such a manner
that:
No pesticides, insecticides, or other chemicals or products
used in cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside
atmosphere;
(a)
No odor from marijuana processing or consumption can be
detected by a person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal
sense of smell at the exterior of the adult use marijuana
establishment or at any adjoining use or property.
(b)
(3)
In no event shall marijuana retailers, social consumption operators,
or microbusinesses be open and/or operating and dispensing
product between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. and not
opening before 10:00 a.m. on Sundays, which is consistent with
the operational requirements for licensed alcoholic beverage
(4)
E.
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:801
establishments outlined in MGL c. 138, § 12 (Licenses Authorizing
Sale of Beverages to be Drunk on Premises et seq.).
Any social consumption establishment allowing on-site smoking or
burning of marijuana products must operate under the guidelines
required of a membership association, outlined in MGL c. 270,
§ 22(c)(2) (Smoking in public places).
(5)
The special permit granting authority shall approve four special
permits for adult use marijuana establishments (License Group B)
in the City of Chicopee at a single moment in time.
The special permit granting authority reserves the right to
increase the number of special permits allowed in the City of
Chicopee through review of this section.
(a)
(6)
All adult use marijuana establishments shall comply with any and
all structural design requirements per Commonwealth of
Massachusetts 935 CMR 500.
(7)
Special permit requirements.
An adult use marijuana establishment may only be allowed by
special permit granted by the special permit granting authority
in accordance with MGL c. 40A § 9, subject to the following
statements, regulations, requirements, conditions and limitations.
(1)
A special permit for a marijuana establishment shall be limited to
one or more of the following uses that shall be prescribed by the
special permit granting authority:
(a) Marijuana cultivator.
(b) Craft marijuana cooperative.
(c) Marijuana product manufacturer.
(d) Marijuana retailer.
(e) Marijuana research facility.
(f) Independent standards and testing laboratory.
(g) Microbusiness.
(h) Social consumption operator.
(2)
In addition to the application requirements set forth above, a
special permit application for an adult use marijuana establishment
shall include the following:
(a) The name and address of owner(s) of the establishment;
Copies of all required draft or final license and permit
applications planned for submission by the applicant to the
(b)
(3)
F.
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:802
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Cannabis Control
Commission;
Copies of any existing licenses for adult use and/or medical
marijuana facilities within the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts;
(c)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the site of the proposed
property for the establishment, such as a purchase and sale
agreement, deed, owner's authorization, or lease;
(d)
Proposed security measures for the marijuana establishment,
including lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc., to ensure
the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
A letter from the City of Chicopee Police Chief, or designee,
acknowledging review and approval of the marijuana
establishment security plan is required.
(e)
A certified list of all parties in interest entitled to notice of the
hearing for the Special Permit application, taken from the most
recent tax list of the City of Chicopee and certified by the office
of the Assessor; and
(f)
A site plan, fulfilling requirements as outlined in the City of
Chicopee Zoning Ordinances, Article II, Administration and
Enforcement, § 275-6, Site plan review.
Parking for all adult use marijuana establishments shall
be designed in accordance with City of Chicopee Zoning
Ordinances, Article III, Regulations Applicable to All
Districts, § 275-40, Parking and loading.
[1]
(g)
All site plans shall be referred to the Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee (SPRAC) for review by the special permit granting
authority.
Review by the Site Plan Review Advisory Committee
(SPRAC) shall be performed in accordance with City of
Chicopee Zoning Code, Article II. Administration and
Enforcement, § 275-6C, Site Plan Review Advisory
Committee review.
[1]
The SPRAC shall review the site plan and confirm that
all conditions and requirements outlined in the City of
Chicopee Zoning Code, Article II, Administration and
Enforcement, § 275-6C(2)(b), Site plan review: Submission
requirements, are met satisfactorily.
[2]
The SPRAC shall submit comments regarding the site plan
which may be designated as conditions of approval for
incorporation in the final approved application, should the
SPRAC render that no comments submitted by any
[3]
(h)
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:803
reviewing parties necessitate substantial alterations to the
site plan and warrant a resubmission for SPRAC review.
Mandatory findings. The special permit granting authority shall not
issue a special Permit for a marijuana establishment unless it finds
that:
The establishment is designed to minimize any adverse
impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in
Subsection A, Purposes, of this section;
(a)
The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of special
permit granting authority that it will meet all the permitting
requirements of all applicable agencies within the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will comply with all
applicable state laws and regulations. The awarding of the
special permit shall be contingent upon approval of licensure
by the Cannabis Control Commission; and
(b)
The applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and
requirements set forth herein.
(c)
(4)
Annual reporting. Each adult use marijuana establishment
permitted under this section shall, as a condition of its special
permit, file an annual report to and appear before the special
permit granting authority no later than January 31 of each calendar
year, providing a copy of all current applicable state licenses for the
facility and/or its owners. Each adult use marijuana establishment
permitted under this section shall additionally provide all copies
of reports submitted to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and
inclusive of any and all responses to said reports issued by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts per adult use marijuana
regulations.
(5)
A special permit granted under this section shall have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership, lease, or
control of the premises as an adult use marijuana establishment.
A special permit granted under this section shall run with the
applicant only and may be transferred only with the approval of
the special permit granting authority in the form of an amendment
to the special permit along with all information required in this
section.
(6)
The City shall require a bond or deposit of money in order to
guarantee the establishment, upkeep and maintenance of the
facility and grounds, including any planted vegetated screen,
through the duration of the adult use marijuana establishment's
tenure. All bonds and deposits shall run with the applicant and
shall be submitted to the City Solicitor as to form for his/her
approval prior to submission to the City Treasurer for approval as
to sufficiency and custody. Upon termination of the establishment's
tenure in the City, the applicant shall submit a written petition to
(7)
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:804
the Director of Planning and Development for the release of the
bond.
Any violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of a
special permit issued under this section.
(8)
Waiver. The special permit granting authority, when granting a special
permit under this section, may waive setback requirements as outlined
in this chapter, provided the applicant submits its request in writing
and can demonstrate the proposed site will not have an adverse effect
upon the surrounding neighborhood. The special permit granting
authority reserves the authority to require the applicant to produce
necessary documentation to support its position. Further, a waiver of
setback requirements shall require both the affirmative vote of 3/4 of
all of the members of the special permit granting authority and shall
require a separate vote apart from the main vote on the proposed
special permit.
G.
Licensing for current medical marijuana operations. A medical
marijuana facility licensed by the City of Chicopee shall be required to
secure a special permit from the special permit granting authority but
shall be exempt from the request for proposal requirement contained in
this chapter. Further, the special permit granting authority may allow a
medical marijuana facility licensed by the City of Chicopee to submit a
written opinion from the Director of Planning for the City of Chicopee
opining that said facility meets or exceeds the requirements of this
chapter when its application under this chapter.
H.
Request for proposals process.
The City of Chicopee shall only entertain approval of proposed
adult use marijuana licensees during a period of time in which
license applications are submitted during an open and public
request for proposals (RFP) process. This request for proposals
process will be managed at the sole discretion of the City of
Chicopee.
The response to the request for proposals process shall be an
application package which shall include, but not be limited to,
the following required materials:
Complete business model, including confirmed sources of
financing and projections of revenue and expenses
spanning at least five years.
[1]
[2] Site plan.
[3] Draft/proposed host community agreement.
(a)
An approved application package submitted in response to the
request for proposals shall result in the endorsement of the
(b)
(1)
I.
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:805
applicant for the submission of a special permit application to
the special permit granting authority.
Abandonment or discontinuance of use.
A special permit granted under this section shall lapse if not
exercised within one year of issuance. Exercising of the special
permit shall be defined as the approval of a Building Permit issued
by the City of Chicopee Building Commissioner.
(1)
An adult use marijuana facility shall be required to remove all
material, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia.
Prior to surrendering its Commonwealth of Massachusettsissued
licenses and/or permits; and
(a)
(b) Within six months of ceasing operations.
(2)
J.
§ 275-72 CHICOPEE CODE § 275-72
1:806
Chapter 276
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 122.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 243.
Zoning — See Ch. 275.
§ 275-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-72
1:807

ARTICLE I
Findings; Scope and Definitions
§ 276-1. Declaration of findings.
The City hereby declares as a legislative finding that the rights-of-way
within the City limits:
§ 276-2. Title.
This ordinance may be referred to and cited as the "telecommunications
rights-of-way Ordinance" of the City of Chicopee, Massachusetts, or herein
as "this ordinance".
§ 276-3. Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to telecommunications providers only, and shall
have no application to the Chicopee Municipal Lighting Plant; nor shall
it apply to other entities owning controlling facilities within the rights-ofway,
including but not limited to electric, gas or water public utilities, or
cable television system service providers, as defined herein, that do not
themselves engage in the provision of telecommunications services. The
requirements of this ordinance shall apply to the full extent of the terms
herein and shall be limited in scope or application only to the extent as
may be required by applicable federal or Massachusetts law, including such
changes in applicable law as may be hereinafter enacted.
§ 276-4. Defined terms.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. Words used in
the present tense include the future tense, words in the singular number
include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the
singular. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is
A. Are a unique and physically limited resource;
Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the
City; and
B.
Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled
consistent with that intent and, among other provisions, the provisions
of MGL c. 166, §§ 21 and 22; and can be partially occupied by the
telecommunications facilities to the enhancement of the health,
welfare, and general economic well-being of the City and its citizens;
and require adoption of the specific additional regulations established
by this ordinance to promote coordination of users, maximize available
space, reduce maintenance and other costs to the City and the public,
and facilitate entry of a maximum number of the providers of
telecommunications in the public interest.
C.
§ 276-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-4
1:809
permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
AFFILIATE — Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by,
or under common control with the provider; provided that affiliate shall in
no event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less
than 15% of such provider, or any creditor of such provider solely by virtue
of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason
of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common
ownership, common management, or common control with, such provider.
AGREEMENT — A telecommunications use agreement as defined herein or
any other agreement or license granted by the City authorizing use of the
rights-of-way for any telecommunications provider.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming services, together with subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video
programming or other programming services, which a licensee may make
available to all subscribers generally.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the City.
CHICOPEE MUNICIPAL LIGHTING PLANT — The Municipal Lighting
Department for the City of Chicopee.
CITY — The City of Chicopee, Massachusetts.
DTE — The Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy.
GRANT OF LOCATION or GOL — Permission from the City granted to a
telecommunications provider which seeks to construct a line in order to
transmit such service upon, along, under or across a public way, including
the wires, poles, piers, abutments or conduits necessary therefor, pursuant
to MGL c. 166, § 22.
INTERNET ACCESS SERVICE — The offering of facilities that provide
direct access to the international computer network of both federal and
nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks to customers for a
fee. For purposes of this ordinance, "internet access service" shall include
the direct access to the Internet or Internet connections, including but
not limited to all high-speed and dedicated subscriber line ("DSL")
communications connections to the Internet or otherwise. Dial-up access to
the Internet is not subject to this ordinance.
OPEN VIDEO SERVICES or OVS — Any video programming services
provided to any person by a provider certified by the FCC to operate
an open video system pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 573, as may be amended,
regardless of the facilities used.
ORDINANCE — This telecommunications rights-of-way ordinance and all
provisions herein established by this ordinance.
§ 276-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-4
1:810
PERSON — Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, or any natural person, but shall not include a governmental
entity, including the Chicopee Municipal Lighting Plant.
PROVIDER — A telecommunications provider or any person required to
have a telecommunications use agreement.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A gas or electric company providing regulated services
pursuant to MGL c. 164, or a telephone company providing regulated
services pursuant to MGL c. 166. Such term does not include Chicopee
Municipal Lighting Plant's plant and facilities.
RESELLER SERVICE PROVIDER — A telecommunications provider
providing service within the City that does not have ownership, possessory
interest, or control of facilities in the rights-of-way, but instead uses the
rights-of-way by interconnecting with and/or using the network elements of
a provider utilizing the rights-of-way, or by leasing capacity from a facilitybased
telecommunications provider.
RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface and space on, above and below every
municipal street, alley, road, highway, lane or City right-of-way dedicated
or commonly used now or hereafter for public uses and facilities thereon,
including, but not limited to, overhead lighting facilities. This term shall not
include any county, state, or federal rights-of-way except where controlled
or maintained by the City, or as other provided by applicable laws or
pursuant to an agreement between the City and any such person or agency.
"Rights-of-way" shall not include public property owned or leased by the
City that is not intended for right-of-way use, including, but not limited to,
municipal building property, parks, public works facilities, or any facilities
and/or poles of the Chicopee Municipal Lighting Plant.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission of intelligence within the
Commonwealth by electricity, by means of telephone lines or telegraph lines
or any other method or system of communication, including the operation of
all conveniences, appliances, instrumentalities, or equipment appertaining
thereto, or utilized in connection therewith.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACT — The Telecommunications Act of 1996,
codified at Title 47 of the United States Code.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The cables, wires,
lines, poles, piers, abutments, conduits, towers, wave guides, optic fiber,
antennas, and any associated converters, equipment, or other facilities
designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying or distributing telecommunications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — A person granted a
telecommunications use agreement and that person's agents, employees,
lawful successors, transferees, or assignees, or any other person who
constructs, operates or maintains telecommunications facilities or provides
telecommunications services by use of facilities in the rights-of-way, other
than reseller service providers. Such term shall also include providers of
internet access service, private carriage telecommunications services and
dark fiber to the extent such offerings are not covered under a separate City
§ 276-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-4
1:811
grant of authorization. Such term shall not include the Chicopee Municipal
Lighting Plant; nor shall it include other public utilities, that own poles,
conduit and other facilities that are utilized by telecommunications
providers but do not themselves provide telecommunications on a
commercial basis.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The offering of telecommunications
for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS USE AGREEMENT — An agreement providing a
general authorization for use of the rights-of-way by a telecommunications
provider, subject to any applicable GOL and permitting, as authorized
herein and executed by the City and said telecommunications provider.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS USE AGREEMENT RENTAL FEE — The fee
required by the City for a telecommunications provider for its use of the
rights-of-way pursuant to a telecommunications use agreement under
Article II of this ordinance.
§ 276-4 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-4
1:812
ARTICLE II
Telecommunications Use Agreement Requirements
§ 276-5. Unlawful to operate without agreement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain
telecommunications facilities or to operate as a telecommunications
provider by use of facilities in the rights-of-way in the City without an
existing, valid telecommunications use agreement with the City and a GOL
pursuant to MGL c. 166, §§ 21 and 22, unless otherwise specifically
authorized under applicable federal or state law, or otherwise provided
by ordinance. A reseller service provider shall not be required to obtain
a use agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable
telecommunications use agreement, a telecommunications provider is
authorized to provide the full range of telecommunications and related
services (but not including cable service or OVS) contemplated under this
ordinance. The above provision notwithstanding, the Chicopee Municipal
Lighting Plant shall not be required to obtain a telecommunications use
agreement; nor shall public utilities owning and operating facilities within
the rights-of-way that are utilized by third-party telecommunications
providers but do not themselves provide telecommunications services be
required to obtain a use agreement.
§ 276-6. Agreements nonexclusive.
The authority granted by the City in any use agreement shall be for
nonexclusive use of the rights-of-way. The City specifically reserves the right
to grant, at any time, such additional use agreements or franchises or other
rights to use the rights-of-way for any purpose and to any other person,
including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to all applicable laws.
§ 276-7. Nature of rights granted by any agreement.
Use agreements shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the rights-ofway,
and shall give only the right to occupy rights-of-way, including a GOL
as appropriate, for the purposes and for the period stated in this ordinance
and the individual use agreement. No agreement shall grant the right to use
facilities or poles owned or controlled by the Chicopee Municipal Lighting
Plant or a third-party, without the consent of such owners, nor shall a use
agreement excuse a provider from obtaining appropriate conduit access or
pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the facilities
or poles owned or controlled by the Chicopee Municipal Lighting Plant or
public utilities pursuant to MGL c. 166, § 25A. All use agreements shall be
deemed to incorporate and be limited by the provisions of this ordinance
and shall create rights for the sole and exclusive use of the provider.
§ 276-8. Application and application fee required.
Consistent with applicable requirements of MGL c. 166, §§ 21 and 22,
any person seeking to use the rights-of-way as a telecommunications
A.
§ 276-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-8
1:813
provider, or seeking renewal of an existing use agreement to provide
telecommunications or related services, shall submit a completed
application on such form as approved by the City. All such applications
shall include the following information, which shall be filed with the
City Clerk's office and/or such other City departments as specified in
the application:
(1) Legal name of the applicant;
(2) Address of the applicant;
(3) Name and telephone number of contact person for the applicant;
The name, address, telephone number of a contact person, and
a description of the relationship with the applicant (including
ownership interests), of all individuals, corporations, partners or
other entities that own, are owned by, or are otherwise affiliated
with the applicant.
(4)
The name, address, title, and telephone number of all directors,
officers, managing employees, and holders of at least 5% of the
ownership interests in the applicant.
(5)
Description of type of service to be provided and, if appropriate,
evidence of certification by the Department of telecommunications
and Energy;
(6)
Evidence that the applicant has obtained or is seeking all other
relevant federal, state and local governmental approvals;
(7)
If an the applicant is seeking a GOL simultaneously with the use
agreement the applicant shall so indicate on the application along
with the following:
(a) A list of abutter's names and addresses;
A list of all posts, poles or other supports of wires included in
the proposed GOL; and
(b)
The location of proposed conduits and manholes in relation to
the existing underground facilities.
(c)
(8)
A detailed description of the types of aerial and underground
facilities that the applicant intends to install;
(9)
The applicant shall provide a detailed route maps or plans showing
the location of facilities to be installed within the rights-of-way,
prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth;
(10)
(11)A preliminary construction schedule and completion date;
§ 276-8 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-8
1:814
§ 276-9. Standards and procedures for approval or renewal of use
agreements.
Use agreements shall be granted pursuant to all applicable procedures and
requirements as set forth in the Massachusetts General Laws, including
those related to a GOL, as currently in existence or as may be enacted in
the future.
The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or
permanently remove or relocate;
(12)
Information as to what, if any, conduit capacity is available for the
placement of additional underground telecommunications facilities
by other telecommunications providers;
(13)
A statement of whether or not the applicant intends to seek conduit
or pole attachments from the Chicopee Municipal Lighting Plant.
(14)
Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in such amount as may be hereinafter established by the City, to
reimburse the City's reasonable costs in the review and administration
of any application filed under this ordinance.
B.
The telecommunications provider shall certify the information it
provides as complete true and correct. Within 30 days of any
occurrence that results in a material change to the information
provided in such completed application during the term of any use
agreement, the telecommunications provider shall furnish to the City
a certified amendment reflecting such change together with a cover
letter identifying and explaining the change. In such instance, the City
shall retain the right to reopen and reconsider its earlier approval of
the application.
C.
Upon receipt of a completed and signed application, the City Clerk
will forward said application to the Highway Superintendent, Planning
Board and Inspector of Wires for review. The Highway Superintendent,
Planning Board and Inspector of Wires shall promptly review the
application and make written recommendations concerning approval
to the City Council and, if appropriate, shall include recommendations
concerning permit conditions and supplemental instructions.
[Amended 9-1-2009]
A.
If the application includes a petition for a GOL, the City Council shall
promptly schedule, and provide notice for, a public hearing pursuant to
the requirements of MGL c. 166, §§ 21 and 22. [Amended 9-1-2009]
B.
In the event that a telecommunications provider has successfully
negotiated a pole attachment agreement with a pole owner, then to the
extent applicable the procedures under MGL c. 166, § 22, regarding
a joint petition for an increase in the number of wires and cables,
alteration of location, or change in height shall be followed.
C.
§ 276-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-9
1:815
The City Council shall review the application, any evidence presented
at a GOL public hearing if a GOL is requested at the time of the
application, as well as the recommendations received from the Highway
Superintendent, Planning Board and Inspector of Wires and make a
determination on the Application, taking into account the
recommendations received, testimony and evidence presented, if any.
The Council shall consider at least all of the following: [Amended
9-1-2009]
The likelihood that the new facilities will incommode the public use
of the public rights-of-way or endanger or interrupt navigation, as
provided in MGL c. 166, § 21.
(1)
The capacity of the rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed
new facilities.
(2)
The effect on the public health, safety and welfare if the application
is granted.
(3)
Prior conduct of the applicant in performance of its obligations or
compliance with the City's ordinances in the past, or the existence
of any outstanding violations or deficiencies.
(4)
D.
If the application is considered favorably, a use agreement and any
associated GOL shall be issued, granting such telecommunications
provider the right and privilege to construct, operate, and maintain
facilities in, over, through and along the City's rights-of-way for the
purposes of supplying telecommunications and related services on a
nonexclusive basis within the City, subject, however, to the standards,
terms and conditions set forth within this ordinance, and any special
conditions as may be provided for in the individual use agreement.
All providers shall be required to obtain and maintain any necessary
and lawful permit, license certification, grant, registration or any other
authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity,
including, but not limited to, the City, the FCC or the DTE. The City
shall not unreasonably discriminate between similarly situated
telecommunications providers in the administration of this ordinance.
E.
Upon review of the application, evidence presented at any requested
GOL hearing, and the recommendations of the Highway
Superintendent, Planning Board and Inspector of Wires, the City may
deny an application based upon a finding that:
The new facilities will incommode the public use of the public
rights-of-way or endanger or interrupt navigation; and/or
(1)
There is insufficient capacity in the City's rights-of-way to
accommodate the proposed new facilities; and/or
(2)
The facilities will adversely affect the public health, safety and
welfare if the application is granted; and/or
(3)
F.
§ 276-9 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-9
1:816
§ 276-10. Cable service and open video systems (OVS); separate
agreement required.
A telecommunications use agreement shall not provide a
telecommunications provider the right to provide cable service as a cable
television system operator [as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 522 (5)] within the
City. All persons wishing to operate a Cable Television System in the City
must follow the procedures in MGL c. 166A, 207 CMR 3.00, and applicable
provisions of federal law(s). A telecommunications use agreement shall
also not permit a telecommunications provider to operate an open video
system. Persons wishing to provide open video services in the City must
reach a written agreement with the City prior to offering any such services.
Absent such an agreement from the City, a provider shall be prohibited
from offering OVS services, and the offering of any such services shall be
considered a material breach of the applicable use agreement.
§ 276-11. Use of rights-of-way; police powers; provider's use
subordinate.
The provider shall construct and maintain provider's facilities in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including all permit
requirements, and fee payments, and all other City ordinances and
ordinances in effect as of the date of this ordinance or hereinafter adopted
to the extent not in contravention of state or federal law, or vested rights
in any existing agreement, franchise or license. The grant of an agreement
does not in any way impact the continuing authority of the City through
the proper exercise of its Charter or statutory powers to adopt and enforce
ordinances necessary to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The City makes no express or implied representation or warranty
regarding its rights to authorize the installation or construction of facilities
on any particular segment of rights-of-way. The burden and responsibility
for making all such determinations in advance of construction or installation
shall be entirely upon the provider. In such instances, the City shall make
available upon request, to the extent permitted by law, such information
as it may have regarding the rights-of-way to assist the provider in this
determination. The use of the rights-of-way authorized by any agreement
shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's use and rights therein.
Nothing herein shall be construed to allow the City to take ownership of
provider's facilities in violation of any right to due process or compensation
as may exist in federal or state law.
§ 276-12. Term.
The term of a telecommunications use agreement shall be set out in the
individual agreement but in no event shall be for a term of more than seven
years from its effective date.
The applicant has engaged in substantial prior acts of
noncompliance with, or has unresolved substantial violations of,
the City's right-of-way ordinances.
(4)
§ 276-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-13
1:817
§ 276-13. Telecommunications use agreement rental fees.
Every telecommunications provider shall as compensation for the use of
the rights-of-way make an annual telecommunications use agreement rental
payment to the City as follows:
§ 276-14. Timing of payment of telecommunications use agreement
fees.
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, all telecommunications agreement
fees shall be due and payable on an annual basis within 45 calendar days
of the close of the calendar year for which the payment applies (the "due
date").
§ 276-15. Interest on late payments and under payments.
If any telecommunications use agreement fee, or any portion thereof, is not
postmarked or delivered on or before the due date, interest thereon shall
accrue from the due date until received, at the rate of 3% per month, unless
such other maximum rate is established by law.
§ 276-16. No accord and satisfaction.
For a period of three years after receipt of a payment, no acceptance
by the City of any telecommunications use agreement rental fee shall be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount;
nor shall acceptance of any telecommunications use agreement fee payment
be construed as a release of any claim of the City.
§ 276-17. Payment of taxes.
The telecommunications use agreement rental fees required herein shall
be in addition to, not in lieu of, all taxes, charges, assessments, licenses,
permits, fees and impositions otherwise applicable that are or may be
imposed by the City. The telecommunications use agreement fee is a rental
payment for use of the rights-of-way. Each telecommunications provider
shall be fully responsible for the payment of all applicable taxes.
§ 276-18. Sale, lease or transfer of facilities.
Except as otherwise may be provided by law or applicable use agreement,
a telecommunications provider shall not lease, sell, or otherwise transfer
ownership, possession or control of its facilities, or any portion thereof, to
any nonaffiliated person without the prior written consent of the City, which
shall not be denied unreasonably. This subsection shall not be construed
to apply to a nonaffiliated person that merely resells the services of a
Fee for aerial occupancy: fees to be established before right-of-way is
approved.
A.
Fee for underground occupancy: fees to be established before right-ofway
is approved.
B.
§ 276-13 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-18
1:818
telecommunications provider without obtaining an ownership or possessory
interest in the facilities, nor shall it apply to the lease of dark fibers from
within a fiber sheath controlled and maintained by the provider regardless
of how such contracts are named or titled, provided no ownership or
property interests of the facilities are transferred.
§ 276-19. Assignment of use agreement or GOL.
A telecommunications provider shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet
or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or voluntary sale, or by
ordinary sale, consolidation, or otherwise, a use agreement or associated
GOL, or any of the rights or privileges granted by such use agreement or
GOL, other than to an affiliate, without obtaining the City's prior written
authorization, which shall not be unreasonably denied. Further, a provider
shall not change its name under which it does business with the public
without providing reasonable prior notice to the City.
§ 276-20. Forfeiture of agreement and privilege. [Amended
9-1-2009]
In case of failure on the part of the telecommunications provider, its
successors and assigns, to comply with any of the material provisions of
this ordinance, individual use agreement and associated GOL, or if the
provider, its successors and assigns, should do or cause to be done any act
or thing prohibited by or in violation of this ordinance or the terms of a use
agreement and GOL, the provider, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit
all rights and privileges permitted by this ordinance and any use agreement
and associated GOL, and all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate and
become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not take effect until
the City shall carry out the following proceedings: Before the City declares
the forfeiture or revocation of a use agreement and associated GOL, it shall
first serve a written notice upon the company, by certified mail, setting
forth in detail the neglect or failure complained of, and the company shall
have 30 days thereafter, or such other longer reasonable period established
by the City Council, in which to cure the default by complying with the
conditions of the use agreement and GOL and fully remedying any default
or violation. If, at the end of such thirty-day period, the City determines that
the conditions have not been complied with, the City Council shall conduct
a public hearing affording provider due process. If after a hearing the City
Council determines that the provider is in violation of the use agreement
or associated GOL, the City Council shall take action by an affirmative vote
of the City Council present at the meeting and voting to terminate said
use agreement and/or GOL and setting out the grounds upon which said
use agreement and GOL is to be forfeited or revoked in a written notice to
provider, by certified mail, together with written findings of fact. Nothing
herein shall prevent the City from invoking any other remedy as may be
set forth in this ordinance or as may otherwise exist at law; nor shall this
§ 276-20 preclude provider from seeking any right it may have to judicial
review of a final decision under this section.
§ 276-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-21
1:819
§ 276-21. Abandonment.
If provider fails to use all or any substantial portion of its facilities n the
rights-of-way for any continuous period of twelve months, such facilities
shall be deemed abandoned, and the City shall have the right, upon 30 days'
notice, by certified mail, to terminate provider's use agreement or GOL for
such facilities. In the event of abandonment, provider shall, within 30 days
of receiving a request from the City, remove its facilities from the rights-ofway.
In lieu of requiring provider to remove its facilities upon abandonment,
the City shall have the right to obtain full ownership, use and control of such
facilities at no cost to the City.
§ 276-21 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-21
1:820
ARTICLE III
Rights-of-Way Management and Facilities Requirements
§ 276-22. Rights-of-way ordinance.
A provider shall be subject to and comply with the additional or
supplementary terms and conditions of any generally applicable rights-ofway
ordinances that the City may currently have in place or adopt in the
future pursuant to its police powers.
§ 276-23. Designated agent.
Each provider shall designate a local person familiar with the facilities
who will act as a local agent for the provider and will be responsible
for satisfying information requirements of this ordinance as well as the
individual use agreement and any associated GOL. The provider shall
present to the City the agent's name, address, telephone number, fax
number and e-mail address. The agent shall be the person to whom
relocation notices and other such notices shall be sent, and with whom
rests the responsibility to facilitate all necessary communications between
the City and the provider. The provider shall be responsible for all costs
incurred by the City due to the failure to provide such information to the
City.
§ 276-24. Facilities requirements; planned infrastructure.
Prior to constructing any new or additional conduit within the rights-ofway,
provider shall make a good-faith effort to ascertain whether existing
or planned conduit exists that the provider could reasonably utilize to meet
its needs and/or whether a pole attachment to an existing utility pole could
be obtained pursuant to MGL c. 166, § 25A. Upon a determination that
no such conduit or pole space is available, provider shall notify the City
of such fact in writing. Provider shall then provide written notification of
the proposed construction activity to all existing utilities, providers, and
other known service providers, who shall have 30 days from the receipt of
such notification to indicate in writing to the City and the provider as to
whether they desire to jointly undertake the construction of such conduit or
otherwise engage in co-location. Existing utilities and telecommunications
providers, shall have 45 days to respond to a request for joint construction
and/or co-location.
§ 276-25. Coordination and joint planning activities.
Each provider shall participate in any joint planning, construction and
advance notification of rights-of-way work, including coordination and
consolidation of street cut work as directed by the City's designated
representatives. In addition, providers shall cooperate with other providers
and the City for the best, most efficient, most aesthetic and least obtrusive
use of the rights-of-way, consistent with safety, the public interest and
to minimize traffic and other disruptions, including street cuts. The City
§ 276-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-25
1:821
shall monitor the providers' compliance with such coordination and take
steps as necessary pursuant to its general police power authority. providers
shall provide such reports and other documentation related to such joint
planning activities to the City as reasonably requested by the City.
§ 276-26. Reporting obligations.
It is in the public interest as well as that of all telecommunications providers
to attempt to coordinate construction within the rights-of-way whenever it
is reasonably possible. Periodic reporting by telecommunications providers
of anticipated construction plans will facilitate this objective and shall
therefore be submitted to the City as required herein.
§ 276-27. Mapping requirement of providers
Every provider shall, at the time of its initial application and no later
than June 1 of each succeeding year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan with the City's Clerk's office.
A.
The City shall make available at the date of application, and on June 1
of every year, the City's current construction and major maintenance
plan.
B.
All such plans shall include the location and estimated commencement
and termination dates of construction/maintenance work to be
undertaken in the coming two years.
C.
By July 1 of each year the City will have available for public inspection a
composite list of all construction/major maintenance projects of which
the City has been informed. All providers are responsible for keeping
themselves informed as to the current status of the list.
D.
Thereafter, by August 1 of each year, a provider may amend any project
in its list and provide the City with notification of such changes.
providers who coordinate their construction activities and undertake
joint activities pursuant to the plan shall be eligible for a credit on their
fee payments as set out in § 276-13 above.
E.
The provider shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built
drawings depicting accurate location of all its facilities constructed,
reconstructed or relocated in the rights-of-way.
A.
Within 10 days of a request by the City, the provider will provide to
the City information concerning the location of such facilities as may be
reasonably requested.
B.
When available to the provider, upon request of the City, such
information will be submitted in an electronic format specified by the
City; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to
require the provider to acquire or modify any existing electronic
mapping system.
C.
§ 276-25 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-27
1:822
§ 276-28. Facilities placement and construction guidelines.
§ 276-29. Street restoration standards.
D. Underground facilities shall be differentiated from overhead facilities.
Such mapping and identification shall be at the sole cost and expense
of the provider.
E.
The provider shall coordinate the placement of facilities in a manner
that minimizes adverse impact on any public improvement, as
reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not regulated
under the GOL, the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance
from such public improvements so as not to adversely impact such
public improvement.
A.
All facilities shall be located and laid so as not to disrupt or interfere
with any electric lines, communications cables, pipes, drains, sewers,
irrigation systems, or other structures or public or private facilities or
public improvements already installed. In addition, the provider shall,
in performing work in connection with its facilities, avoid, so far as
may be practicable, disrupting or interfering with the lawful use of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public lands of the City by any person.
B.
Providers shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in the rights-of-way work area without first obtaining the written
consent of the City and any designated Tree Warden. In the event a
tree is either accidentally destroyed by the provider or its contractor,
or is authorized to be removed by the City, the provider shall remove
the tree, stump and debris from the work area and, where requested
by the City, replace the tree with an identical species with a minimum
caliper of two inches in the same location, provided that all such work
is coordinated with the Tree Warden.
C.
Providers who own, control or maintain aerial facilities are responsible
for trimming trees or other vegetation growing in the rights-of-way to
prevent their branches or leaves from touching or otherwise interfering
with the aerial facilities. All such trimming or pruning shall be at the
sole expense of the provider and performed under the supervision of
the City or its designated Tree Warden.
D.
The City hereby adopts and incorporates herein the street restoration
standards and procedures that the Department of Telecommunications
and Energy adopted on August 26, 1999, in D.T.E. 98-22, and changes
therein that the Department may adopt from time to time.
A.
The City shall have the authority to inspect work in progress, and
provider shall correct any deficiencies identified during said
inspections. In addition, provider shall meet the following
requirements:
B.
§ 276-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-29
1:823
§ 276-30. Removal and relocation of facilities.
The work shall be performed in accordance with plans on file with
the City.
(1)
Provider shall notify the City two days prior to the start of work.
No work shall be authorized or proceed (except emergency repair
work) without said notification.
(2)
Provider shall notify Dig Safe, in accordance with MGL c. 82, § 40,
at least 72 hours prior to the start of work for the purpose of
identifying the location of underground utilities.
(3)
Provider shall be responsible to contact the City regarding the field
location of any underground traffic control devices on its project.
(4)
A copy of the provider's work authorization must be on the job
site at all times for inspection (except for emergency repair work).
Failure to have the authorization available could result in
suspension of the rights granted by the City.
(5)
Work, day, and time constraints shall be conditions of the work
authorization.
(6)
If it becomes necessary to open the roadway surface in a larger
area than specified in the work authorization, provider shall apply
for an additional authorization to cover the project.
(7)
Provider shall notify the City within 14 days after completion of the
physical work.
(8)
The provider shall promptly remove, relocate or adjust any facilities
located in the rights-of-way as directed by the City for a public
improvement or when reasonably required by the City by reason of
public safety. Such removal, relocation, or adjustment shall be
performed by the provider at the provider's sole cost and expense
without cost or expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized
contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules, regulations and
schedules of the City pertaining to such. The provider shall proceed
with relocations with due diligence upon notice by the City to begin
relocation. The provider shall respond with any conflicts and a
proposed construction schedule within 30 days of receipt of any such
notice from the City.
A.
Following notice by the City in the form of the delivery of final design
plans for such public improvements, the provider shall remove and
relocate its facilities in accordance with the mutually agreed-upon
schedule, provided the project is not delayed by adverse weather
conditions or other factors beyond the control of the provider. The
provider shall certify to the City, in writing, that its facilities have been
relocated or adjusted to clear construction in accordance with project
plans provided by the City.
B.
§ 276-29 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-30
1:824
§ 276-31. Liability insurance; performance and maintenance bond
requirements.
Any damages suffered by the City, its agents or its contractors to
the extent caused by providers' failure to timely relocate or adjust its
facilities, or failure to properly relocate or adjust such facilities, shall
be borne by the provider at its sole cost and expense.
C.
It is the intent of this section for both the City and the provider to
cooperate with one another so that the need for facility relocation is
minimized.
D.
Every provider shall file with the City evidence of liability insurance
with an insurance company licensed to do business in Massachusetts.
The amount will be not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and
$2,000,000 in aggregate. The insurance will protect the City from
and against all claims by any person whatsoever for loss or damage
from personal injury, bodily injury, death, or property damage to the
extent caused or alleged to have been caused by the negligent acts or
omissions of the provider. If the provider is self-insured, it shall provide
the City proof of compliance regarding its ability to self-insure and
proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above amounts.
A.
Every provider shall at all times during the term of the use agreement,
and for two years thereafter, maintain a performance and maintenance
bond in a form approved by the City Attorney. The amount of the bond
will be based upon the reasonable estimated value of the restoration.
An annual bond in an amount of____($___) automatically renewed yearly
during this period shall satisfy the requirement of this section. Within
30 days of the City drawing down upon such bond, the provider shall
replenish the bond to its original face amount. The City shall be
provided a certificate on an annual basis confirming the bond. In the
event the City shall exercise its right to revoke a use agreement or
associated GOL, then the City shall be entitled to recover under the
terms of said bond the full amount of any loss occasioned.
B.
A copy of the liability insurance certificate and performance and
maintenance bond must be on file with the City Clerk.
C.
No performance and maintenance bond or liability insurance will be
required of any governmental entity.
D.
During the term of any agreement, all such insurance and bonds
required by the above provisions shall be maintained at the provider's
sole expense.
E.
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall limit the provider's liability
to the City to the limits of insurance certified or carried. Each provider
also shall be required to indemnify the City in a manner as set forth in
§ 275-36 below.
F.
§ 276-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-31
1:825

ARTICLE IV
Administration; Enforcement; Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 276-32. Administration of agreement.
The City shall be responsible on a nondiscriminatory and competitively
neutral basis for the continued administration of this ordinance and any
use agreements and/or associated GOL's granted hereunder. The City may
delegate this authority from time to time in any manner consistent with
applicable law; provided, however, that the City shall not delegate
enforcement authority.
§ 276-33. Preservation of police power authority.
Any rights granted pursuant to this ordinance and pursuant to any use
agreement authorized hereunder are subject to the authority of the City to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of
the public. Providers shall be subject to and comply with all applicable laws
enacted by the City pursuant to its Charter, to the extent not in conflict with
Massachusetts or federal law. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
waive a right, if any, that any party may have to seek judicial or regulatory
review as to any provisions of the ordinance or as to actions of the parties
under applicable federal, state, or local law currently in effect or as may
hereinafter be amended.
§ 276-34. Incorporation and nonwaiver.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed incorporated in each use
agreement granted subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance. Nothing
in this ordinance or amendments thereto shall be interpreted to unilaterally
deprive any person of any rights or obligations imposed by any binding
and existing valid franchise, use agreement, contract, GOL or other
authorization during the term thereof, whether entered into before or after
enactment of this ordinance, and shall impose obligations on any such
person additional to those included in such franchise, use agreement
contract or other authorization only to the extent permitted by law and to
the extent not inconsistent with such franchise, use agreement, contract or
authorization; provided that the failure of the City to enforce any provision
herein or the failure of any person to comply with any provision herein shall
not be a waiver of the City's right to enforce such provisions, nor shall it in
any way constitute evidence or agreement by the City that such person has
a valid existing franchise, use agreement contract or other authorization.
§ 276-35. Public inspection of records.
Certain information required to be filed with the City pursuant to this
ordinance may be subject to inspection and copying by the public pursuant
to the provisions of the Massachusetts General Statutes related to access to
open records. Notwithstanding any ordinance or provision to the contrary,
the City must disclose any proposed facilities locations of providers
§ 276-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-35
1:827
pursuant to the grant of location process codified at MGL c. 166, §§ 21 and
22.
§ 276-36. Indemnification.
As a condition of use of the rights-of-way, providers, at their sole cost and
expense, shall indemnify, protect, defend (with legal counsel representing
the City that is acceptable to the City, such approval not to be unreasonably
withheld) and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, officers,
employees, and agents, from and against any and all claims, demands,
losses, damages, liabilities, fines, charges, penalties, administrative and
judicial proceedings and orders, judgments, remedial actions of any kind,
and all costs and expenses of any kind, including, without limitation,
reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense arising, directly or
indirectly, in whole or in part, out of the fact that the City approved a use
agreement with provider, the rights granted to provider, or the activities
performed, or failed to be performed, by provider under the use agreement
or use of the rights-of-way, or otherwise, except to the extent arising from
or caused by the sole or gross negligence or willful misconduct of the
City, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents or contractors. This
indemnification shall survive the expiration or termination of any use
agreement or use of the rights-of-way for a period of two years after
the effective date of expiration or termination or satisfactory removal of
all facilities from the rights-of-way as reasonably determined by the City,
including the restoration of property to its condition immediately prior to
the removal activity.
§ 276-37. No cause of damages action against City.
Providers shall have no cause of action whatsoever against the City for
damages of any kind arising from any of the provisions or requirements
of an agreement granted pursuant to this ordinance, or because of the
enforcement thereof by said City.
§ 276-38. Compliance with laws.
In performing activities and exercising its rights and obligations under
any use agreement, providers shall comply with all applicable federal,
state and local laws, ordinances, regulations and policies, including, but
not limited to, all laws, ordinances, regulations and policies relating to
construction and use of public property. This ordinance incorporates and
does not supplant the existing procedures, including public hearings and
notice to abutters for grants of new locations for wires, poles, conduits and
similar facilities pursuant to MGL c. 166, §§ 21 and 22.
§ 276-39. Enforcement.
The City shall be entitled to enforce this ordinance and any agreement
through all remedies lawfully available.
§ 276-35 CHICOPEE CODE § 276-40
1:828
§ 276-40. Relationship of parties.
Under no circumstances shall any use agreement authorized by this
ordinance be construed to create any relationship of agency, partnership,
joint venture, or employment between the parties.
§ 276-41. Appeals.
Unless otherwise provided herein or by MGL c. 249, § 4, a provider may
appeal any decision of the City pursuant to this ordinance or applicable
use agreement to the governing body of the City within 15 calendar days
of such decision where, upon written request of the provider specifying
this provision and including the details of the alleged claim, an evidentiary
hearing shall be held on such appeal.
§ 276-42. Nonenforcement by City.
A provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the
provisions of this ordinance or its applicable agreement by reason of any
failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.
§ 276-43. Publication of notices.
All public notices or ordinances required to be published by law shall
be published in the official newspaper of the City. A provider shall be
responsible for all costs of publication that may be required with respect to
its use agreement or any amendments thereto.
§ 276-44. Severability.
If any material section of this ordinance or of any use agreement granted
pursuant to it is held by a governmental authority of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid or unlawful as conflicting with applicable laws now or hereafter
in effect, or is held by a court or competent governmental authority to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such
applicable laws, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and
independent part of the ordinance or use agreement, and, to the extent
possible, such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all
other provisions herein or in the applicable use agreement.
§ 276-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 276-44
1:829
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
04-57 2-17-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-58 2-17-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-59 3-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-60 3-16-2004 Fees NCM
04-61 3-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-62 3-16-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-63 4-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-64 5-4-2004 Salaries NCM
04-65 6-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-66 Vehicles and traffic amendment Withdrawn
04-67 6-15-2004 Sewer Use Code Ch. 230
04-68 5-18-2004 Motorized scooters Repealed by
Ord. No. 05-149
04-69 7-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-70 7-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
04-71 7-7-2004 Department of Emergency
Management
Ch. 9
04-72 7-6-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
04-73 7-6-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
04-74 8-3-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
04-75 8-3-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 250
04-76
through
04-94
9-7-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
04-95
through
04-101
9-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
04-102 11-16-2004 Litter amendment Ch. 169, Art. IV
§ 276-44 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:830
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
04-103 11-16-2004 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
04-104 11-16-2004 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
04-105
through
04-109
12-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
04-110 12-21-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
04-111 12-21-2004 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
05-112
through
05-118
2-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
05-119 2-15-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 206
05-120 4-19-2005 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
05-121
through
05-127
4-19-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
05-128 5-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
05-129 5-17-2005 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
05-130
through
05-136
6-21-2005 Revolving funds NCM
05-137
through
05-148
6-21-2005 Salaries NCM
05-149 6-21-2005 Motor scooters Ch. 190
05-150
through
05-153
6-21-2005 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
05-154 6-21-2005 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
05-155 6-21-2005 Board of Aldermen amendment Ch. 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:831
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-156
through
05-159
6-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
05-160A 6-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
05-160
through
05-161
Void
05-162 9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
05-163
through
05-165
Void
05-166 9-6-2005 Building Commissions
amendment
Ch. 16, Art. XI
05-167
through
05-169
9-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
Ch. 95,
Acts of
2005
9-23-2005 Charter amendment §§ 49 and 52
05-170
through
05-171
10-18-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
05-172
through
05-174
11-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
05-175 11-15-2005 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
05-176
through
05-178
12-20-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-179
through
06-182
2-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:832
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-183 2-21-2006 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
06-184 3-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
06-185 4-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Repealed by
Ord. No. 07-20
06-186 4-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
06-187 Void
06-188 4-18-2006 City Clerk fees Ch. 11, Art. V
06-189
through
06-190
5-16-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-191 5-16-2006 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
06-192
through
06-198
6-6-2006 Revolving funds NCM
06-01
through
06-04
6-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-05 6-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
06-06 8-1-2006 Acceptance of Acts of 2005, Ch.
157 (accidental disability
retirement benefits for
veterans)
NCM
06-07 8-1-2006 Acceptance of Acts of 2005, Ch.
157 (retroactive benefits for
retirees)
NCM
06-08
through
06-09
9-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-10
through
06-11
9-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-11A 10-17-2006 Alcoholic beverages amendment Ch. 109
06-11B
through
06-11F
10-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-11G 10-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
06-11H 10-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
06-11I 10-17-2006 Fire Department inspection fees Ch. 34, Art. III
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:833
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-12
through
06-14
11-21-2006 Salaries NCM
06-15
through
06-16
11-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-17
through
06-19
12-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
06-19A
through
06-19C
12-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
07-20 1-16-2007 Repeal of Ord. No. 06-185 NCM
07-21 1-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
07-23 1-16-2007 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
07-24
through
07-25
1-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-26
through
07-27
2-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-28
through
07-29
2-20-2007 Salaries NCM
07-30 3-20-2007 Fire prevention: permit fees Ch. 160, Art. II
07-31
through
07-35
4-17-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-36 4-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
07-37 4-17-2007 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
07-38
through
07-41
5-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-42
through
07-48
6-5-2007 Revolving funds NCM
07-49 6-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
07-50
through
07-53
6-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:834
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-54 6-19-2007 Public Works Department
amendment
Ch. 80
07-55 6-19-2007 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
07-56
through
07-63
6-19-2007 Salaries NCM
Order 6-19-2007 Law Department amendment Ch. 46
07-64 9-20-2007 Streets and sidewalks: use of
highways amendment
Ch. 243, Art. V
07-65 9-20-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
07-66 9-20-2007 Engineer amendment Ch. 28
07-67
through
07-69
9-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-70
through
07-71
9-20-2007 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
07-72
through
07-78
10-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-79
through
07-82
11-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
07-83 12-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
07-84 12-18-2007 Tag sales/yard sales Ch. 244
08-85
through
08-91
1-22-2008 Salaries NCM
08-92
through
08-95
1-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-96
through
08-98
3-4-2008 Salaries NCM
08-99
through
08-100
3-4-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-01 4-1-2009 Change of medical coverage for
retirees and families
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:835
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-02
through
08-03
4-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-04 4-15-2008 Police Department amendment Ch. 77
08-05 5-20-2008 Storm and sewer rates NCM
08-06 5-20-2008 Municipal Home repealer Ch. 64,
reference only
08-07
through
08-09
5-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-10
through
08-16
6-17-2008 Revolving funds NCM
08-17 6-17-2008 Zoning fees amendment NCM
08-18 6-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
08-19 6-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
08-20
through
08-29
7-1-2008 Salaries NCM
08-30
through
08-33
7-1-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-34 9-2-2008 Salaries NCM
08-35 9-2-2008 Revolving fund NCM
08-36
through
08-37
9-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-38 9-18-2008 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
08-39
through
08-49
9-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-50 10-21-2008 Sewers amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 230; 269
08-51
through
08-60
10-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
08-61 11-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
08-62 11-18-2008 Automatic amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:836
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-63 12-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
Ch. 512,
Acts of
2008
1-14-2009 Charter amendment: amend
name of governing body
Charter
09-64
through
09-70
1-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-71 2-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
09-72 2-17-2009 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 15-52
09-73 2-17-2009 Salaries NCM
09-74 2-17-2009 MIS Director amendment Ch. 8, Art. I
09-75 2-17-2009 Department of Human
Resources amendment
Ch. 22
09-76 2-17-2009 Planning Department
amendment
Ch. 75
09-77 2-17-2009 Public Works Department
amendment
Ch. 80
09-78
through
09-80
3-17-2009 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
09-81
through
09-82
3-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-83 3–17-2009 Building Commissions
amendment; School Building
Commission
Ch. 16, Arts. XI
and XXVI
09-84
through
09-86
4-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-87 5-19-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
09-88
through
09-91
5-19-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-92
through
09-99
6-2-2009 Revolving funds NCM
09-01
through
09-02
6-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:837
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-03 6-16-2009 Public consumption of
marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol
Ch. 110
09-04 6-30-2009 Municipal golf course
amendment
Ch. 172
09-05
through
09-12
7-7-2009 Salaries NCM
09-13 7-7-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-14
through
09-16
9-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-17
through
09-18
9-1-2009 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
09-19 9-1-2009 Unregistered and abandoned
vehicles amendment
Ch. 262
09-20 9-1-2009 Law Department amendment Ch. 46
09-21 9-1-2009 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 122
09-22
through
09-24
11-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-25 10-20-2009 Department of Veterans'
Services amendment
Ch. 97
09-26 10-20-2009 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
09-27 10-20-2009 Noise amendment Ch. 200
09-28 10-20-2009 Curfews amendment Ch. 139
09-29
through
09-36
10-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
09-37 12-15-2009 Building Commissions
amendment
Ch. 16, Art. XI
09-38 12-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
10-01 2-16-2010 Purchasing: Department of
Purchases
Ch. 82, Art. I
10-02 2-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
10-03 2-16-2010 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:838
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-04
through
10-08
2-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
10-09
through
10-10
3-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
10-11 3-16-2010 Maintenance garage
amendment
Ch. 53
10-12 3-16-2010 Collector amendment Ch. 13
10-13 4-20-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
10-14 5-18-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
10-15 5-18-2010 Revolving fund NCM
10-16 5-4-2010 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 15-52
10-17
through
10-26
6-1-2010 Revolving funds NCM
10-27
through
10-30
6-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
10-31 8-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
10-32 8-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
10-33 8-3-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
10-34 9-21-2010 Salaries NCM
10-35 9-21-2010 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
receptacles for used clothing or
furnishings amendment
Ch. 169, Art. V
10-36 9-21-2010 Noise amendment Ch. 200
10-37
through
10-40
9-21-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
10-41 9-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
10-42 10-19-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
10-43
through
10-55
11-16-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
10-56 11-16-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:839
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-01
through
11-04
1-24-2011 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
11-05
through
11-07
1-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
11-08 2-15-2011 Police Department amendment Ch. 77
11-09 3-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
11-10 3-15-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
11-11 4-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
11-12 5-17-2011 Collection and storage of
rubbish and refuse amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 17-2
11-13 5-17-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
11-14 and
11-15
6-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
11-16 and
11-17
6-21-2011 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
11-18
through
11-27
6-21-2011 Revolving funds NCM
11-28 8-2-2011 Municipal fines and appeals Ch. 132, Art. I
11-29 9-20-2011 Salaries NCM
11-30
through
11-34
8-2-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
11-35 9-21-2011 Department of Veterans'
Services amendment
Ch. 97
11-36
through
11-38
9-21-2011 Chicopee Veterans' Memorial
Committee amendments
Ch. 16, Art. X
11-39 9-21-2011 Veterans Convention
Commission repealer
Ch. 16, Art. II,
reference only
11-40
through
11-45
9-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
11-46 9-21-2011 Salaries NCM
11-47 10-18-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:840
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-48
through
11-55
10-18-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
11-56 12-6-2011 Zoning fees amendment NCM
11-57 12-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
12-01 2-21-2012 Salaries NCM
12-02
through
12-05
2-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
12-06 and
12-07
4-17-2012 Licenses amendments Ch. 188
12-08
through
12-13
4-17-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
12-14 5-15-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
12-15 5-15-2012 Municipal fines and appeals
amendment
Ch. 132, Art. II
12-16 5-15-2012 Salaries NCM
12-17
through
12-18
5-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
12-19 6-19-2012 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 122
12-20 6-19-2012 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
12-21
through
12-25
9-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
12-26 10-16-2012 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
12-27
through
12-29
10-16-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
12-30 11-20-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 230
12-31
through
12-36
11-20-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
13-1 1-15-2013 Ambulance service rates
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:841
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-2
through
13-4
1-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
13-5
through
13-6
2-19-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
13-7 2-19-2013 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 122
13-8 3-21-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
13-9 3-21-2013 Graffiti on private property Ch. 238, Art. I
13-10 5-21-2013 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
13-11 5-21-2013 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 15-52
13-12 5-21-2013 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No. 15-52
13-13 6-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
13-14 6-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
13-15 6-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
13-16
through
13-19
9-3-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
13-20 11-19-2013 Automatic amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
13-21 11-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
13-22
through
13-30
11-19-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
14-1
14-2
14-3 4-15-2014 Salaries NCM
14-4 4-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
14-5 5-6-2014 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
littering amendment
Ch. 169, Art. IV
14-6 6-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
14-7
through
14-8
6-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
14-9 7-1-2014 Storm and sewer rates NCM
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:842
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
14-10
through
14-18
8-5-2014 Salaries NCM
14-19 Special Act (Chapter 296, Acts
of 2014)
NCM
14-20 9-16-2014 Salaries NCM
14-21 9-16-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
14-22
through
14-28
9-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
14-29
through
14-30
10-21-2014 Salaries NCM
14-31
through
14-37
10-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
14-38 11-18-2014 Salaries NCM
14-39
through
14-41
11-18-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
14-42
through
14-44
12-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-1 1-2-2015 Special Act NCM
15-2 1-2-2015 Special Act NCM
15-3
through
15-7
1-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-8 2-17-2015 Salaries NCM
15-9 2-17-2015 Police Department amendment Ch. 77
15-10
through
15-14
2-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-15 3-17-2015 Police Department amendment Ch. 77
15-16 3-17-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
15-17 3-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
15-18
through
15-19
4-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:843
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-20 4-21-2015 Adoption of Massachusetts
General Law
NCM
15-21 5-19-2015 Temporary no-parking signs NCM
15-22
through
15-23
5-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-24 6-2-2015 Adoption of Massachusetts
General Law
NCM
15-25
through
15-35
6-2-2015 Revolving funds NCM
15-36 6-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
15-37
through
15-38
8-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-39 8-4-2015 Salaries NCM
15-40
through
15-42
8-4-2015 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
15-43
through
15-44
8-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-45 8-4-2015 Fire Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 34, Art. I
15-46 9-1-2015 Alcoholic beverages and
amusement devices: automatic
amusement devices amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
15-47
through
15-48
9-1-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-49
through
15-51
9-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-52 10-6-2015 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 144
15-53
through
15-56
10-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:844
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-57
through
15-60
10-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-61 12-1-2015 Police Department amendment Ch. 77
15-62
through
15-63
12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-64 12-15-2015 Salaries NCM
15-65
through
15-66
12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
15-67
through
15-69
12-15-2015 Zoning amendments Ch. 275
15-70
through
15-72
12-15-2015 Public Works Department
amendments
Ch. 80
15-73
through
15-76
12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-1 2-16-2016 Salaries NCM
16-2 2-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
16-3 2-16-2016 Licenses amendment Ch. 188
16-4
through
16-8
2-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-9 3-15-2016 Salaries NCM
16-10
through
16-13
3-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-14 4-19-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 122
16-16
through
16-25
4-19-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-26
through
16-36
6-7-2016 Revolving funds NCM
16-37 6-21-2016 Storm and sewer rates NCM
16-38 6-21-2016 Storm and sewer rates NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:845
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-39 6-21-2016 Salaries NCM
16-40
through
16-43
6-21-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-44 7-5-2016 Salaries NCM
16-45
through
16-58
9-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-59 9-20-2016 Unregistered and abandoned
vehicles amendment
Ch. 262
16-60
through
16-63
9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-64
through
16-75
10-18-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-76 11-15-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 275
16-77 11-15-2016 Salaries NCM
16-78
through
16-81
11-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
16-82 12-6-2016 Police Department amendment Ch. 77
16-82A 12-6-2016 Street Acceptance NCM
16-83 12-20-2016 Fire Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 34, Art. I
16-84 12-20-2016 Salaries NCM
16-85 12-20-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 122
17-1 1-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
17-2 2-21-2017 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
miscellaneous provisions;
collection and storage of
rubbish and refuse
Ch. 169, Art. I;
Ch. 169, Art. II
17-3 2-21-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 260
17-3
through
17-9
4-18-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendments
Ch. 260
17-10 4-18-2017 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:846
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-11 4-18-2017 Streets and sidewalks: use of
highways amendment
Ch. 243, Art. V
17-12 5-16-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
17-13
through
17-16
5-16-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
17-17
through
17-26
6-6-2017 Revolving Funds NCM
17-27 6-20-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
17-28 6-20-2017 Salaries NCM
17-29 6-20-2017 Code Enforcement Amendment Ch. 132
17-30 6-20-2017 Drones; Regulation of
Unmanned Aircraft Systems
Ch. 186
17-31 6-20-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
17-32 6-20-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
17-33 6-6-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
17-34 6-20-2017 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
17-35 9-21-2017 Acceptance of MGL c. 90, § 17C NCM
17-36 9-21-2017 Salaries NCM
17-37 9-21-2017 Revolving Funds NCM
17-38 9-21-2017 Commissions, Committees,
Councils and Authorities:
Commission on Disability
Ch. 16, Art.
XXIV
17-39 9-21-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
17-40
through
17-41
9-21-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
17-42
through
17-45
10-17-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
17-46
through
17-51
11-21-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
17-52
through
17-53
12-19-2017 Zoning Amendments Ch. 275
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:847
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-54
through
17-58
12-19-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
18-1
through
18-4
2-20-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
18-5
through
18-6
2-20-2018 Salaries NCM
18-7
through
18-15
4-3-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendments
Ch. 260
18-16
through
18-20
5-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
18-21 6-19-2018 Finances: Miscellaneous
Provisions Amendment; Parks
and Recreation Amendment
Ch. 32, Art. I;
Ch. 206
18-22 6-19-2018 Salaries NCM
18-23
through
18-25
6-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
18-26 7-3-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
18-27 9-6-2018 Sewers Amendment Ch. 230
18-28 9-6-2018 Salaries NCM
18-29 and
18-30
9-6-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
18-31
through
18-51
10-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
18-52 10-2-2018 Commissions, Committees,
Councils and Authorities:
Municipal Building
Commissions Amendment
Ch. 16, Art. XI
18-53 12-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 275
18-54
through
18-60
12-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
19-1 1-15-2019 Salaries NCM
19-2 1-15-2019 Sewers Amendment Ch. 230
§ DL-1 CHICOPEE CODE § DL-1
1:848
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-3 and
19-4
1-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 260
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:849