CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 1, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
> 
PREFACE 
The Cambridge, Massachusetts Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1988, has been kept current by regular supplementation. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 1, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this Code current by regular supplementation. 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, section 2.12.040 is section .040, located in chapter 2.12 of title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by "tens" (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 1, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific Code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 1403, passed December 10, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the Code section number. For example, section 2.04.010 is section .010, in chapter 2.04 of title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, Code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are "Reserved" for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the Code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each Code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992)) 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a Code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" Code references in the new Code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior Code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new Code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 1, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04)). If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the Code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 1, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 1, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the Code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new Code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the Code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. We prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to deliver the supplements more quickly but to also reduce the number of errors. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adopted. 
"The Municipal Code of the City of Cambridge" was passed to be ordained at the City Council meeting held on December 18, 1989. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989)  
1.01.020 - Copies on file. 
Pursuant to the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 43, Section 23, Tercentenary Edition, being a part of the City Charter, the ordinances as aforesaid, which exceed in length eight octavo pages of ordinary book print may be examined at the Office of the City Clerk in the form of a printed pamphlet during office hours on or after December 7, 1989. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Designation and citation of code. 
The ordinances of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts, embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated and cited as "The Code of the City of Cambridge, 1987." The code may also be cited as "Cambridge City Code" or, in the provisions which follow as "this code." 
(Prior code § 1-1)  
1.04.020 - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the City relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments; but subject to the limitation and the provisions of Section 1.04.060 of this chapter, all ordinances of the City heretofore in force are repealed; but this repeal shall not apply or affect any ordinance heretofore adopted accepting or adopting the provisions of any statute of the Commonwealth nor shall it affect an ordinance entitled "Construction, Use, Maintenance and Inspection of Buildings," and any amendments thereto or any building code or zoning ordinance or any amendments thereto hereafter enacted. 
(Prior code § 1-5)  
1.04.030 - Definitions. 
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following definitions shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
1.  "A.L.M., c. , § ," means the Annotated Laws of Massachusetts.* 
2.  "Auditor" means the City Auditor. 
3.  "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
4.  "City" means the City of Cambridge, in the County of Middlesex and Commonwealth of Massachusetts, except as otherwise provided. 
5.  "Clerk" means the City Clerk. 
6.  "Commonwealth" means the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
7.  "Council" means the City Council of the City of Cambridge. 
8.  "County" means the County of Middlesex. 
9.  "G.L., c. , § ," means the Official Edition (1986) of General Laws. 
10.  "Manager" means the City Manager. 
11.  "Mayor" means the Mayor of the City of Cambridge. 
12.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
13.  "Oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
14.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
15.  "Person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, executor, administrator, guardian, trustee, agent, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
16.  "Personal property" means and includes every species of property, except real property as defined in this chapter. 
17.  Preceding and Following. The words "preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
18.  "Property" means and includes real and personal property. 
19.  "Public grounds" means and includes the common and all public lands placed by the City Council under the charge of the Park Department or the Water Department and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of highways. 
20.  "Real property" means and includes land, together with all things attached to the land so as to become a part thereof. 
21.  Shall, Must and May. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
22.  "Solicitor" means the City Solicitor. 
23.  "Tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, means and includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
24.  "Treasurer" means the City Treasurer. 
25.  "Ways," "streets" or "highways" means and includes boulevards, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, squares, places and sidewalks, and each of these words includes every other of them. 
26.  "Writing" or "written" means and includes printing and any other mode of representing words, letters and figures. 
27.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 1-6) 
* Editor's Note: "G.L.," as used in this code, refers to the most recent official edition of the General Laws of Massachusetts. Any references in this code to "A.L.M." are also intended to refer to the most recent official edition of the General Laws of Massachusetts.  
1.04.040 - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
A.  Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and by including the last day; and, if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall not be counted in the computation. 
B.  Conflicting Provisions. If any provisions of this code conflict with each other, accepted rules of statutory construction shall be applied to resolve the conflict. 
C.  Definitions. Unless expressly otherwise provided, definitions given within a chapter, article or section shall apply only to words or phrases used in the chapter, article or section. 
D.  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
E.  Joint Authority. Words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons. 
F.  Number. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural includes the singular, except as otherwise provided. 
G.  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past and present, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
H.  Time. Words stating a time or hour of a day shall mean the official time of the City. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 1-7)  
1.04.050 - Chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections, headings and catchlines. 
All headings of chapters, articles or divisions and all catchlines of sections and subsections are unofficial and intended only for convenience in arrangement and as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the chapters, articles, divisions, sections and subsections. They shall not be deemed to be part of the contents of the chapters, articles, divisions, sections or subsections; nor shall the headings and catchlines alter the otherwise intended meaning of any provision of this code. 
(Prior code § 1-8)  
1.04.060 - Prospective effect of code—Repealed ordinances not revived. 
This code shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, any penalty incurred, any suit, prosecution or proceedings pending, or the tenure of office of any person holding office, at the time when it takes effect, nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving an ordinance theretofore repealed or superseded, or the effect of preventing any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, or of interfering with any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Prior code § 1-9)  
1.04.070 - Territorial applicability. 
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City and to that territory outside the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any Constitutional or Charter provisions, or any law. 
(Prior code § 1-10)  
1.04.080 - Publication of code and supplementation. 
The City Clerk shall publish this code on pages punched for insertion in a loose leaf ring notebook, and at least twice every year shall similarly publish the amended language of this code on the appropriate pages, so that they may be inserted in place of the original pages. The code and updates as so published shall be the official version of this code, and shall be made available to the public in sufficient quantities. The city clerk shall so republish the entire code at least once every ten years. 
(Ord. 950, 1981: prior code § 1-17)  
1.04.090 - Licensing power. 
Whenever, under any provision of this code, a license or permit is required from a certain officer or board, such officer or board shall have the power to issue the proper license or permit. 
(Prior code § 1-13)  
1.04.100 - Severability of provisions. 
It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this code or any amendment thereto, are severable and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code, or any amendment thereto shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code or any amendment thereto since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Prior code § 1-14)  
Chapter 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Form. 
The following shall be the device of the seal of the City to wit: In the center thereof a shield bearing upon it a view, on the right the towers of Gore Hall, and on the left the Washington Elm; under the shield the inscription shall be "Cantabrigia Condita A.D. 1630; Civico Regimine Donata A.D. 1846" (Cambridge Founded A.D. 1630; Chartered A.D. 1846). Around the seal, as the City motto, shall be the words "Literis antiquis novis institutis decora" (adorned by ancient letters and new institutions). 
(Prior code § 1-15)  
1.08.020 - Custodial official designated. 
The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the City seal. 
(Prior code § 1-16)  
Chapter 1.12 - ORDINANCES 
Sections: 
All laws of the city shall be termed ordinances; and the enacting style shall be, "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cambridge, as follows." 
(Prior code § 1-2) 
 
1.12.020 - Recordation and availability to citizens. 
All ordinances hereafter passed shall be recorded in the order of passage by the City Clerk, in a book kept for that purpose, with proper margins and index, to be lettered, "Records of Ordinances of the City of Cambridge;" which book shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, subject to the inspection of the citizens. 
(Prior code § 1-3)  
1.12.030 - Public notice and hearing requirements. 
(a)  For every proposed ordinance which is referred to the Ordinance Committee by the City Council, the Ordinance Committee shall hold a public hearing and shall publish notice of such hearing in at least one newspaper of the City at least seven days before the hearing. 
(b)  Every proposed ordinance or loan order, except emergency measures and revenue loan orders, shall be published once in full in at least one newspaper of the City, and in any additional manner that may be provided by ordinances, at least ten days before its final passage. After final passage, it shall in the manner as before, again be published once, as amended and completed, except in the case of an emergency ordinance which shall take effect on its passage, and shall be so published at the earliest practicable moment; provided, that if any ordinance or proposed ordinance, or codification of ordinances or proposed ordnances, shall exceed in length eight octavo pages of ordinary book print, then, in lieu of the advertising required by this section, the same may be published by the City Council in a municipal bulletin or printed pamphlet, and if so published in full at least ten days before its final passage, and thereafter as amended and completed, again published in such bulletin or pamphlet, such publication shall be deemed sufficient without the newspaper publication as required in this section. 
(Prior code § 1-4) 
(Ord. 1215, Repealed & Replaced, 02/22/1999)  
Chapter 1.16 - CITY OFFICE HOURS 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Saturday closure—Exceptions—Applicability of State statutes. 
A.  Public offices located in City Hall and the Robert E. and Leo J. McCusker Center, and the offices of the Election Commission and the Sealer of Weights and Measures, shall be closed on all Saturdays. 
B.  However, when the public needs require that an office be open on Saturday, this shall be done with the approval of the department head. 
C.  The provisions of Chapter 4, Section 9 of the General Laws, Tercentenary Edition shall apply in the case of such closing of any such office on any Saturday to the same extent as if such Saturday were a legal holiday. 
(Prior code § 2-179)  
Chapter 1.20 - LICENSES AND PERMITS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
1.20.010 - Issuance conditions—Authority to revoke. 
All licenses and permits issued to any person under any ordinance or order of the City Council or the Board of License Commissioners or any other board or official of the City having power to issue licenses and permits, shall be issued subject to the condition that the same may be revoked at any time, at the option of the department or body from which the same were issued, or at the option of any future department or body. 
(Prior code § 12-1)  
1.20.020 - Issuance conditions—Disclosure—Conformance with all statutes and ordinances. 
Every officer or board issuing a license or permit shall insert therein a condition that the person accepting the same shall conform to all statutes and ordinances, and also to the specifications in the license or permit; that the license or permit may be revoked at any time by the authority issuing it; that the violation of any of its specifications shall work an immediate revocation of the license or permit. 
(Prior code § 12-2)  
1.20.030 - Bonding requirements—Cases when. 
Licenses and permits shall have no force or validity until a bond or other satisfactory security, when required, shall be given to the City indemnifying and saving harmless the City from all liability, loss and expense whatsoever which the City may incur and suffer arising out of the issuing of such license or permit with such surety or sureties and in such amounts as may be satisfactory to the City Auditor and approved by the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 12-3)  
1.20.040 - Additional sureties on bonds. 
Additional sureties shall be furnished on all such bonds mentioned in Section 1.20..030 of this title, as well as on all bonds heretofore given under any ordinance or order of the City Council or under any provision of law, whenever, in the manner and as often as in the opinion of the department or body from which the licenses and permits were issued, or any such future department or body, it seem to be for the best interests of the City to require the same. 
(Prior code § 12-4)  
1.20.050 - Annual examination of sureties. 
The sufficiency of all sureties upon all bonds hereafter given to the City shall be examined at least once every year under the direction of the City Auditor who shall report the result of such examination to the respective department or other body which issued the license or permit, or any succeeding department or body. 
(Prior code § 12-5)  
1.20.060 - Premises to be restored at cost of licensee. 
In addition to and as a further condition of the aforesaid bond the person so licensed or permitted, by an agreement satisfactory to the City Solicitor, for himself, his heirs, successors and assigns shall agree to restore at his own expense and cost the premises, concerning which the license or permit was originally given to the same condition in which the premises were at the time of the granting of such license or permit. 
(Prior code § 12-6)  
Chapter 1.24 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.24.010 - Penalty for code violations—Continuing violation. 
A.  Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited or is made to be unlawful, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars. 
B.  Each day any violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 1-11)  
1.24.020 - Fines and penalties inure to use of City. 
All fines and penalties for the violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance, or any order of the City Council shall, when recovered, inure to the use of the City, and be paid into the City Treasury, unless it is otherwise directed by the laws of the Commonwealth, or by the ordinances of the City. 
(Prior code § 1-12)  
1.24.030 - Non-Criminal Enforcement of Ordinances and Regulations 
Whoever violates any ordinance or any rule or regulation of the Commission of Health and Hospitals or any other Cambridge officer, board or department may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition pursuant to General Law Chapter 40, Section 21 D. The enforcing persons and the penalties shall be as stated in the particular ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. 1198, Added, 03/30/1998)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.02 - CITY COUNCIL 
 
2.02.010 - Governing body of City. 
The City Council shall be the governing body of the City as provided in 1 G.L., c.43, § 95. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-2)  
2.02.020 - Legislative powers provided by statutory authority. 
The Council shall exercise all legislative powers as provided by 1 G.L., c. 43, § 97. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-3)  
2.02.030 - Membership—Election—Term of office. 
The Council membership, its term of office and election shall be as provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 96. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-4)  
2.02.040 - Organization. 
The Council after its election shall meet and organize as provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 97. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-5)  
2.02.050 - Regular and special meetings. 
A.  All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Sullivan Chamber, City Hall or, if agreed to by a majority of the Council, at any other suitable public building within the city at 5:30 p.m. of Monday of each week, from the first Monday in January to and including the last Monday in June and from the second Monday in September to and including the last Monday in December; provided, however, that when a meeting day falls on a holiday the succeeding Monday shall be the meeting day; and provided further, that the City Council may at any meeting, by a majority vote, decide to discontinue any further meetings hereinbefore assigned. 
B.  The Mayor, or the Vice-Chairman of the City Council, or any four members thereof, may at any time call a special meeting by causing written notices, stating the time of holding such meeting and signed by the person calling the same, to be delivered in hand to each member of the City Council, or left at his usual dwelling place, at least forty-eight hours before the time of such meeting. Meeting of the City Council may also be held at any time when all the members of the City Council are present and consent thereto. 
(Ord. 1094, 1990: Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 942, 1980: prior code § 2-6)  
2.02.060 - Quorum. 
As provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 99 a majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-7)  
2.02.070 - Presiding officer. 
As provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 99 the Mayor shall preside at the Council meetings and may vote. In his absence the Vice-Chairman of the Council shall preside and in the absence of both a temporary Chairman shall be chosen. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-8)  
2.02.080 - Voting procedures for expenditures. 
All final votes on questions involving expenditure of fifty dollars or more, or upon request of any member shall be in the manner provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 99. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-9)  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.04.010 - Appointment by City Council. 
The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office pursuant to 1 G.L., c. 43, § 103. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-12)  
2.04.020 - Qualifications. 
The qualifications of the City Manager shall be such as are set out in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 103. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-13)  
2.04.030 - Powers, rights and duties. 
The duties, powers and rights of the City Manager shall be such as are provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 104. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-14)  
2.04.040 - Appointment and removal of officers and employees—General requirements. 
The duties, powers and rights of the City Manager as to appointment and removal of administrative officers and employees of the City shall be such as are set out in 1 G.L., c. 43, §§ 104 to 107. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-15)  
2.04.050 - Appointment and removal of officers and employees—Annual designations. 
The City Manager shall appoint, if deemed necessary, for the terms hereinafter specified and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified the following officers, to wit: 
In January 
(For one year from the first Monday in January.) 
One or more measurers of wood and bark 
Two or more fence viewers 
Two or more field drivers 
One poundkeeper for each pound in the City 
Two or more Constables 
Two or more inspectors of junk shops, pawnbrokers' shops and secondhand clothing stores and dealers 
One or more weighers of hay 
One or more weighers of coal 
One or more public weighers 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-16)  
2.04.060 - Enforcement of laws—Supervision of departments. 
The City Manager shall cause the laws of the Commonwealth and the ordinances, orders and regulations of the City to be executed and enforced by the proper officers; shall exercise general supervision and control over the official acts and conduct of all officers, and shall take proper action to cause every violation and neglect of duty to be punished. For exceptions, see 1 G.L., c. 43, § 103. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-17)  
2.04.070 - Discharge of mortgages. 
Whenever the amount due and payable on any mortgage belonging to the City is paid to the Treasurer, he shall certify it to the City Manager, who shall thereupon discharge the mortgage; or he may assign it, without recourse in any event and without representations or warranties, express or implied, and for that purpose shall execute and deliver all necessary papers. 
(Prior code § 2-18)  
2.04.080 - Signing of deeds and conveyances. 
All deeds, conveyances, leases and other instruments, which shall be given by the City, and which must be signed, sealed and acknowledged, shall be signed and acknowledged and delivered on behalf of the City, by the City Manager, who shall affix thereto the City Seal. This provision shall not be construed to prevent any officer from executing any conveyance, lease, contract or other instrument in performing the duties devolving upon him. 
(Prior code § 2-19)  
2.04.090 - Approving drafts and signing bonds. 
The City Manager shall approve all drafts drawn by the City Auditor upon the City Treasurer, and with the Treasurer and Auditor shall sign all bonds, notes and certificates of indebtedness issued for loans to the City authorized by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2-20)  
2.04.100 - Compensation. 
As provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 103, the City Manager shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall determine. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: prior code § 2-21)  
2.04.110 - Removal from office. 
Removal of the City Manager shall be effected only in the manner provided in 1 G.L., c. 43, § 103. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-22)  
Chapter 2.06 - DEPUTY CITY MANAGER 
 
2.06.010 - Appointment by City Manager. 
The Deputy City Manager shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 939 (part), 1980; prior code § 2-26)  
2.06.020 - Control of Department of Administration. 
The Department of Administration shall be under the control of the Deputy City Manager, who shall be considered a department head within the provisions of General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Chapter 43, Section 103. 
(Ord. 939 (part), 1980; prior code § 2-25)  
2.06.030 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Deputy City Manager shall be such as are designated and assigned from time to time by the City Manager. In the absence or disability of the City Manager the Deputy City Manager shall assume the duties of the City Manager, subject to the formal approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. 939 (part), 1980; prior code § 2-28)  
2.06.040 - Civil service or tenure rights. 
The Deputy City Manager shall have no rights under civil service, nor acquire any rights of tenure in any manner. 
(Ord. 939 (part), 1980; prior code § 2-27)  
2.06.050 - Compensation. 
The Deputy City Manager shall receive as annual compensation the amount set forth in Chapter 2.62 of this title. 
(Ord. 939 (part), 1980; prior code § 2-29)  
Chapter 2.08 - ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER FOR COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
 
2.08.010 - Established—Head of department. 
A.  For the purpose of promoting further cooperation among the several departments, divisions, boards, agencies, commissions and officers, and, more particularly, for the purpose of aiding in the general supervision and control of the City departments whose functions pertain to overall planning and development, and, further, to aid and assist the City Manager in the proper performance of his office, there shall be an Assistant City Manager for Community Development, who shall be considered a department head within the provisions of General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Chapter 43, Section 103. 
B.  The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall serve as the Administrator of Community Development, and shall have responsibility for the proper functioning and general effectiveness as well as the general supervision and control, of the Department of Community Development, and of those other local departments, divisions, boards, agencies, commissions and officers, such as the Planning Board and the Department of Planning and Development, for which the City Manager's office has direct managerial responsibilities, and for the maintenance of effective working relationships with those other local organizations, such as the Cambridge Housing Authority, the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority and the Cambridge Economic Opportunity Committee, in which the City Manager's office has coordinative or collateral responsibilities, as well as with those organizations of a regional, state or federal nature, or organizational subdivisions thereof, such as the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), the Massachusetts Executive Office of Communities and Development (EOCD) and the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), with which the City Manager's office from time to time may have statutory or contractual responsibilities, and whose functions in all instances relate to overall planning and development programs intended, through the design and implementation of new programs, projects, activities, systems, procedures and funding arrangements, or through the modifications of existing ones, to improve environmental conditions, facilities and services, to strengthen environmental resources, and to meet current and future environmental requirements, as well as those pertaining, in a similar manner to organization for community development work, to the development of basic data and information systems, to human services, and to economic, transportation and housing affairs. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 838 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-222)  
2.08.020 - Appointment—Term. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. It is the intention of this provision to fix all responsibility and vest all authority for the appointment and removal of the Assistant City Manager for Community Development in the City Manager. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-223)  
2.08.030 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall be such as are designated and assigned from time to time to the Assistant City Manager for Community Development by the City Manager. The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall have all the powers, rights and duties that the City Manager shall determine as are necessary for the proper functioning and general effectiveness, as well as for the general supervision and control, of the departments, divisions, boards, agencies, commissions and officers, consistent with the powers and duties assigned to him by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-225)  
2.08.040 - Civil service or tenure rights. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall have no rights under civil service, nor acquire any rights of tenure in any manner. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-224)  
2.08.050 - Compensation. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall receive as annual compensation the same amount set forth in Chapter 2.62 of this title for the Assistant City Manager. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-226)  
Chapter 2.10 - ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER FOR FISCAL AFFAIRS 
 
2.10.010 - Division of Finance—Composition. 
The Division of Finance shall consist of the Auditing Department, Assessors Department, Budget and Personnel Department, Purchasing Department and Treasury Department. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-227)  
2.10.020 - Division of Finance—Director. 
The Division of Finance shall be under the control of the Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs, who shall be the Director of Finance, and who shall be considered a department head within the provisions of General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Chapter 43, Section 103. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-228)  
2.10.030 - Director of Finance—Authority. 
The Director of Finance shall be in charge of the Division of Finance. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-229)  
2.10.040 - Appointment—Term. 
The Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. It is the intention of this provision to fix all responsibility and vest all authority for the appointment and removal of the Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs in the City Manager. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-230)  
2.10.050 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs shall be such as are designated and assigned from time to time to the Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs by the City Manager. The Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs shall have all the powers, rights and duties that the City Manager shall determine as are necessary for the proper functioning and general effectiveness, as well as for the general supervision and control of the departments, divisions, boards, agencies, commissions and officers, consistent with the powers and duties assigned to him by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-232)  
2.10.060 - Civil service or tenure rights. 
The Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs shall have no rights under civil service, nor acquire any rights of tenure in any manner. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-231)  
2.10.070 - Compensation. 
The Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs shall receive as annual compensation the same amount set forth in Chapter 2.62 of this title for Assistant City Manager. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-233)  
2.10.080 - Auditor designated Comptroller of Accounts. 
The City Auditor shall be Comptroller of Accounts and none of the preceding sections effect those powers and duties which are the responsibility of the City Auditor by statute. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 1974: prior code § 2-234)  
Chapter 2.12 - ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER FOR HUMAN SERVICE PROGRAMS 
 
2.12.010 - Human Services Department—Established. 
There is established a Department of Human Service Programs that shall consist of the Civic Unity Committee, Community Schools, the Council on Aging, the Department of Recreation, the Youth Resources Bureau and any other department that the City Council may determine could thereby operate its programs more effectively. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 34 § 1)  
2.12.020 - Human Services Department—Director. 
The Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs shall be in charge of the Department of Human Service Programs, and shall be considered a department head within the provisions of General Laws of Massachusetts, Chapter 43, Section 103. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 34 § 2)  
2.12.030 - Appointment—Term. 
The Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. It is the intention of this provision to fix all responsibility and vest all authority for the appointment and removal of the Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs in the City Manager. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 34 § 3)  
2.12.040 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The powers and duties of the Assistant City Manager for Human Services Programs shall be such as are designed and assigned from time to time by the City Manager. The Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs shall have all the powers, rights and duties that the City Manager shall determine are necessary for the proper functioning and general effectiveness, as well as for the control of the departments, divisions, boards, agencies, commissions, councils and officers of human services in the City. 
B.  The duties of the Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Identification of human service needs in the City and assessment of the adequacy of public and private resources to meet those needs; 
2.  Planning, coordination and evaluation of the human service programs of the City; 
3.  Education of the community to enhance understanding of human service issues; 
4.  Maintenance of effective working relationships with other local organizations such as the Cambridge School Department, the Cambridge Housing Authority, the Cambridge-Somerville Home Care Corporation and the Cambridge-Sommerville Mental Health Services, as well as the local area boards of the various state agencies concerned with human services, and those agencies in the private sector which contribute to the welfare of the citizens of Cambridge; 
5.  Communication and coordination with all federal, state and private planning and service delivery agencies concerned with human service activities, and taking such action regarding available funds and programs as is indicated to enhance the quality of life for Cambridge citizens; 
6.  Responding to reasonable requests from the Commission for Human Service Programs for information and staff support, so that the Commission may fulfill its duties and responsibilities; 
7.  Development, with Neighborhood Councils, of mechanisms for the purpose of supporting and enhancing their capacity to respond effectively to the needs of their areas. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 34 § 5)  
2.12.050 - Civil service or tenure rights. 
The Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs shall have no rights under civil service, nor acquire any rights of tenure in any manner. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 34 § 4)  
2.12.060 - Compensation. 
The Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs shall receive as annual compensation the same amount set forth in Chapter 2.62 of this title. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 34 § 6)  
Chapter 2.14 - MAYOR 
 
2.14.010 - Official head of City—Powers and duties. 
A.  The Mayor shall be the official head of the City. 
B.  He shall have all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed in 1 G.L., c. 43 § 100 and the ceremonial duties as official head of the City. 
C.  He shall be provided with suitable offices in City Hall. 
D.  He shall accept service of civil process on behalf of the City. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-1)  
Chapter 2.16 - COMMISSIONER OF HEALTH AND HOSPITALS 
 
2.16.010 - Established—Qualifications. 
There shall be a Commissioner of Health and Hospitals and in addition to the qualifications required by any special act of the Legislature, the Commissioner shall have proven administrative experience in the areas of planning, establishing priorities, personnel, program management and/or budgeting. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-1)  
2.16.020 - Powers and duties. 
A.  The Commissioner shall be responsible for promoting and protecting the health of the citizens of Cambridge. The Commissioner shall see that, within the City, the laws of the Commonwealth, including regulations and the ordinances of the City pertaining to public health, hospitals and housing are faithfully executed and enforced. The Commissioner shall have overall charge of all City-operated health care programs and treatment facilities. 
B.  The Commissioner shall appoint and supervise health department personnel and shall appoint the members of the medical staff or staffs of such facilities and their assistants from those recommended by the medical staff in conformity with the medical staff bylaws, with the approval of the City Manager. 
C.  The Commissioner shall acquire, analyze, use and store health-related statistics for program planning and evaluation purposes. 
D.  The Commissioner shall identify anticipated community health needs and assess the adequacy of public and private health resources to meet those needs. 
E.  The Commissioner shall coordinate with federal, state, regional and private health planning and/or delivery groups to ensure that the Department of Health and Hospitals is responsive to the health service needs of all members of the community. 
F.  Although the Commissioner retains full authority for action, the Commissioner shall discuss major problem areas and proposed policy changes with the Health Policy Board and is expected to reach agreement with them before making policy changes. 
G.  The Commissioner shall supply information and staff support as reasonably requested by the Health Policy Board so that it may be fully informed. 
H.  The Commissioner shall attend all meetings of the Cambridge Health Policy Board except for justifiable cause such as illness, absence from the City or unless otherwise assigned by the City Manager, and attend as many subcommittee meetings of the Board as is reasonably practical or possible. 
I.  The Commissioner shall present the budget for the Department of Health and Hospitals to the Cambridge Health Policy Board for review and comment, prior to its submission to the City Manager. 
J.  The Commissioner shall develop needed proposals and programs; shall approve and coordinate all grant proposals relating to health matters in the community; shall coordinate the delivery of care by City and private health providers; shall monitor the quality of private facilities such as hospitals, nursing homes, day care centers and community residences; shall promote health education and advocate health standards. 
K.  The Commissioner shall prepare and submit to the City Manager an annual report on the activities of his department during the preceding fiscal year. 
L.  The Commissioner shall perform such other duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be assigned by the City Manager. 
M.  The Commissioner shall promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations necessary or proper for the administration of the Department of Health, Hospitals and Housing as may be required by this chapter and by law. 
N.  The position of Health Commissioner is a full-time job and must be treated as such. Therefore, there shall be on file in the City Clerk's office, for public record, a memorandum of understanding between the City Manager and the Health Commissioner concerning any professional activities for remuneration which are not strictly related to the duties of Commissioner as set out elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. 901, 1978; Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-2)  
2.16.030 - Compensation. 
The Commissioner shall receive such salary as the City Council shall determine from time to time. The Commissioner shall be provided with suitable office accommodations at the expense of the City and under the direction of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-3(a))  
Chapter 2.18 - INSPECTOR OF ANIMALS 
 
2.18.010 - Annual nomination procedures. 
The City Manager shall annually, in March, as needed, nominate one or more Inspectors of Animals, and before April 1st send to the Director of Livestock Disease Control the name, address and occupation of each nominee. Such nominee shall not be appointed until approved by the Director. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-13)  
2.18.020 - Duties and responsibilities. 
In addition to the duties required of him by the statutes, and acts in amendment thereof, the Inspector of Animals shall professionally visit, attend and treat, whenever necessary or requested by the City Manager, any and all of the horses owned by the City and shall physically examine and report upon all horses offered for sale to the City. 
(Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-14)  
2.18.030 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Inspector of Animals shall annually, in January, and whenever requested by the City Manager, make a full and detailed report of all matters pertaining to his department, with such suggestions as he may deem proper. 
(Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-15)  
Chapter 2.20 - CONSTABLES 
 
2.20.010 - Appointment—Qualifications. 
The City Manager shall appoint Constables for the term of three years beginning with the first day of January in the year of appointment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all such Constables with the power to serve civil process shall be residents of the City upon appointment and shall remain residents of the City during their tenure in office, except for Health Inspectors in the Health Department who need not reside, but who shall cease to act as Constables and shall be removed from such office immediately upon the termination of employment as a Health Inspector, unless they reside at that time in the City, as required of other Constables. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 38 (part))  
2.20.020 - Bond required when. 
Appointments of Constables shall specify in each case whether the appointment is for a position connected with the City or County service to serve without bond, or for the service of civil process upon the filing of the bond required by law. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 38 (part))  
2.20.030 - Fees. 
The fee for Constables appointed to serve civil process under this chapter shall be fifty dollars for each three-year term of office which shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to their assuming their duties. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 38 (part))  
2.20.040 - Residency requirements—Exemptions. 
The residency required in this chapter shall apply to the appointment of Constables with the power to serve civil process, not to the appointment of Constables with power of arrest. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 38 (part))  
2.20.050 - Residency requirements—Current appointees. 
The residency required in this chapter shall not take effect for those Constables who hold appointments at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor affect their eligibility for reappointment. 
(Ord. 946 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 38 (part))  
Chapter 2.22 - DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY 
 
2.22.010 - Create —Management and supervision. 
A.  In addition to any boards, commissions or departments required by any Act of Congress or the Legislature, the following agencies, boards, commissions, councils, departments and divisions are created: 
1.  Departments. 
— Affirmative Action; 
— Animal Commission; 
— Arts Council; 
— Assessors; 
— Auditing; 
— Budget; 
— City Clerk; 
— City Council; 
— Community Development; 
— Consumer Advisory Council; 
— Election Commission; 
— Electrical; 
— Emergency Management; 
— Executive; 
— Fire Department; 
— Handicapped; 
— Health/Hospitals; 
— Historical; 
— Human Rights Commission; 
— Human Services; 
— Inspectional Services; 
— Law Department; 
— Library; 
— License; 
— Mayor; 
— Neville Manor; 
— Peace Commission; 
— Personnel; 
— Police; 
— Public Works; 
— Purchasing; 
— Rent Control; 
— Retirement; 
— School Department; 
— Traffic; 
— Treasurer/Finance; 
— Veterans Services; 
— Water; 
— Weights/Measures; 
— Women's Commission. 
2.  Boards and Commissions. 
— Animal Commission; 
— Arts Council; 
— Assessors; 
— Board of Examiners; 
— Board of Survey; 
— Board of Zoning Appeal; 
— Building Code Board of Appeal; 
— Cambridge Public Access Corporation; 
— Central Square Committee; 
— Civic Unity Committee; 
— Civilian Review Board (Police Review and Advisory Board); 
— Conservation Commission; 
— Consumer Advisory Committee; 
— Council on Aging; 
— Election Commission; 
— Handicapped Commission; 
— Health Policy Board; 
— Historical Commission; 
— Housing Authority; 
— Human Rights Commission; 
— Human Services Commission; 
— Industrial Development Financing Authority; 
— Library Board of Trustees; 
— License Commission; 
— Mid-Cambridge Conservation District Commission; 
— Nuclear Disarmanent and Peace Establishment Commission; 
— Planning Board; 
— Pole and Conduit Commission; 
— Porter Square Community Advisory Committee; 
— Recycling Committee; 
— Redevelopment Authority; 
— Rent Control; 
— Retirement Board; 
— Scientific Advisory Committee; 
— Status of Women Commission; 
— Traffic and Parking Commission; 
— Water Board. 
B.  Each of the several departments shall be under the charge and management of the officers or boards designated in the respective chapters relating thereto, all to be under the general supervision and control of the City Manager, except the City Clerk Department and the Auditing Department in accordance with the Charter. (See 1 G.L., c. 43, § 103. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-23)  
2.22.020 - Cooperation with other departments and executive boards. 
For the purpose of promoting cooperation in the several departments and executive boards, the City Manager may call meetings of the heads thereof, at the City Hall, at any time. He may invite other persons for conference at these meetings. 
(Prior code § 2-24)  
Chapter 2.24 - CITY CLERK DEPARTMENT 
 
2.24.010 - City Clerk—Appointment—Term—Powers and duties. 
A.  The City Clerk Department shall be under the charge of the City Clerk, who shall be elected by a majority vote of the City Council in the month of May, and shall hold office for three years from June 1st in the year of his election and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall have such powers and perform such duties as the Council and the laws may prescribe. He shall have the care and custody of all the records, documents, maps, plans and papers of the City. He shall attend and keep the records of all the meetings of the City Council. 
(Ord. 846, 1975; prior code § 2-30 (part))  
2.24.020 - City Clerk—Bond requirements. 
A.  The City Clerk shall give to the City a bond, with sufficient sureties, in the sum of three thousand dollars in such form as shall be satisfactory to the Council. The bond shall be executed, approved and delivered before he enters upon the duties of his office or within ten days after his election, whichever event shall first occur. Should he fail to give such bond as required, the election shall be void, and a new election shall be had forthwith. 
B.  In the case of death or insolvency of any of the sureties upon any bond so given, the City Clerk shall immediately notify the City Manager and give a new bond, with sufficient sureties, as provided in this section, and if he fails to give such new bond within a reasonable time after notice to do so, it shall be sufficient cause for his removal from office. 
(Prior code § 2-31)  
2.24.030 - Deputy City Clerk—Appointment—Term—Powers and duties—Compensation. 
A.  A Deputy City Clerk shall be elected by a majority vote of the City Council, who shall serve the Council as staff person to their committee's along with attending all City Council meetings. Furthermore, the Deputy City Clerk shall assist the City Clerk in recording, indexing and certifying all documents and papers required by law to be filed in the office of or recorded by the City Clerk. He shall be under the direct supervision and control of the City Clerk and shall be deemed to be an employee of the City Clerk. 
B.  In accordance with the General Laws, Chapter 31, Section 5, the position of Deputy City Clerk shall be one of the two positions exempt from civil service in the office of City Clerk. He shall assume and perform all duties of the City Clerk, including overall administrative and supervisory responsibility of all office functions including personnel, when for any reason such office becomes vacant due to absence or disability of the City Clerk. The Deputy City Clerk shall give bond in such form as the City Council shall approve, but not less than six thousand seven hundred dollars with sufficient sureties in the sum of three thousand dollars, which bond shall be executed, approved and delivered before he assumes his duties. 
C.  The Deputy City Clerk shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall determine. The Deputy City Clerk may be removed from the office by a two-thirds vote of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 846, 1975; prior code § 2-30 (part))  
2.24.040 - Notification of appropriations, expenditures, reports and payments—Sewer and sidewalks assessment reports. 
The City Clerk shall notify the Auditor of all orders passed by the Council, authorizing appropriations, expenditures, assessments, apportionments or abatements, immediately after such orders are approved. He shall also report to him weekly all amounts received by him, and paid to the Treasurer on account of licenses or fees of any description. He shall report to the Treasurer all orders for sewers and sidewalk assessments, and all apportionments and abatements thereof, immediately after such orders are approved. 
(Prior code § 2-32)  
2.24.050 - Fee schedule. 
Effective July 1, 2012, the fees for the City Clerk Department shall be as follows: 
Marriage Intention 	$35.00 
Marriage Certificate 	10.00 
Birth Amendment/Corrections 	50.00 
Birth Certificates 	10.00 
Delayed Birth Record 	50.00 
Correct Death Errors 	50.00 
Death Certificate 	10.00 
Correct Marriage Certificate 	50.00 
Examine Vital Records: 	
 (per hour or portion thereof) 	15.00 
 (per additional one-half-hour or portion thereof) 	7.00 
Filing Trust 	35.00 
Domestic Partnership Applications 	35.00 
Domestic Partnership Certificate 	10.00 
Constables 	100.00 
Business Certificates (including 
certified copy) 	50.00 
Amending Business Certificate 	10.00 
Termination of Business Certifi- 
cate 	5.00 
Register Podiatrist 	50.00 
Registered Electrolysis 	50.00 
Optometry Certificate 	50.00 
Physician/Osteopath Certificate 	50.00 
Power of Attorney 	35.00 
Closing-out Inventory 	10.00 
Petition for Zoning Amendment 	150.00 
Certified Copies Requested by 
Senior Citizen 	5.00 
 
(Ord. 1348, 5/21/2012; Ord. 1320, 5/18/2009; 1294, Amended, 05/22/2006; Ord. 1292, Added, 11/14/2005; 1280, Added, 09/27/2004; 1274, Amended, 06/14/2004; Ord. 1133, 1992)  
Chapter 2.26 - LAW DEPARTMENT 
 
2.26.010 - City Solicitor—Authority—Qualifications—Appointment. 
The Law Department shall be in charge of the City Solicitor, who shall be an attorney admitted to practice in the courts of the Commonwealth. He shall hold no other office under the City government. He shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-35)  
2.26.020 - Draft of legal instruments. 
The City Solicitor shall draft all legal instruments of whatever nature which may be required of him by any ordinance, the City Council, the Mayor or the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2-36)  
2.26.030 - Legal proceedings and opinions. 
The City Solicitor shall prosecute and defend all suits, causes and actions in which the City is a party. He shall represent the City before administrative agencies on any matter in which the interest of the City may be affected. He shall defend the officers and employees of the City for any act or omission in the discharge of their official duties. He shall furnish legal opinions on matters submitted to him by the City Manager, Mayor, City Council, School Committee or head of department. 
(Prior code § 2-37)  
2.26.040 - Negligence claims. 
A.  Every officer in charge of a department shall immediately report in writing to the Law Department whenever any transaction, act or negligence of his department occurs which results in, or may occasion the bringing of a claim against the City. Upon receipt of a claim against the City or any department thereof, it shall be referred to the Committee on Claims of the City Council, and notice shall be given to the City Solicitor, who shall make an investigation of the claim, and for this purpose shall be furnished, on request, with all necessary departmental books, papers or records, and may require any official or employee of a department who may have information concerning such claim to attend any hearing thereon. Upon completion of the investigation, the City Solicitor shall report to the Committee on Claims recommending settlement for a certain amount or disapproving the claim. 
B.  The Committee on Claims shall have the authority to settle any such claim for the amounts recommended by the Law Department or for a lesser amount, or to reject the proposed settlement. No such settlement shall be made for an amount exceeding five hundred dollars. Nothing contained in this chapter shall affect the power of the City Solicitor conferred by law concerning the settlement of suits in which the City is a party. 
(Prior code § 2-38)  
2.26.050 - Salary and expenses. 
The City Solicitor shall receive such salary as the Council may determine. In all cases when his attendance is required out of the City, his reasonable travelling expenses shall be allowed him. 
(Prior code § 2-39)  
2.26.060 - Authority to appoint assistants—Qualifications. 
The City Manager, or by his authority, the City Solicitor, shall appoint as needed, Assistant City Solicitors, who shall be attorneys admitted to practice in the courts of the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: prior code § 2-40)  
2.26.070 - Furnishing of offices. 
Suitable offices shall be provided for the Law Department. 
(Prior code § 2-41)  
Chapter 2.28 - ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
 
2.28.010 - City Engineer—Authority—Appointment—Term—Compensation. 
A.  The Engineering Department shall be under the charge of the City Engineer, who shall be appointed by the City Manager in April for the term of one year from May 1st in the year of his or her appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. He or she shall receive such compensation as the Council may determine. 
B.  In carrying out all his or her duties set forth in this Chapter, the City Engineer shall act under the direction of the Commissioner of Public Works. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: prior code § 2-42)  
2.28.020 - Consultation regarding public improvements. 
The City Engineer shall be consulted in relation to public improvements of every kind where the advice of a civil engineer would be of service. He shall have charge of all plans of streets, drains, sewers and structures of every kind, not especially belonging to other departments, and shall keep the same properly classified and indexed. He may promulgate rules and regulations concerning the operation of his department. 
(Prior code § 2-43)  
2.28.030 - Control of public works construction. 
Unless otherwise specially provided the City Engineer shall take charge of the construction of all public works of the City which properly come under the direction of the civil engineer. He shall perform all engineering services, make all examinations and prepare all statements, plans, specifications and contracts which any department may need in the discharge of its duties. He shall, upon being notified by the City Manager, supervise all repairs on the bridges used as highways, which affect the safety of the structures, and when required by the City Manager, or by any department, shall measure the work done by contract for the City, and certify to the results of such measurement. 
(Prior code § 2-44)  
2.28.040 - Surveys, plans, estimates and descriptions. 
The City Engineer or his assistants shall make such surveys, plans, profiles, estimates and descriptions as may be required of him by the City Manager, the City Council or any committee thereof. He shall perform all other services for the City, which properly come under the direction of a civil engineer, as may be required of him by the City Manager, the City Council or any committee thereof, the City Solicitor or the Water Board. 
(Prior code § 2-45)  
2.28.050 - Plans and surveys relative to streets. 
The City Engineer shall take charge of all plans and surveys relating to the laying out, widening, extending and grading of streets, and the establishing of correct lines for the same, and of all such structures and public works of the City as the Council may direct; provided, that nothing in this section shall be so construed as to authorize him to interefere with existing departments or boards, or with any which may be hereafter established whose duties may be clearly defined. 
(Prior code § 2-46)  
2.28.060 - Furnishing lines and grades of streets and foundation lines. 
The City Engineer shall furnish free of charge to all applicants so far as the files and records of his office will permit, any information as to the lines and grades of streets on which their estates are situated, or upon which they intend to build. He shall ascertain the proper foundation grade for the superstructure of every building to be erected by the City and immediately thereafter to furnish all necessary information in relation thereto to the Commissioner of Public Works. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-47)  
2.28.070 - Encroachment on streets—Notification. 
Whenever the City Engineer ascertains that any building or structure has been placed within the lines of a public street or that it may cause injury or inconvenience to a public street, he shall immediately give notice thereof in writing to the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2-48)  
2.28.080 - Inspection of bridges. 
The City Engineer shall at least once a year and whenever required, carefully inspect all the bridges within the City limits, and make such Appointment—Duties. need of renewal or repairs, as the case may require. 
(Prior code § 2-49)  
2.28.090 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The City Engineer shall annually, in January, present to the City Manager a report in relation to his department, showing the number of persons employed, the detailed expenses of the department, the general nature of the work, the property under his charge, the condition of all structures that come under his supervision that are in process of construction, or that have been completed during the previous year, and such other general information, in relation to the same, as he may deem expedient. 
(Prior code § 2-50)  
Chapter 2.30 - DIVISION OF FINANCE GENERALLY 
 
2.30.010 - Composition. 
The Division of Finance shall consist of the Auditing Department, the Purchasing Department and the Treasury Department. 
(Prior code § 2-52)  
2.30.020 - Director of Finance—Authority. 
The Division of Finance shall be under the charge of the Director of Finance. 
(Prior code § 2-53)  
2.30.030 - City Auditor—Comptroller of Accounts. 
The City Auditor shall be Comptroller of Accounts and ex officio the Director of Finance. 
(Prior code § 2-54)  
2.30.040 - Director of Finance—Powers and duties. 
The Director of Finance shall have access to all the books and records of each department. He may, with the consent of any department head, direct that any employee of any department may temporarily perform work in some other department, or that mechanical equipment or office space not in use by one department may be used by some other department. 
(Prior code § 2-55)  
2.30.050 - Control of personnel of departments. 
The Director shall have general control over the personnel in each of the departments of the division, and no increase or decrease of such personnel, whether permanent or temporary, shall be made without his approval, subject to the provisions of 1 G.L., c. 43. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-56)  
2.30.060 - Departmental cost accounting required when. 
The Director shall have the power to require any department or official of the City to establish methods of cost accounting for such department or work under the control of such official, which shall accurately reflect the cost to the City of performing any service performed by such department or official. 
(Prior code § 2-57)  
2.30.070 - Estimation of departmental salaries. 
No estimate of a specified salary for any employee, whether permanent or temporary, within the Division of Finance, shall be submitted to the City Manager to be used in the preparation of the budget without the approval of the Director. If a salary is an item in an enacted budget, it shall be paid without such approval. If the salaries or rate of payment of any employee within the division have not been determined by the budget or by ordinance, no liability shall incur for such work done without the approval of the Director. 
(Prior code § 2-58)  
Chapter 2.32 - AUDITING DEPARTMENT 
 
2.32.010 - City Auditor—Authority— Appointment—Term—Vacancies. 
A.  The Auditing Department shall be under the charge of the City Auditor who shall be elected by a majority vote of the Council in the month of May to hold office from June 1st for three years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall receive such salary as the Council shall from time to time determine. 
B.  Whenever the office shall become vacant the Council shall fill it for the balance of the term in the same manner as provided for in the election of the Auditor. 
(Prior code § 2-59)  
2.32.020 - Custodian of bonds and contracts. 
A.  The auditor shall have custody of all surety bonds posted by City officials, all contracts and bonds given to the City to secure contracts, all insurance policies in which the City has an interest, and he shall keep a register of the dates, and amount of such bonds, contracts and insurance policies, and shall notify the City Manager whenever a bond or insurance expires. 
B.  The Auditor shall receive from the Treasurer and hold all bonds, notes, scrip and other certificates of indebtedness together with coupons issued by the City, and shall keep a registry thereof. Immediately upon receiving any bond, note, scrip, coupons or other certificate of indebtedness from the Treasurer, the Auditor shall deliver to him an order for the payment of the same. 
(Prior code § 2-60)  
2.32.030 - Books of accounts—Receipts. 
A.  Subject to the approval of the City Manager, the Auditor shall direct the manner in which the books and accounts of all offices and departments of the City shall be kept, and once each month he shall prepare and furnish to the City Manager and to each department, a printed statement showing the condition of each appropriation account, the expenditures and the unexpended balances under each, loans issued and authorized with date, rate, term and amounts, borrowing capacity and such other data relating to the City's financial condition as may be asked for by the City Manager. 
B.  The Auditor shall report to the City Manager promptly after June 30th of each year, the expenditures and receipts during the preceding financial year, giving in detail the amount of appropriations and expenditures and the receipts and source of income. He shall include in the report, a statement of the funded and temporary loans, rates of interest thereon, and shall exhibit all the liabilities and assets as shown on the books in his office at the close of the financial year. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-61)  
2.32.040 - Approval of purchases, contracts or requisitions. 
If bills agree with the order or requisition, the head of the department upon receipt shall approve and forward them to the Auditor's office. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-62)  
2.32.050 - Maintenance of accounts—Expended appropriations. 
The Auditor shall keep his accounts in accordance with the system of accounting set up and supervised by the Division of Accounts of the Commonwealth. He shall credit each City account with its appropriation for the financial year, and with all revenue received, on the account of the same, and charge against the appropriation the expenditures and liabilities as they shall from time to time be made. Whenever an appropriation for any account is expended, he shall immediately give notice thereof to the City Manager, and he shall not pass or allow any claim or account chargeable against such appropriation until the Council shall provide the means of paying the same. 
(Prior code § 2-63)  
2.32.060 - Countersigning bonds and notes. 
The Auditor shall countersign with the City Treasurer and City Manager all the bonds, notes and certificates of indebtedness issued for loans to the City, authorized by the Council, and also all the orders drawn by the City Manager on the Treasurer as provided in Section 2.36.090 of this Title, and he shall prepare and countersign warrants directed to the Treasurer for all lawful expenditures. 
(Prior code § 2-64)  
2.32.070 - Receipts and disbursements. 
No person, board or commission, unless authorized under the statutes, shall collect or receive any moneys for any purpose whatsoever on behalf of the City except the City Treasurer or his authorized agents. Whenever it shall appear to the Treasurer that moneys should be paid direct to departments, the same shall be paid only by the authority of the Treasurer and to such person as he shall designate and under such conditions as he shall prescribe, and all returns to the Treasurer, and all rates, bills and assessment (except tax bills) due the City shall be made out upon such forms as the Auditor shall deem proper. 
(Prior code § 2-65)  
2.32.080 - Examination of books and accounts of departments. 
The Auditor shall examine once a year, or as often as the City Manager may direct, the books, records and accounts of the several departments and executive boards, and make his recommendations to the City Manager of such modifications, improvements or charges as may be deemed advisable. The Auditor shall order and govern the installation of such modifications, improvements or changes. 
(Prior code § 2-66)  
2.32.090 - Annual report of unfinished contracts. 
Annually, in January, and at other times when requested by the City Manager, the Auditor shall make written report to the City Manager of all unfinished contracts in his possession made with the City and of the existing financial condition of each contract. 
(Prior code § 2-67)  
2.32.100 - Annual audit. 
Annually, at the expiration of the fiscal year, the City Manager shall cause an audit of the accounts of the City to be made. 
(Prior code § 2-68)  
Chapter 2.34 - PURCHASING DEPARTMENT 
 
2.34.010 - Purchasing Agent—Authority. 
The Purchasing Agent shall be the head of the Purchasing Department. 
(Prior code § 2-69)  
2.34.020 - Appointment—Term. 
The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the City Manager in the month of March, and shall hold office from April 1st for two years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Prior code § 2-70)  
2.34.030 - Vacancies. 
A vacancy in the office of Purchasing Agent shall be filled by the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2-71)  
2.34.040 - Bond requirements. 
The Purchasing Agent shall give a bond for the faithful performance of his duties in such form as the City Solicitor shall approve, in a sum not less than ten thousand dollars. The bond shall be executed, approved and delivered before he enters upon the duties of his office or within ten days after his appointment, whichever event shall first occur. 
(Prior code § 2-72)  
2.34.050 - Failure to post bond. 
If the Purchasing Agent fails to give the required bond, his appointment shall be void and a new appointment shall be made forthwith. In case of the dissolution of insolvency of any of the sureties on the bond, the Purchasing Agent shall, upon notice from the City Manager, give a new bond with sufficient surety or sureties. If the Purchasing Agent fails to give such new bond within ten days after notice by the City Manager, such failure shall be sufficient cause for his removal from office. 
(Prior code § 2-73)  
2.34.060 - Compensation—Determined by Council. 
The Purchasing Agent shall receive such salary as the Council shall from time to time determine. 
(Prior code § 2-74)  
2.34.070 - Compensation—Limited to salary. 
The Purchasing Agent shall devote his entire time to the performance of his duties and shall receive no compensation other than his stipulated salary for any service rendered by him. 
(Prior code § 2-75)  
2.34.080 - Employment of clerks and storekeepers. 
The Purchasing Agent shall have authority, subject to the approval of the City Manager, to employ clerks and storekeepers as may be necessary for the performance of the duties vested in the department. 
(Prior code § 2-76)  
2.34.090 - Purchasing agent for city—Exceptions. 
The Purchasing Agent shall procure all supplies or services for the City or any department thereof and may delegate such power and duty pursuant to G.L. c. 30B. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-77)  
2.34.100 - Requisition procedures. 
Any department head or official of the City in need of supplies or services shall make requisition for the same of the Purchasing Agent upon requisition blanks devised and supplied by the Purchasing Agent. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-78)  
2.34.120 - Purchases in advance of requisitions. 
The Purchasing Agent shall have authority to procure in advance of requisition such supplies or services as may be needed by the City and its departments, and which upon requisition shall be furnished to the Purchasing Agent by the various departments. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-80)  
2.34.130 - Storage lease agreements. 
The Purchasing Agent, with the approval of the City Manager, shall have authority to lease premises necessary for storing such supplies as he may procure. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-81)  
2.34.140 - City Auditor approval required. 
No liability shall be incurred upon procurements of supplies or services made by the Purchasing Agent until they shall have been approved by the City Auditor. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-82)  
2.34.150 - Competitive contracts. 
All procurements for supplies or services exceeding five thousand dollars shall be based upon competition, and all procurements for supplies or services of ten thousand or over shall be made in the manner provided by Chapter 2.112 of this title. 
(Ord. 1249 amended 03/19/2001; Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: Ord. 944, 1980: prior code § 2-83)  
2.34.160 - Purchases made for City only. 
The Purchasing Agent shall procure only such supplies and services as are to be used in the business of the City. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-84)  
2.34.170 - Purchasing Department Reserve Fund. 
An appropriation shall be made to the Purchasing Department to be known as the Purchasing Department Reserve Fund, to which all purchases of supplies, not made upon specific requisitions, shall be charged and to which all payments by departments and officials for such supplies shall be credited. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-85)  
2.34.190 - Recordkeeping of charges. 
The Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of the cost of supplies and services which shall be open at all reasonable times for public inspection. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-87)  
2.34.200 - Sale of surplus property— Approval required. 
All personal property of the City not needed for public use or that may have become unsuitable for use, shall upon the written recommendation of the department head or official in charge of such property and approval of the City Manager, be sold by the Purchasing Agent. 
(Prior code § 2-88)  
2.34.210 - Sale of surplus property. 
All sales of surplus personal property made by the Purchasing Agent, where the dollar value is less than five thousand dollars, shall be made pursuant to sound business practice. 
(Ord. 1249 amended 03/19/2001; Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-89)  
2.34.220 - Sale of surplus property— Disposition and reporting receipts. 
The Purchasing Agent shall report to the Auditor all moneys received and payable to the City Treasury from the sale of personal property of the City. 
(Prior code § 2-90)  
2.34.230 - Sale of surplus property— Expenses. 
All expenses incurred by the Purchasing Agent in conducting any sale of the personal property of the City shall be approved by the City Auditor before payment. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-91)  
2.34.240 - Right of inspection of City property. 
The Purchasing Agent shall at such times as he may deem reasonable inspect the supplies of the City. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-92)  
2.34.260 - Inspection of materials purchased. 
All supplies and services procured, except emergency procurements, shall be inspected by or under the supervision of the Purchasing Agent. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-94)  
2.34.270 - Estimate of future needs. 
As and when the Purchasing Agent may direct, every department, commission or board shall make an annual inventory of the personal property under its charge, and shall forward to the Purchasing Agent an estimate of the supplies it will need during the ensuing year. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-95)  
2.34.280 - Emergency purchases. 
In case of emergency, a department head or official may directly purchase such supplies or services as may be needed, but before liability shall accrue to the City, approval of the purchase shall be given by the Purchasing Agent. 
(Ord. 1249 amended 03/19/2001; Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-96)  
2.34.290 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Purchasing Agent shall annually, within ten days after the close of the fiscal year, make a report to the City Manager and City Council of the activities of his department, which shall contain an account of equipment, materials and supplies, bought, furnished and sold, and the prices paid or received therefor, an inventory of equipment, materials and supplies on hand, and such recommendations as he shall deem expedient. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-97)  
Chapter 2.36 - TREASURY DEPARTMENT 
 
2.36.010 - City Treasurer—Authority— General duties. 
A.  The City Treasurer shall be the collector of taxes and shall have charge of the treasury and collecting departments and the books, documents and papers thereof. He shall be appointed by the City Manager during the month of May, and shall hold office from June 1st for a term of one year and until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
B.  The City Treasurer shall receive, receipt for, and have the care and custody of the current funds of the City, and also of all moneys, property and securities which may be in his charge by virtue of any statute or ordinance, or by virtue of any gift, devise, bequest or deposit. 
C.  The City Treasurer shall negotiate all loans authorized by the City Council and shall countersign with the City Auditor and the City Manager all bonds, notes and certificates of indebtedness issued for loans to the City, authorized by the City Council. When surrendered to him for cancellation he may exchange coupon or registered bonds, notes or certificates of the City for one or more registered bonds, notes or certificates having the same maturity and rate of interest, and they may be issued to the same or new owner or owners. Such new bonds, notes or certificates shall be signed by the Treasurer and countersigned by the City Auditor and the City Manager. As collector of taxes he shall have all special powers conferred on a treasurer appointed collector by a vote of the City Council. 
D.  The City Treasurer may be elected by the Board of Commissioners of sinking funds to serve as the Treasurer of the Board, but shall not receive compensation therefor in addition to his salary as City Treasurer. 
E.  A vacancy in the office of Treasurer shall be filled for the residue of the term in the same manner in which the office was originally filled. 
(Prior code § 2-98)  
2.36.020 - Bond requirements. 
The Treasurer shall give a bond in such form as the Commissioner of Corporations and Taxation of the Commonwealth shall approve, with sufficient sureties, to be approved by the Commissioner in a sum not less than the amount fixed by the City Council. The bond shall be executed, approved and delivered before he enters upon the duties of his office or within ten days after his appointment, whichever event shall first occur. Should he fail to give such bond within the time required in this section, the election shall be void and a new appointment shall be had forthwith. 
(Prior code § 2-99)  
2.36.030 - Collection of taxes. 
The City Treasurer shall have the power and be charged with the duty of collecting all accounts of every nature due the City and shall demand in writing payment of the same. He shall use every means available to collect the same and after he has exhausted all such means and failed he shall refer the same to the Law Department. All departments shall commit to him on forms supplied by the City Auditor, all accounts due the City for collection. 
(Prior code § 2-100)  
2.36.040 - Payment of accounts and claims—Orders. 
A.  The City Manager is authorized to draw orders on the Treasurer for the payment of accounts and claims approved and certified as provided in this chapter. He may draw his order to pay any sum not exceeding three-quarters of the amount then due, by way of advance on contracts made, or on work begun and not completed, upon being satisfied of the necessity therefor by a certificate signed by the board or head of department controlling the expenditure, within the sum especially appropriated therefor by the City Council, or draw his order for any sum upon the express order of the City Council. 
B.  The City Manager shall draw his order for the weekly payment of the wages of such employees as are entitled by law to be paid weekly: the amounts of such wages to be entered upon payrolls which shall be made up to the last day of the week and certified to as correct by the heads of the respective departments, except where a department is under the charge of an executive board, in which case they shall be so certified by some officer designated by the board; all such amounts to be within the appropriations to which the same shall be chargeable. 
C.  The City Manager shall draw his order for the payment of the salaries of the teachers of the public schools, and the sum due for State, military aid and soldiers' relief; the amount of such salaries to be entered upon payrolls which shall be certified to be correct by the School Committee, and the amounts of such sum for State and military aid and soldiers' relief to be entered upon payrolls, which shall be certified correct by the committee on soldiers' relief, such amounts to be within the appropriations to which the same shall be chargeable. 
D.  The City Manager may, from time to time, draw his orders upon the Treasurer for the payment of such sums as he may deem necessary to be paid out of any appropriation which may be made and set apart by the City Council as a fund to meet emergencies, but never to exceed the amount of such appropriation. 
E.  Other payrolls shall be drawn up to comply with all applicable laws of the Commonwealth. 
F.  Bills received and audited shall be paid within a reasonable period of time. Such payment shall comply with all applicable laws of the Commonwealth. For the purposes of this section, reasonable shall be defined as within thirty days of receipt. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-101)  
2.36.050 - Payment of checks, orders and bonds. 
The Treasurer shall pay all drafts, checks and orders directed to him from the Auditing Department as provided by law, for the payment of demands against the City; shall, on presentation, pay all executions against the City duly certified as correct by the City Solicitor; also, all bonds issued by the City, and the interest on the same as they or it becomes due; shall cancel all bonds and coupons and immediately transmit to the City Auditor the bonds, coupons and executions so paid. 
(Prior code § 2-102)  
2.36.060 - Payment procedures—Authorization required. 
No money shall be paid out of the City Treasury except upon the written order of the City Manager, addressed to the Treasurer, countersigned by the Auditor; provided, however, that the Treasurer may pay before such order is drawn, any sum of money due on the principal or interest of any note, bond or other security of the City, or on any judgment against the City, and also refunds certified by the Chief Superintendent, Board of Assessors or for minors' license. 
(Prior code § 2-103)  
2.36.070 - Financial year close—Treasurer duties. 
The Treasurer shall use and apply in such manner as the City Council may direct, all property, money and securities in his possession at the close of each financial year. The financial year shall begin on July 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-104)  
2.36.080 - Cemetery Fund—Disposition of revenues. 
The Treasurer shall receive and have the care and custody of all moneys paid by persons for the perpetual care of lots in the Cambridge Cemetery, and give vouchers of the City therefor. He shall notify the Superintendent of the Cemetery of all such payments together with a description of the lots and graves on account of which such payments are made. He shall invest such moneys in some safe manner, and pay interest realized thereon into the City Treasury. The fund created by such payments shall be denominated "The Cemetery Fund for the Perpetual Care of Lots." The net income realized from such fund shall be devoted to the care of the graves and lots for the perpetual care of which payments have been made as aforesaid. 
(Prior code § 2-105)  
2.36.090 - Library Funds. 
The Treasurer shall receive all sums of money paid under the provisions of 4 G.L., c. 140, § 172, and shall forthwith credit the amount of such money to the appropriation for the Public Library. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 2-106)  
2.36.100 - Water Works Department—Receipt of payments. 
The Treasurer shall collect all rents, water rates and other sums payable to the City, not otherwise specially provided for. He shall, in April of each year, notify all persons assessed for the use of water that the annual bills for water rates are due and payable at his office on May 1st; and he shall give notice of and collect all other bills on account of the Water Works, which may, from time to time, be placed in his hands by the Water Works Department. He shall supply to the Water Works Department daily, a record of his receipts on account of the Water Works, with the number and amount of each bill collected. 
(Prior code § 2-107)  
2.36.110 - Crediting and debiting accounts—Recordkeeping—Council reporting requirements. 
The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all his receipts and payments as City Treasurer and collector of taxes, making the same conform as nearly as may be with the accounts kept by the City Auditor. He shall credit each department or account with all sums received on its account and shall charge to each all sums paid out on such account. He shall not pay any money out of the Treasury except upon orders of the City Manager drawn in the form prescribed in Section 2.32.030 of this title, or except for special purposes as provided in Sections 2.36.040 and 2.36.060 of this chapter. He shall annually, in July, give to the City Council a written report in detail, of receipts and expenditures for the year ending June 30th and submit a copy thereof to the City Manager. 
(Amended during 1987 codification; Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-108)  
2.36.120 - Auditor reporting requirements. 
The City Treasurer shall, on the first day of every month give a written report to the Auditor, in detail, of all his collections, receipts and disbursements during the preceding month with the names of persons of, or to whom and on what account the same were received or paid. It shall be sufficient, in reporting the receipts for taxes, assessments and water rates, to state the amount received, and the particular warrant, assessment or account upon which the collection was made. He shall also report a true record of all discounts, abatements and repayments allowed during the month on taxes, assessment, water rates or other accounts. 
(Prior code § 2-109)  
2.36.130 - Sidewalk and sewer assessments. 
Whenever any assessments for defraying the expenses of constructing or repairing common sewers, or of completing sidewalks, are delivered to the Treasurer for collection, he shall forthwith make a demand in writing for the payment of such assessments; and, if any such assessment remains unpaid for three months after such demand, and no notice of apportionments, or request therefor be filed in his office, he shall collect the same according to law. Whenever the amount due and payable on any mortgage belonging to the City is paid to the Treasurer, he shall certify the same forthwith to the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2-110)  
2.36.140 - Payroll responsibilties. 
The heads of departments shall furnish to the City Treasurer weekly payrolls of employees in their respective departments as are entitled by law to be paid weekly, and monthly payrolls for all other employees stating the full name of each employee, title of his office or specific nature of the labor which he was originally engaged to perform, kind of work in which he has actually been engaged since the submission of the last previous payroll, salary, wages or other compensation and dates of employment; and after such payrolls are approved and certified, the Treasurer shall make payments to such employee, his authorized agent or attorney, and shall take therefor the receipt of no other person than such employee, agent or attorney. The Treasurer shall pay all employees of the City, whose names are borne upon such payrolls, either in person at the City Hall, or by sending a clerk or paymaster to pay such persons at the places where they are employed. 
(Prior code § 2-111)  
2.36.150 - Compensation—Expenditures for collection. 
A.  The Treasurer shall receive such salary as the City Council shall from time to time determine. 
B.  All fees, charges and commissions of every kind allowed by law, for the collection of taxes, betterments, rates and assessment of every kind, to the Treasurer and collector of taxes shall be collected and paid by him into the City Treasury. At the end of each month he shall give to the Auditor a sworn written statement of all moneys so received by him or have been paid into the Treasury. 
C.  The City Treasurer shall be allowed to expend as expenses necessarily incurred in the employment of attorneys at law, Deputy Collectors, Sheriffs, Deputy Sheriffs or Constables to collect unpaid bills for poll and personal taxes and department bills (except Water Department bills) which have been in his possession for more than six months, a sum not exceeding twenty-five percent of the amount collected. 
(Prior code § 2-112)  
2.36.160 - Appointment and removal of clerks. 
The Treasurer shall appoint the clerks in his office and shall be answerable for their conduct in the discharge of their duties. Such appointments shall be forthwith certified to the City Manager. The clerks shall receive such compensation as the City Treasurer may, from time to time, determine with the approval of the City Manager, and they may be removed by the Treasurer for such cause as he shall assign in writing in the order of removal, which order shall be forthwith communicated to the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2-113)  
2.36.170 - Notification of tax assessments. 
The Treasurer shall, as soon as possible after receiving any tax list and warrant, send a notice to each person assessed, resident and nonresident, of the amount of his tax. If he shall send such notice through the mail he shall postpay and direct the same to the place of residence of such person on January 1st of the year in which the tax was assessed, and if to a resident of the City, shall direct it to the street and number of his residence, if possible. 
(Prior code § 2-114)  
2.36.180 - Interest on unpaid taxes. 
Upon all taxes remaining unpaid on October 1st, interest and costs shall be charged and collected as required by the laws of the Commonwealth. 
(Prior code § 2-115)  
2.36.190 - Monthly reporting of receipts. 
The Treasurer shall, during the first week of each month, render to the City Manager a statement of his receipts and payments for the month preceding, together with a summary of his receipts and payments for the current financial year up to the close of the preceding month. 
(Prior code § 2-116)  
2.36.200 - Invalid tax deeds. 
Whenever it appears to the City Treasurer that an invalid tax deed has been given to the City Collector for an estate sold at a tax sale, the City Treasurer shall charge the cost of calling in such invalid tax deed to the appropriation for "abatements." 
(Prior code § 2-117)  
Chapter 2.38 - BUDGET AND PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT 
 
2.38.010 - Director—Appointment—Term—Vacancy. 
A.  The Budget and Personnel Department shall be under the charge of the Director. He shall be appointed by the City Manager in the month of August and shall hold office from September 1st for a term of three years and until a successor has been appointed and qualified. 
B.  A vacancy in the office of Director shall be filled for the residue of the term in the same manner in which the office is originally filled. 
(Prior code § 2-118)  
2.38.020 - Expenditures and estimates. 
The Budget and Personnel Director shall inquire into actual and proposed expenditures of the City and its departments and shall bring together the estimates of the financial needs of the City and shall check such estimates against information relative to past expenditures and income. In general, he shall assist the City Manager in the preparation of the annual budget, of any supplementary budgets, in the calculation of transfer proposed and of any other matters relating to expenditures to be made by the City. 
(Prior code § 2-120)  
2.38.030 - Departmental investigation authority. 
The Budget and Personnel Director shall have authority at any time to examine into and investigate the work of any City department or official, to require reports from such department or official relative to any and all costs of operation, and to require statements from any department or official as to reasons for any proposed expenditure. The Budget and Personnel Director shall at any time have access to the records of any City department or official. 
(Prior code § 2-121)  
2.38.040 - Additional duties. 
In addition to the duties specifically prescribed to by law, the Budget and Personnel Director shall perform such other duties with reference to the City budget or the City personnel as the City Manager may require. 
(Prior code § 2-123)  
2.38.050 - Personnel and civil service. 
The Budget and Personnel Director shall interview City officials, department heads, City employees and any officers or agents of the City concerning all matters relating to personnel. He shall investigate and make reports and recommendations to the City Manager concerning compensation, service, ratings, civil service classifications, safety measures and complaints of City employees, officials, departments heads and any officers or agents of the City. He shall discharge any other duties as may relate to the personnel of the City. He shall keep an accurate system of records of all persons employed by the City. 
(Prior code § 2-124)  
2.38.060 - Director of Finance authority. 
In addition to the duties imposed by this chapter, the Budget and Personnel Director shall perform such other duties as may be required of him from time to time under the provisions of Chapter 2.30 of this title. 
(Prior code § 2-125)  
2.38.070 - Reports and recommendations. 
The Budget and Personnel Director shall report to the City Manager with all reasonable speed such information as he may desire relative to the activities of any department or official of the City. He shall make reports and recommendations to the City Manager concerning methods and means by which the work of any department or official may be more efficiently or economically performed. 
(Prior code § 2-122)  
2.38.080 - Compensation. 
The Budget and Personnel Director shall receive such salary as the City Council shall from time to time determine. 
(Prior code § 2-119)  
Chapter 2.40 - ASSESSORS DEPARTMENT 
 
2.40.010 - Board of Assessors—Director of Assessment—Appointments—Terms—Vacancies. 
A.  The Assessors Department shall be under the charge of the Chairman of the Board of Assessors, who shall be known as the Director of Assessment. The Chairman of the Board of Assessors/Director of Assessment shall be appointed by and salary shall be set by the City Manager. The Director shall serve as the Department Head of the Assessors Department and shall be responsible to the City Manager for the operation of the Assessors Department. 
B.  There shall be three Assessors, including the Chairman/Director, who shall be appointed by the City Manager for terms of three years, such appointments to be made in the month of December, and the terms for each appointment shall commence on the first Monday in January following the appointment. 
C.  If a vacancy occurs at any time on the Board of Assessors, including the Chairman/Director, the City Manager shall fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
D.  The Board of Assessors shall have all the powers and duties and be subject to the limitations of assessor of taxes, as set forth in the laws of the Commonwealth, and shall devote full time to the duties of the office. 
(Ord. 1064, 1988: prior code § 2-133)  
Chapter 2.42 - VETERANS SERVICE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.42.010 - Director—Authority. 
The Veterans Service Department shall be under the charge of the Director of the Veterans Service Department. 
(Prior code § 2-134)  
2.42.020 - Appointment—Term. 
The City Manager shall appoint a Director in April of every other year for the term of two years from May 1st of the year of appointment until his successor is appointed and qualified. The Director shall be a full-time employee and hold no other position or receive any other salary from the City. 
(Prior code § 2-135)  
2.42.030 - Advisory Committee—Appointment—Term—Compensation. 
A.  The City Manager shall appoint not fewer than forty persons to constitute an Advisory Committee of the Veterans Service Department annually in April to serve for one year from May 1st. 
B.  Members of the Committee shall be appointed with regard to geographical representation and to representation of all organizations in the City which shall be in a position to be of service to veterans. 
C.  The members shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Prior code § 2-136)  
2.42.040 - Departmental duties. 
The Department shall advise and assist persons who have served or are serving in the Armed Forces of the United States, and their families concerning their rights and privileges under federal, state and local laws; shall advise and assist such persons in obtaining all benefits; shall advise and assist veterans in obtaining employment and training and retraining for any employment, and in obtaining opportunities for further education, and in obtaining medical treatment and assistance. The Department shall further keep informed as to the programs or facilities of any organizations, whether public or private, of service to or of interest to veterans and their families, and in general shall carry on its activities for the purpose of extending aid, other than soldiers' relief and State and military aid disbursed under G.L. Chapter 115, to members of the armed forces and their families or veterans and their families. 
(Prior code § 2-137)  
2.42.050 - Departmental employees. 
The Department shall employ, subject to the provisions of G.L. Chapter 31 and of the Charter, such employees as may be from time to time necessary. 
(Prior code § 2-138)  
Chapter 2.44 - INSPECTIONAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT 
 
2.44.010 - Established—Appointment of Commissioner. 
Pursuant to G.L. c. 43 § 5, there is established an Inspectional Services Department (the "Department"), which shall be under the charge of an officer known as the Inspectional Services Commissioner (the "Commissioner") appointed by the City Manager. The Commissioner shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 995 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 5 § 5-1)  
2.44.020 - Commissioner—Authority. 
The Commissioner shall also serve as Inspector of Buildings and Building Commissioner for purposes of Sections 107 and 108 of the State Building Code (780 CMR), and as Commissioner of Housing Inspection for the purpose of carrying out the duties prescribed by G.L. c. 111 §§ 127A, 127B, 127C, 127E, 127H and 127L, or any other statute, for the Commissioner of Housing Inspection of the City. 
(Ord. 995 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 5 § 5-2)  
2.44.030 - Commissioner—Powers and duties. 
All the powers and duties heretofore exercised and performed by the Building Commissioner shall be exercised and performed by the Commissioner, who shall also exercise and perform such powers and duties as may be assigned or delegated to him pursuant to Section 2.44.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 995 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 5 § 5-3)  
2.44.040 - Inspectional duties. 
The Commissioner, under the direction of the City Manager, shall perform such inspectional duties as may be lawfully delegated to him by the several commissioners, departments, boards and commissions of the City, including but not limited to the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals, the Commissioner of Public Works, the Planning Board, the Conservation Commission, the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department. The inspectional duties shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the delegating authority and the applicable code or law. 
(Ord. 995 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 5 § 5-4)  
2.44.050 - Transfer of certain boards to department. 
The Board of Zoning Appeal, the Board of Examiners and the Board of Building Code Appeal are transferred to the Department, but none of them shall be under its supervision or control. 
(Ord. 995 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 5 § 5-5)  
2.44.060 - Administration. 
The Commissioner may establish within the Department such administrative units as may be necessary or convenient for its efficient and economical administration, and, when necessary or convenient for such purpose, he may abolish or merge any such units. 
(Ord. 995 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 5 § 5-6)  
Chapter 2.46 - PUBLIC LIBRARY DEPARTMENT 
 
2.46.010 - Board of Trustees—Authority— Composition. 
The Public Library Department shall be under the charge of a board of seven Trustees, to consist of one member of the School Committee and six citizens at large to be chosen as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-172)  
2.46.020 - Appointment—Term. 
A.  The City Manager shall annually, in the month of January, or whenever a vacancy may occur appoint one member of the School Committee, to serve as Trustee for the municipal year. 
B.  Also in January of each year, two citizens at large shall be appointed by the City Manager, as Trustees to hold office for the term of three years from the third Monday of January of the year in which they are appointed, and in case of a vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Prior code § 2-173)  
2.46.030 - Officers—Quorum. 
The Trustees shall elect from their number a Chairman and Secretary, and four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Every third year in the month of January, the Trustees shall choose a librarian to serve for three years who shall be removable at the pleasure of the Board and who shall receive such compensation as the Trustees shall determine. 
(Prior code § 2-174)  
2.46.040 - Powers and duties. 
The Trustees shall expend all moneys presented to the Library, or approriated by the City Council (See Section 2.36.090), for the purpose of books, the improvement of the Library, its care, custody, maintenance and repairs of the building. They may establish such fees for the use of the Library, and shall make and publish bylaws and regulations, to extend the benefits of the institution as widely as practicable throughout the community. All moneys received for the use of the Library shall be paid weekly into the City Treasury. 
(Prior code § 2-175)  
2.46.050 - Expenditure determinations. 
No money shall be paid from the City Treasury on account of the Library, except by order of the Trustees, and in pursuance of an order signed by the City Manager; and in no case shall the amount drawn exceed the amount appropriated for the Library. 
(Prior code § 2-176)  
2.46.060 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Trustees shall present to the City Manager annually, in July, a report of their activities and a statement of the condition of the Library, the number of books added during the year, with an accurate account of all receipts and expenditures, together with any other information or suggestions which they may deem desirable. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-177)  
Chapter 2.48 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.48.010 - Fire Chief—Authority— Appointment. 
The Fire Department shall be under the charge of the Chief who shall be appointed by the City Manager subject to the provisions of the Acts of 1937, Chapter 262, for an indefinite period, and the City Manager may, at any time, remove him in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(Prior code § 10-1)  
2.48.020 - Platoon system established. 
The Department shall be established upon the basis of a two platoon system. The Chief shall have authority to make necessary changes in the number of members of the Department and in equipment to meet the requirements of the system. 
(Prior code § 10-2)  
2.48.030 - Alternate official. 
If the Chief of the Fire Department is absent or unable from any cause temporarily to perform the duties of Chief, those duties shall be performed by the Administrative Officer to the Chief or such other ranking officer as the City Manager may designate. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: prior code § 10-3)  
2.48.040 - Vacancy. 
If the office of Chief becomes vacant it shall be filled by the City Manager pending a permanent appointment in accordance with 1 A.L.M. c. 41, § 61A. 
(Prior code § 10-4)  
2.48.050 - Departmental promotions. 
Promotions in the Department shall be made only by competitive civil service examinations and from the rank next below the position to be filled. 
(Prior code § 10-5)  
2.48.060 - Regular tour of duty. 
A.  No member of the Fire Department shall be required to perform a regular tour of duty of more than forty-two hours in any seven-day period. 
B.  "Regular tour of duty" shall not include any hours of service in answering multiple alarms by an off-duty platoon or emergency duty. The Chief shall have authority to make necessary changes, transfers and additions to the department to effectuate this section. 
(Prior code § 10-6)  
2.48.070 - Vacations. 
A.  Each permanent member of the Fire Department shall be allowed annual vacation without loss of pay, as follows: 
1.  For service of not more than ten years, an allowance of two weeks; 
2.  For service of ten years or more, but not more than twenty years, an allowance of three weeks; 
3.  For service of twenty years or more, an allowance of four weeks. 
B.  The above mentioned vacations to be taken at such time within the year as may be determined by the Chief, but each member must have served six months previous to the vacation period before he shall be allowed a vacation. Days off falling within the vacation period shall not be considered a part thereof. 
(Prior code § 10-7)  
2.48.080 - Aid to other cities or towns. 
The Chief or, during his absence, the Deputy Chief is authorized to go to aid another city, town or fire district in extinguishing fires therein, with both apparatus and men, and, while in the performance of their duties in extending such aid, the members shall have the same immunities and privileges as if performing the same within the City. 
(Prior code § 10-8)  
2.48.090 - Master mechanic—Appointment— Duties. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall appoint a Master Mechanic who shall be a member of the Department and who shall have charge of the Fire Department repair shop and supervise all repairs of apparatus and equipment belonging to the Fire Department. 
(Prior code § 10-9)  
2.48.100 - Inspector of Garages and Fire Prevention—Appointment— Authority. 
The Board of License Commissioners is authorized to appoint an Inspector of Garages and Fire Prevention who shall act under the authority and direction of the Board in the inspection of all premises which it may be intended to use for the purchase, storage, sale, barter or exchange of rags, cotton, feathers, paper stock, excelsior, straw or other inflammable junk so as to determine for the Board the exact condition of such premises and whether or not such conditions may be in agreement with the provisions of the statutes of the Commonwealth or ordinances of the City. He shall also perform such other service as may be required by the regulations of the Board of License Commissioners. 
(Prior code § 10-10)  
2.48.110 - Departmental expenditures. 
The Chief may expend for the conduct of his Department such sums as the City Council may appropriate. 
(Prior code § 10-11)  
2.48.120 - Other rules and regulations. 
The Chief of the Department with the approval of the City Manager, shall make rules and regulations governing the operation of the Department. 
(Prior code § 10-12)  
2.48.130 - Fee Schedule—Fire Department authority. 
The Fire Department will charge fees for permits and inspections required by G.L. c. 148, according to the schedules set forth in the following Sections 2.48.140 through 2.48.160. Where the amount of the fee is more than ten dollars, the amount in excess of ten dollars is for the inspection which is required in conjunction with the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 1052 (part), 1987: prior code § 10-33)  
2.48.140 - Fee Schedule—G.L. c. 148 Section 10A and Board of Fire Prevention permits and inspections. 
The Fire Department will charge the following fees for permits and inspections required by G.L. c. 148 Section 10A and the Regulations of the Board of Fire Prevention: 
Tank truck inspection (527 CMR 8.17(3)(h) $25.00 
Storage of fuel for oil burner (527 CMR 4.02(2)(b) $10.00 
Installation of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
equipment and storage of LPG (527 CMR 6.08) $25.00 
Storage of explosives (527 CMR 13.04(1) $10.00 
Use of Class A and B explosives (527 CMR 13.04(3) $50.00 
Storage of flammable fluids, solids or gases $25.00 
Sale, etc., of model rockets (527 CMR 16.07) $10.00 
Supervised firing of cannon (527 CMR 22.02) $10.00 
Registration of underground storage tanks (527 CMR 9.00) $50.00 
Inspection of theater (527 CMR 10.10) $25.00 
Tank installation (527 CMR 9.15) $50.00 
(Ord. 1052 (part), 1987: prior code § 10-34)  
2.48.150 - Fee Schedule—Various G.L. c. 148 permits and inspections. 
The Fire Department will charge the following fees for permits and inspections required by various sections of G.L. c. 148: 
Removal or relocation of underground gasoline tank (G.L. c. 148 s. 38A) $50.00 
Display of fireworks (G.L. c. 148 s. 39A) $25.00 
Inspection of institutions licensed by Department of Public Health or Department of Public Welfare (G.L. c. 148 s. 4) $25.00 
Inspection of premises specified in innholder's license (G.L. c. 148 s. 4) $25.00 
Permit and inspection of certain public accommodations (G.L. c. 148 s. 26C) $25.00 
Permit and inspection of certain residential buildings and structures (G.L. c. 148 s. 26E) $25.00 
Permit and inspection of certain residential buildings and structures on sale or transfer (G.L. c. 148 s. 26F) $25.00 
(Ord. 1052 (part), 1987: prior code § 10-35)  
2.48.160 - Fee Schedule—Work required by State Building Code. 
The Fire Department will charge the following fees for work required by the State Building Code (780 CMR): 
Plan review (780 CMR 1200.1) $50.00 
$200.00 (building more than 70 feet in height) 
(Ord. 1052 (part), 1987: prior code § 10-36)  
2.48.170 - Regulations for automatic fire alarm systems. 
This section and the following three sections are intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of the owners and tenants of buildings which have an automatic fire alarm system (AFAS), as defined in s. 201.0 of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR), which is connected directly to the Cambridge Fire Department or is connected to said Department indirectly through a private alarm company. 
(Ord. 1110 (part), 1990)  
2.48.180 - Fee for false alarms. 
A.  Regarding buildings which have an AFAS connected directly to the Fire Department or connected indirectly to said Department through a private alarm company, a fee will be charged by the Fire Department for all responses by the Department to such buildings, where the response is caused by the activation of the AFAS, and the fee may be assessed against the owner or tenant of the building. No fee will be charged in the following circumstances: 
1.  Where the AFAS was activated by an actual fire. 
2.  Where the AFAS was activated by smoke from a source such as burning food or an overheated motor or overheated electrical appliance or other equipment. 
3.  Where someone, with reasonable cause, activates a manual pull station. 
B.  No fee will be charged for the first three responses in any six-month period, i.e. any period between January 1st and June 30th or between July 1st and December 31st. After the third response in any six-month period, the following fees will be assessed for subsequent responses within that period: 
Fourth response,       $ 50.00 
Fifth response,       75.00 
Sixth response,       100.00 
Seventh response,       150.00 
Eighth and subsequent responses,       $200.00 
(Ord. 1110 (part), 1990)  
2.48.190 - Appeal. 
Any person who is aggrieved by the assessment of a fee pursuant to Section 2.48.180, may, within seven days of notice of said assessment, appeal in writing to the Chief of the Fire Department. The appeal will be heard by the Fire Chief or his designee. 
(Ord. 1110 (part), 1990)  
2.48.200 - Rules and regulations. 
The Chief of the Fire Department may promulgate rules and regulations to implement Sections 2.48.170, 2.48.180 and 2.48.190. 
(Ord. 1110 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 2.50 - BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION 
 
2.50.010 - Established—Appointment of Inspectors. 
A.  A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department is established which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. 
B.  The Chief shall designate an officer of the Department as Chief Inspector of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, who shall hold this office at the pleasure of the Chief of the Fire Department. 
C.  The Chief of the Fire Department may also designate not more than five inspectors or as shall from time to time be authorized by the City Council. The members of this Bureau shall be members of the Fire Department and shall wear a special badge with the designation "Fire Prevention Inspector" and shall be fully uniformed while on inspection work. 
(Prior code § 10-13)  
2.50.020 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce all laws and ordinances of the Commonwealth and City, covering the following: 
1.  The prevention of fires; 
2.  The storage and use of explosives and flammables; 
3.  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment; 
4.  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
5.  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotel, lodginghouses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose; 
6.  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire; 
7.  The investigation of buildings especially susceptible to fire; and 
8.  The investigation of hazardous occupancies. 
B.  The Bureau shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this chapter, and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. The Chief of the Fire Department may delegate any of his powers or duties under this chapter to any officer of the Fire Department. 
(Prior code § 10-14)  
2.50.030 - Recommendations to City Council. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall investigate and recommend to the City Council such additional ordinances, or amendments to existing ordinances, as he may deem necessary for safeguarding life and property against fire. 
(Prior code § 10-15)  
2.50.040 - Instructions for reporting requirements. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall prepare instructions for the Chief Inspector and his assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-16)  
2.50.050 - Investigation of causes and circumstances of fires. 
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the City by which property had been destroyed or damaged and so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. The Chief Inspector shall begin the investigation immediately upon the occurrence of such fire, and if it appears to him that such fire is of suspicious origin he shall immediately notify the Chief of the Fire Department who shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(Prior code § 10-17)  
2.50.060 - Inspection and approval of hazardous materials storage. 
Before licenses may be issued for the keeping, storage, use, manufacture, sale, handling, transportation or other disposition, of highly flammable materials and rubbish, crude petroleum or any of its products, gun or blasting powder, dynamite or explosives of any kind, including fireworks, fire cracker and signaling explosives, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief Inspector or his assistants shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used for any such purposes. 
(Prior code § 10-18)  
2.50.070 - Inspection of hazardous businesses. 
The Chief Inspector or an inspector specially designated thereto shall inspect, as often as may be necessary, but not less than once a month, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storages or installations of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives and flammable materials, all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler systems, and such other hazards or appliances as the Chief of the Fire Department shall designate, and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(Prior code § 10-19)  
2.50.080 - Inspection of buildings and public thoroughfares. 
A.  The Chief of the Fire Department shall inspect, or cause to be inspected by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, or by the Fire Department officers and members, as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinance affecting the fire hazard. This section shall not authorize entry into a one-family or two-family dwelling without the consent of the occupant. 
B.  If such officers or persons find in any building or upon any premises any accumulations of combustible rubbish, including waste paper, rags, cardboard, string, package material, sawdust, shavings, sticks, waste leather or rubber, broken boxes or barrels or other refuse that is or may become dangerous as a fire menace or as an obstacle to easy ingress into, or egress from such building or premises, they shall, in writing, order same to be removed or such condition to be remedied. Notice of such order shall be served upon the owner, occupant or his authorized agent. If the order is not complied with within twenty-four hours, the person making such order, or any person designated by him, may enter into such building or upon such premises and remove such rubbish or abate such condition at the expense of such owner or occupant, and such expense shall be a lien upon such building or premises in accordance with the provisions of 4 G.L., c. 148, § 5. 
C.  Any owner or occupant who fails or refuses to comply with the order shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars as provided in 4 G.L., c. 148, § 5. 
D.  The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of it to such occupant personally or by delivering it to and leaving it with the person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of such premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner's last known post office address. 
E.  If the Chief of the Fire Department shall find either as a result of any report by the Bureau of Fire Prevention or the members thereof or any inspector or from his own inspection that any building or any part of a building constitutes an imminent danger to the lives and safety of person inhabiting the same, employed therein, or resorting thereto for purposes of entertainment or otherwise, he shall have the power to order the immediate removal or abatement of any obstructions, appliances, decorations or any articles or conditions whatsoever which in his opinion constitutes an imminent danger to the lives and safety of such persons; and the owner, occupant, lessee or person in control of such premises shall forthwith comply with such order. If the Chief of the Fire Department is of the opinion that the articles or conditions causing such danger cannot be immediately removed or abated, he shall have the power to order the immediate closing of such premises until such removal or abatement has been accomplished to his satisfaction. If he shall be of the opinion that such articles or conditions could be immediately removed or abated, but the owner, occupant, lessee or person in control of such premises neglects or refuses immediately to comply with the order, the Chief may likewise order the immediate closing of such premises. The Police Department shall assist the Chief of the Fire Department in enforcing immediate compliance with such order and to enforce the closing of such premises and to see to it that no person shall enter thereon except such person as shall lawfully engage in any work relative to the correction of the conditions causing the aforesaid danger. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 10-20)  
2.50.090 - Report of dangerous buildings. 
Whenever any inspector finds any building or other structure, which, on account of the absence of or inadequate fire escapes, or lack of automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, he shall immediately, in writing, report such conditions to the Chief of the Department who shall take the necessary steps to see that the conditions are corrected. 
(Prior code § 10-21)  
2.50.100 - Right of entry. 
The Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief Inspector, or any inspector may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises as provided by law for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, he may deem necessary. 
(Prior code § 10-22)  
2.50.110 - Suspicious origin fire investigation assistance. 
The Chief of Police, upon request of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, shall assist the inspectors in the investigation of any fire which, in their opinion, is of suspicious origin. 
(Prior code § 10-23)  
2.50.120 - Educational institutions—Fire drills required. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall require teachers of public, private and parochial schools and educational institutions to have one fire drill each month and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during school hours. 
(Prior code § 10-24)  
2.50.130 - Statistics and recordkeeping. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep, in the office of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the inspectors under the provision of this chapter. All such records shall be public. 
(Prior code § 10-25)  
2.50.140 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The annual report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made as of June 30th and transmitted to the City Manager through the Chief of the Fire Department. It shall contain all proceedings under this chapter with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include therein. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend any amendments to the ordinance which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Amended during 1987 codification; prior code § 10-26)  
2.50.150 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
This chapter is not intended to conflict with any powers or duties of the Board of License Commissioners, nor with the work done under authority of Section 2.48.100 of this title. Nor is this chapter intended to eliminate any work done under the authority of Sections 22 and 99 of the Rules and Regulations of the Cambridge Fire Department approved January 1, 1943.* 
(Prior code § 10-27) 
*  (22) Each captain shall familiarize himself with the character of the buildings in his district, and also the location of hydrants. 
 (99) Commanding officers shall make or cause to be made inspections of buildings in the district assigned to their respective companies. They shall inspect all business establishments, dwellings housing three or more families, schoolhouses, and churches. Buildings owned by Middlesex County, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and United States Government are excepted. Each year, beginning October 1st, they shall inspect every dwelling in their respective districts. Single and two-family dwellings cannot be entered except with the permission of the owner or occupant. Inspectors shall state their errand and courteously ask permission before they proceed to enter any single or two-family dwelling. Officers shall have at least four men on duty before leaving quarters on tour of inspection unless otherwise ordered by the chief of the department. Complaints which cannot be rectified by the officer in charge of the district after reinspection, shall be forwarded to the deputy chief for his examination. A record of all inspections shall be kept on file in company quarters and a report forwarded monthly to the chief of department.  
Chapter 2.52 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.52.010 - Police Commissioner—Authority. 
The Police Department shall be under the charge of a Police Commissioner who shall be the head of the Department and who shall, from time to time, make suitable regulations governing the Department and the officers thereof, subject to the approval of the City Manager. The Police Commissioner shall be in immediate control of all City property used by the Department, and of the police officers, who shall be assigned to their respective duties by the Police Commissioner, whose orders they shall obey. The Chief of Police shall be the next ranking officer of the Department and in the absence of the Commissioner, shall be the head of the Department. 
(Ord. 1106 (part), 1990)  
2.52.020 - Appointment—Removal— Compensation. 
A.  The City Manager shall appoint the Police Commissioner and the Chief of Police. The Police Commissioner may be removed from office at any time by the City Manager. The Chief of Police may be removed in accordance with the applicable provisions of law. 
B.  The Police Commissioner shall receive such compensation as the City Manager shall from time to time establish. 
(Ord. 1106 (part), 1990)  
2.52.030 - Administration—Organization. 
A.  The Police Commissioner with the approval of the City Manager, shall have authority to determine the number of members of the Department. He shall have authority to organize and administer the Department. The Police Commissioner may expend for the conduct of the Department such sums as the City Council may appropriate. 
B.  There shall be a minimum of thirty foot patrol officers assigned by the Chief to neighborhoods where needed. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 1062, 1987; Ord. 881 (part), 1977; Ord. 834, 1974; prior code § 15-3)  
2.52.040 - Platoons—Tours of duty. 
The head of the Department shall establish and maintain such platoons or work shifts as are necessary for the effective and efficient delivery of police services within the city. The head of the Department will ensure that each platoon is adequately staffed and supervised, in order to maintain and assure protection of the citizens of the City and the safety of members of the Department. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: Ord. 881 (part), 1977; Ord. 832, 1974; prior code § 15-4)  
2.52.050 - Discipline guideline adoption. 
The Police Commissioner may make such rules and regulations governing the discipline of the Department as the City Manager may approve. 
(Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-6)  
2.52.060 - Disposition of revenues. 
All fees, penalties, witness fees, moneys or compensation received by any member of the Police Department, other than the salary fixed by ordinance, for any services rendered in his official capacity, except moneys or compensation received by him for special services, and except witness fees for testimony in courts without the limits of the City, shall be paid weekly into the City Treasury by the officer receiving the same. 
(Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-10)  
2.52.070 - Fees for certain permits and other documents. 
The Police Commissioner shall collect on behalf of the City the following fees: 
A.  For the issuance of permits for performance of work or labor on Sunday, twenty-five dollars. 
B.  For the issuance in duplicate of letters of police record for application for passports or other purposes, ten dollars. 
(Ord. 1106 (part), 1990)  
2.52.080 - Recordkeeping and reports. 
The Police Commissioner shall keep a correct and complete record of the business of the Department, and shall make such reports to the City Manager from time to time, as he shall require, concerning all matters relating to the Police Department, and to the property of the City used by the Police Department. 
(Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-12)  
2.52.090 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Police Commissioner shall make a report to the City Manager annually, in the month of July, of all the receipts and expenditures of his Department, the organization and efficiency of the force, and an itemized statement of all the materials, tools and property of every kind belonging to the City, on hand June 30th with their estimated value. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-13)  
2.52.100 - Promotions. 
Promotions in the Department shall be made only by competitive civil service examinations and from the rank next below the position to be filled. 
(Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-9)  
2.52.110 - Vacancies. 
Any vacancy occurring in the Department shall be filled by the City Manager pending a permanent appointment in accordance with 1 G.L., c. 41, § 61A. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-7)  
2.52.120 - Vacations. 
Each permanent member of the Police Department shall be allowed an annual vacation of fourteen working days without loss of pay, the same to be taken at such time within the year as may be determined by the Police Commissioner, but each member must have served six months previous to the vacation period before he shall be allowed a vacation. Days off falling within the vacation period shall not be considered a part thereof. 
(Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-5)  
2.52.130 - Pensions. 
The pensions of the Police Department shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of 1 G.L., c. 32 § 83, et seq. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 881 (part), 1977; prior code § 15-14)  
Chapter 2.54 - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 
 
2.54.010 - Commissioner of Public Works— Direction. 
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have general charge of the parks of the City, except such portions of any parks as are placed under the control of the Public Works Commission. 
(Amended during 1987 codification; prior code § 14-1)  
2.54.020 - Commissioner of Public Works— Authority. 
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have and exercise all the rights, powers and authority given to him and the City Council by the Legislature in the matter of parks, except as to recreation, so far as the same can be legally delegated by the City, subject to all duties, liabilities and restrictions imposed by law. 
(Prior code § 14-2)  
2.54.030 - Department composition. 
The Department of Public Works shall consist of the Streets Division, the Sewers Division and the Cemetery Division. It shall be under the charge of the Commissioner of Public Works who shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 17-1)  
2.54.040 - Recommendations to City Manager. 
The Commissioner of Public Works shall submit recommendations to the City Manager with respect to the operations of his department as he may from time to time deem appropriate and shall prepare and submit to the City Manager in July of each year a report on the activities of his department during the preceding year. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 17-2)  
2.54.050 - Streets Division—Direction— Appointment. 
The Streets Division shall be under the charge of the Superintendent of Streets who shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 17-3)  
2.54.060 - Superintendent of Streets—Powers and duties. 
A.  The Superintendent of Streets shall, under the direction and control of the Commissioner of Public Works have the general care and charge of the highways, bridges and public squares and shall attend to the making, mending and alteration thereof, and cause the same to be kept in good repair, so as to be safe and convenient for travelers, with their vehicles at all seasons of the year. He shall place suitable street signs at convenient distances apart. He shall keep the entrances to catchbasins open and clear of ice in cold weather so as to permit the flow of surface water into them. 
B.  The Superintendent of Streets shall have authority to take necessary steps to overcome any nuisance caused by dust in the public ways and streets and may cause the ways and streets to be watered or oiled whenever he may deem it advisable. He shall see that the highways and streets and sidewalks are kept in good order, and that all nuisances and obstructions therein are forthwith removed, or give notice thereof to the Commissioner of Public Works or Chief of Police, and he shall remove all snow from the sidewalks and walks around the school houses. And in case of the blockade or obstruction of any street, the person causing such blockade or obstruction shall forthwith notify the Superintendent of Streets and the Chief of Police thereof. 
C.  The Superintendent of Streets shall have control of the collection, carrying away, sale and disposal of house offal and shall have authority to make rules and regulations in relation thereto not inconsistent with any ordinance now in force or that may be hereafter enacted. He shall also have charge of the vehicles, buildings and equipment now used or hereafter to be used in connection with the collection, carrying away, sale and disposal of house offal. 
D.  The Superintendent of Streets shall have the authority for the purposes of removing or plowing snow or removing ice in any way from the City, to remove or cause to be removed to some convenient place, including in such term a public garage, any vehicle interfering with such work. The owner of any such vehicle so removed shall be liable for the reasonable costs of such removal and storage and delivery of the vehicle to the owner may be withheld by the Superintendent of Streets until such reasonable costs shall be paid. The Police Department shall render all necessary assistance to the Superintendent of Streets in enforcing this section. 
E.  The Superintendent of Streets shall, at the request of the City Solicitor, cause to be completed in a timely manner both an investigation and written report regarding any alleged defect in a public way. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 17-4)  
2.54.070 - Superintendent of streets—Management of property—Annual reporting requirements. 
The Superintendent shall have the right to hire, and the general control of, all persons employed in his decision and shall have the custody and management of the vehicles, buildings and all other property connected with the Streets Division, and shall keep the same in good condition and repair. He shall annually, in the month of July, present to the Commissioner of Public Works a report showing the detailed expenses, the material and other property on hand, a detailed account of work done, and other facts in relation to his Division. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 17-5)  
2.54.080 - Sewers Division—Direction. 
The Sewers Division shall be under the charge of the Commissioner of Public Works. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 17-44)  
2.54.090 - City Engineer—Authority. 
The City Engineer shall have general supervision of all common sewers of the City and of all connections built under the provisions of the Division. 
(Prior code § 17-45)  
2.54.100 - Superintendent of Sewers—Appointment—Duties. 
The City Manager shall appoint the Superintendent of Sewers who shall be in charge of building, repairing and keeping in good order all the common sewers of the City. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 17-46)  
2.54.110 - Cemetery Division—Direction. 
The Cemetery Division shall be under the charge of a Superintendent who shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to the civil service laws and rules and regulations. A vacancy in the office shall be filled in the same manner as provided for the original appointment. 
(Prior code § 17-63)  
2.54.120 - Superintendent—Care and management. 
The Superintendent shall have the care and management of the Cambridge Cemetery, so-called, and also of the burial ground on Garden Street. 
(Prior code § 17-64)  
2.54.140 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Superintendent shall annually, in the month of July, submit to the Commissioner of Public Works a report of all his acts, doings and proceedings and of the condition of the cemetery and burial ground, and an account of his receipts and expenditures for the preceding year ending June 30th. 
(Prior code § 17-70)  
2.54.150 - Superintendent of Recreation. 
There shall be a Superintendent of Recreation whose duty shall be, under the general supervision of the City Manager: 
A.  To take charge of recreational activities in playgrounds or playfields, or in schools or other buildings of the City, and any and all activities of recreational nature directed by or contolled by or carried on with the authority of the City; 
B.  To have charge of the portions of parks and other premises used for playgrounds and playfields, and of the golf course; and 
C.  To perform any other duties which may now or hereafter be imposed upon him by operation of law, ordinance, or by the direction and authorization of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 14-6)  
2.54.170 - Superintendent of Recreation—Jurisdiction and powers. 
A.  The Superintendent of Recreation shall have the powers and perform the duties with respect to playgrounds and recreation under the General Laws, or under any general ordinance relating to playgrounds and recreation; the Superintendent shall further have the control, supervision and maintenance of the following areas in the parks of the city, which are hereby declared to be devoted to use as playgrounds and playfields: 
1.  Russell Field; 
2.  Fresh Pond Playground; 
3.  Rev. P.H. Callanan Playground; 
4.  T.F. Corcoran Playground; 
5.  Corporal Burns Playground; 
6.  J.J. Ahern Field; 
7.  Russell E. Hoyt Field; 
8.  Norfolk Street Playground; 
9.  Robert I. Paine Playground; 
10.  Fletcher School Playground; 
11.  Peabody School Playground; 
12.  Morse School Playground; 
13.  Wellington School Playground; 
14.  Taylor School Playground; 
15.  Sleeper School Playground; 
16.  Lowell School Playground; 
17.  The southerly portion of Rindge Field on Pemberton Street, Yerxa Road and Haskell Street; 
18.  The southerly portion of J.F. Donnelly Field, also called Cambridge Field, on York, Willow and Berkshire Streets; 
19.  The southerly portion of E.J. Sennott Park, situated on Harvard, Common and Norfolk Streets; 
20.  The southwesterly portion of Cambridge Common, situated on Garden and Waterhouse Streets; 
21.  The Lawrence D. Mahoney Recreation Center, situated at Windsor and School Streets; 
22.  The Patrick J. Delaney Golf Course, situated on the westerly and southwesterly shore of Fresh Pond, between Concord Avenue and Huron Avenue; 
The above areas are more particularly shown on Plan No. 7181, on file in the office of the City Engineer, and such other lands as may hereafter be assigned by appropriate action for use for recreational purposes or may be acquired therefor; 
23.  The area known as Jerry's Pit, but more particularly set forth in a lease by Dowey and Almy Company to the City of Cambridge, dated October 8, 1942, and the lots located at: 
a.  Cogswell Place, 
b.  493 Franklin Street, 
c.  Corner of Allston and Pleasant Streets, 
d.  Corner of Sixth and Hurley Streets, 
e.  Sherman Street; 
as shown on a plan by the City Engineer No. 7181, as shown by blue lines. 
B.  In addition to the above areas, which are hereby permanently devoted to use as playgrounds and playfields, the Superintendent may, with the approval of the City Manager and Commissioner of Public Works, exercise temporary or seasonal control, supervision and maintenance over other areas in the parks for the purpose of use, temporary or seasonal, as playgrounds or playfields. 
C.  The Superintendent is further empowered, with the approval of the City Manager, and in accordance with any provisions of law or ordinance applicable thereto, to rent, or may acquire the use of without charge, other areas for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 14-5)  
2.54.180 - Superintendent of Recreation—Facility repair responsibility. 
The Public Works Department shall have full responsibility for major repairs, reconstruction or alteration to any buildings used by the Superintendent of Recreation for any of his or her activities, and ordinary maintenance shall be the responsibility of the Superintendent. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: prior code § 14-7)  
Chapter 2.56 - ELECTRICAL DEPARTMENT 
 
2.56.010 - City Electrician—Appointment—Term. 
The Electrical Department shall be under the charge of the City Electrician who shall be appointed by the City Manager in the month of May for the term of one year from June 1st. 
(Prior code § 9-1)  
2.56.020 - Assistant City Electrician—Appointment—Duties. 
A.  There shall be an Assistant City Electrician who shall, in accordance with the provisions of the civil service law, be appointed by the City Electrician from one of the members of the Department. 
B.  The Assistant City Electrician, in addition to any other duties or authority prescribed for him, shall be in charge of the Electrical Department, whenever the City Electrician may be absent or unable to perform his duties. 
(Prior code § 9-2)  
2.56.030 - Poles and wires—Supervision and inspection. 
The City Electrician shall have supervision of every wire over, upon, through or under all streets and over buildings throughout the City; every wire within a building when such wire is designed to carry an electric light or power current; all wires for the transmission of electricity for the purpose of heating or power; all poles, conduits and other structures holding, supporting or containing such wires in streets and public places. He shall inspect the condition of all poles, wires, conduits and cables, their attachments, insulations, supports and appliances. 
(Prior code § 9-3)  
2.56.040 - Accounting and recordkeeping. 
The City Electrician shall keep an accurate account of the number of lamps which burn gas, or other material, the cost of same, the number of men employed, the wages given, the kind, quality and cost of fixtures, the number of electrical lights and the cost and outages of the same, and all other expenses incurred in his department. 
(Prior code § 9-32)  
2.56.050 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The City Electrician shall annually, in July, present to the City Manager a report showing the detailed expenses, the value of the property on hand, the number, quality and cost of lights used by the City, the outages of the same, and such other material facts as relate to the operation of his department. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 9-33)  
Chapter 2.58 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY 
 
2.58.010 - Residency requirements—Exception. 
A.  No person shall be appointed to any position of employment in any department of the City or to any unpaid board or commission (except professional employees whose qualification must include technical training and experience) who has not been a resident of the City for two years continuously prior to his appointment. 
B.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to members of the Advisory Committee of the Veterans Service Department. 
(Prior code § 2-180)  
2.58.020 - Removal of subordinates. 
Whenever any board or officer in charge of a department shall remove any subordinate, the order of removal and the cause assigned therefor shall be entered in full on the records of the department in which he served. Every such board or officer shall cause all statutes, ordinances, regulations and orders relating to the duties of his department to be observed and enforced. 
(Prior code § 2-186)  
2.58.030 - Departmental activity recordkeeping. 
Every board officer in charge of a department shall keep records of the activities of the department. All records and files, shall, under the supervision of the officer in charge of the department, be open to public inspection, and any person may take notes therefrom; but this shall not apply to matters on which final action has not been taken, or which, in the opinion of the City Manager should not be made public, or to the records of the proceedings of the various committees kept by the Clerk of Committees. 
(Prior code § 2-188)  
2.58.040 - Employees not to act as election officials. 
No permanent employee of the City shall act as warden, clerk, inspector or deputy officer at the polls at any primary or election held in the City. 
(Prior code § 2-195)  
Chapter 2.60 - OFFICIAL BONDS 
 
2.60.010 - City Manager approval required—Exception. 
The required bond of every City officer and the sureties upon it shall be approved by the City Manager before the officer enters upon his duties, except bonds of officers as to which other forms of approval are required by law. 
(Prior code § 2-197)  
2.60.020 - Surety company requirements. 
The surety on any official bond subject to the approval of the City Manager shall be an incorporated surety company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth unless the City Manager shall be satisfied that a satisfactory surety of this character cannot be obtained at a reasonable premium, in which case he may accept individuals as sureties. Officers or employees required to furnish such official bonds shall further be required to give new bonds satisfactory to the City Manager whenever required by him so to do. 
(Prior code § 2-198)  
2.60.030 - Premiums. 
The premium for surety upon any bond shall not exceed the rate established for premiums on such bonds by companies authorized to issue them, and shall be allowed and paid by the department of which the principal on the bond is an officer or employee. 
(Prior code § 2-199)  
Chapter 2.62 - SALARIES 
 
2.62.010 - Schedule of salaries. 
A.  Holders of the following offices shall receive such annual salary as shall be fixed by the City Manager within the limits set out below for the category in which such office is placed. In fixing such salary, the City Manager shall consider the salaries paid equivalent offices by comparable governmental units elsewhere in the United States, and the salary necessary to attract or retain competent individuals in the City's services. Such salary shall, unless otherwise provided by statute or ordinance, or past practice, be in full for all services rendered to the City, shall be apportionable in the event of service for only part of the year, and shall be subject to deduction for any and all sums due to the City from such office holder: 
1.  Category I shall include the Deputy City Manager, Hospital Administrator, and Commissioner of Health and Hospitals, who shall receive a salary of not less than seventy thousand dollars nor more than eighty thousand dollars. 
2.  Category II shall include the Assistant City Managers for Community Development, Fiscal Affairs, and Human Services, and Commissioner of Public Works, the Fire Chief and Police Chief, who shall receive a salary of not less than sixty thousand dollars nor more than seventy thousand dollars. 
3.  Category III shall include the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, Director of Traffic and Parking, Director of Personnel and Labor Relations, and the Director of Library and Communications, who shall receive a salary of not less than fifty-two thousand dollars nor more than sixty-two thousand dollars. 
4.  Category IV shall include the Administrator of Neville Manor, the Water Superintendent, City Auditor, City Clerk, City Engineer, City Solicitor, Principal Assessor, Budget Director, City Electrician, Purchasing Agent, Director of Rent Control, Director of Veterans' Services, and Chairperson, License Commission, who shall receive not less than forty-four thousand dollars nor more than fifty-four thousand dollars. 
5.  Group V shall include the Deputy City Auditor, the Deputy City Clerk, Sealer of Weights and Measures, Veterans' Agent, and Director of Emergency Management shall receive not less than thirty-six thousand dollars nor more than forty-six thousand dollars. 
6.  Group VI shall include the City Manager, whose salary shall be as set by the City Council by Ordinance No. 1045 with annual increases equal to that of the Greater Boston Consumer Price Index for the preceding calendar year. 
B.  If a position reaches the maximum for its category and no amendment to the ordinance has been adopted, then that position shall receive an increase on the following July 1st that is the equivalent of the increase in the Greater Boston Consumer Price Index for the preceding calendar year. 
C.  No person holding an office listed above shall receive compensation in the form of overtime. 
D.  At such time as the incumbent in the Office of Police Chief and Fire Chief should change, then the sum established within the group shall be the total compensation received by that person from the City. 
E.  Persons holding the offices mentioned above, except the incumbent City Solicitor, shall devote full time during ordinary business hours to their respective duties. 
F.  City Council members. 
1.  Each member shall receive the following salaries and are to be paid monthly or weekly, unless otherwise stated: 
a.  Mayor, fifty-two thousand five hundred dollars (flat rate); 
b.  Chair Ex Officio, School Committee. The Mayor as Chair Ex Officio, School Committee shall also receive an amount of compensation equal to that amount received by a member of the School Committee under Section 2.104.010. 
c.  City Council Member, fifty-two thousand five hundred dollars (flat rate). 
2.  The effective date of this rate shall be July 1, 2000. 
3.  Effective July 1, 2001, and subsequently annually on July 1st, an additional increase equivalent to that of the Greater Boston Price Index for the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. 1178, 1996; Ord. 1070, 1988; Ord. 1059, 1987: prior code § 2-191) (Ord. No. 1174, Amended 11/06/95; Ord. 1178, Amended, 06/10/96) 
(Ord. 1238, Amended, 06/05/2000)  
2.62.020 - Salaries not otherwise provided for; overtime pay; employees subject to call. 
A.  All employees of the City whose salaries are not fixed by ordinance shall be paid such salary as shall from time to time be fixed by the respective heads of the departments subject to the approval of the City Manager except in the departments of the City Clerk, City Auditor and the executive department and boards elected by the people, in which case the salaries shall be fixed by the respective heads of the departments. 
B.  Whenever any person employed by the City, except in the Police Department, Fire Department and the School Department, shall perform labor in excess of eight hours in any one day or in excess of forty hours in any one week, he shall be paid for such excess hours of work at the rate of one and one-half times his regular salary, such salary to be calculated at an hourly rate on the basis of an eight hour working day. 
C.  All persons employed by the City shall be subject to call to perform work in their respective departments at any time. 
(Prior code § 2-194) 
(1178, Amended, 06/10/1996)  
Chapter 2.64 - DISABILITY PAY 
 
2.64.010 - Notification to City Solicitor upon injury. 
Upon the happening of any accident to any employee, the City Solicitor shall be forthwith notified by the department in which the injured person was then employed. 
(Prior code § 2-202)  
2.64.020 - Petition for compensation. 
Every employee of the City injured while in the performance of his duty without fault on his part, in order to receive compensation under Chapter 364 of the Acts of 1894 and any and all acts that may be enacted in addition thereof and supplementary thereto, shall petition the City Council upon blanks to be prepared by the City Solicitor, in which petition shall be set forth the time, place and cause of the injury and his willingness to disclose all facts relating to the injury. 
(Prior code § 2-200)  
2.64.030 - Committee on Claims—Investigation, report and recommendations. 
The petition shall be forthwith referred to the Committee on Claims, which shall investigate, report and make recommendations as to the length of time, if any, for the continuance of the pay of the injured employee. 
(Prior code § 2-201)  
2.64.040 - Report and physical examination. 
After an investigation of the facts relating to the injury and an examination from time to time of the injured person by an authorized physician, all of which shall be under the direction of the City Solicitor, a report shall be made by the latter in which shall be annexed a certificate of the physician. 
(Prior code § 2-203)  
2.64.050 - Hearing and approval. 
The Committee on Claims, in addition to the report of the City Solicitor, may hear such other facts as it may deem proper and shall report thereon to the City Council. If the Committee is in favor of the continuance of pay of such employee, and if its report is adopted by the Council and approved by the City Manager, the amount so allowed shall be entered upon the books of and verified by the department in which the injured employee was employed at the time the injury was sustained. 
(Prior code § 2-204)  
2.64.060 - Department head certification. 
Upon certification of the head of the department in which the injured employee was employed that the time allowed by the Committee is correct, the amount of wages shall be forthwith paid upon the draft of the City Manager. The injured person shall execute a receipt and release in full of all demands against the City for any and all injuries arising out of or in any way connected with such injury. 
(Prior code § 2-205)  
2.64.070 - Payments for continuing disability. 
Should the disability of the injured employee continue beyond the time of the first payment or thereafterwards appear, further payments may be made upon other petitions of the injured employee if after investigation and report thereon by the Committee on Claims and upon the certification of the authorized physician, the same is adopted by the City Council and approved by the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 2-206)  
Chapter 2.66 - CAMBRIDGE EMPLOYMENT PLAN  
Article I. - Cambridge Employment Plan 
 
2.66.010 - Established. 
The Cambridge Employment Plan, as set forth in this article is established. 
(Ord. 1005 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 24 § 24-1)  
2.66.020 - Definitions for Article I. 
The following words as used in this article, shall, unless the context otherwise requires, have the following meanings: 
A.  "Applicable areas" means and includes those areas in which the Cambridge Employment Plan is in effect, namely, the following major commercial and industrial zoning districts of the City: Office 2, Office 3, Office 3A, all business districts except Business A and A1, all industrial districts, all PUD districts, the MXD district and all Commercial Area Revitalization districts. Additional applicable areas may be designated by the City Manager. 
B.  "Cambridge resident" means any person for whom the principal place where that person normally eats and sleeps and maintains his or her normal personal and household effects is within the City of Cambridge. 
C.  "Developer" means the person, corporation, partnership or other business entity which is the proponent of the project. 
D.  "Employment and training agency" means a Massachusetts nonprofit corporation which is designated by the City Manager to carry out the employment and training program as defined in this article. 
E.  "Minority person" means and includes those persons who are Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American or Cape Verdean. 
F.  "Project" means a project covered by Article I of this chapter, namely, new construction, expansion or alteration of a building occupied by a principal use which is listed in the following subsections of the Table of Use Regulations (Section 4.30) in the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance: 
14.31(i)(2) (hotel or motel) 
4.34 (office and laboratory) 
4.35 (retail business and consumer service) 
4.36 (drive-in retail and service) 
4.37 (light industry, wholesale business and storage) 
4.38 (heavy industry) 
(Ord. 1053 (part), 1987: Ord. 1005 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 24 § 24-2)  
2.66.030 - Objectives. 
The Cambridge Employment Plan has the following objectives: 
A.  To ensure that local resources are wisely invested in those applicable areas where there is maximum promise that the benefits that accrue, including employment opportunities, will be made available to City residents; 
B.  To maintain and to increase, whenever possible, the current percentage of City jobs held by City residents (twenty-five percent), by promoting the hiring of qualified unemployed and underemployed City residents; 
C.  To promote the hiring of qualified unemployed and underemployed women and minorities who are City residents; 
D.  To provide employers with a central location for disseminating and receiving information on all facets of employment and training resources in the City. 
E.  To provide employment information, opportunities and training for unemployed and underemployed youth who are City residents. 
(Ord. 1103 (part), 1990; Ord. 1005 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 24 § 24-3)  
2.66.040 - Developer's responsibilities. 
In any applicable area, the Cambridge Inspectional Services Department shall not issue a building permit for any project until the developer signs an agreement with the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager to achieve the objectives set forth in Section 2.66.030 of this article. In such agreement the developer shall agree to: 
A.  Notify the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager of all job opportunities of which it has knowledge or over which it has hiring control. Jobs include, but are not limited to, construction, manufacturing, clerical, technician, maintenance and security jobs; 
B.  Place appropriate job announcements in the City news media prior to placing such announcements outside the City; 
C.  Notify businesses which occupy the project building of the services available through the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager and the Cambridge Community Development Department; 
D.  Inform each such business about the objectives and goals of the Cambridge Employment Plan; 
E.  Provide the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager with the names of all new businesses moving into the project building and the names of their contact persons; 
F.  Set goals and indicate procedures whereby City residents would obtain jobs with the developer; 
G.  Report periodically, in writing, to the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager, the number of City residents hired under the agreement, together with whatever other information the agreement requires; 
H.  Include in every lease a provision requiring the tenant to sign an agreement as provided in subsections A through G of this section with the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1005 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 24 § 24-4)  
2.66.050 - City's responsibilities. 
A.  Recognizing the City's obligation to provide assistance to the private sector under the Cambridge Employment Plan and its commitment to the employment of City residents, the City, acting through its Community Development Department, agrees to: 
1.  Provide an attractive overall environment to encourage private investment by properly planning and administering economic and urban design improvement strategies in applicable areas; 
2.  Assist in financing of commercial, industrial and housing development. 
B.  The City, acting through its job training organization (the Employment and Training Agency designated by the City Manager), agrees to: 
1.  Establish a central clearinghouse where developers and new firms can provide job information for dissemination to appropriate agencies and receive a wide array of information on tax credits, training programs and other services pertaining to training and employment needs; 
2.  Maintain a readily accessible job recruitment and listing system so that eligible City residents can be quickly placed in available jobs; 
3.  Commit the necessary resources in the development of appropriate job training programs consisting primarily of "on-the-job" and "tailored classroom" training. 
C.  The City, acting through its Department of Human Services, agrees to: 
1.  Provide organizational support and technical expertise in the establishment and administration of a centralized City-wide youth employment center. 
(Ord. 1103 (part), 1990; Ord. 1005 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 24 § 24-5)  
Article II. - Construction Projects 
 
2.66.060 - Construction projects—Worker qualifications. 
A.  On any construction project which is funded in whole or in part by City, State or federal funds, or funds which, in accordance with a federal grant, the City expends or administers, or in which the City is a signatory to the construction contract, the worker hours shall be performed as follows: 
1.  No less than twenty-five percent of the total employee worker hours shall be performed by bona fide Cambridge residents. 
2.  No less than twenty-five percent of the total employee worker hours shall be performed by minority persons. 
3.  No less than ten percent of the total employee worker hours shall be performed by women. 
B.  This section shall not apply to housing rehabilitation projects including eight or fewer. 
(Ord. 1053 (part), 1987: prior code § 24-6)  
2.66.070 - Compliance, enforcement, sanctions. 
A.  All contractors entering into construction contracts covered by Article II of this chapter shall: 
1.  Certify that they know of the provisions of said Article and that they intend to comply with them; 
2.  List all job openings with the Employment and Training Agency or Agencies and keep accurate records as to action taken on referrals from these agencies; 
3.  Maintain personnel records listing the names, addresses, sex and race of their employees; and require their subcontractors to do likewise. 
B.  The Cambridge Community Development Department shall develop, in consultation with the Employment Training Agency or Agencies, good-faith measures by which to judge the affirmative actions of contractors operating under the provisions of this Article II. All records required to be maintained by this section shall be made available on request to representatives of said Department. All such records shall be maintained for the duration of the construction project and for one year thereafter. 
C.  Should a contractor be deemed not to have complied with the provisions of this Article II, nor to have made a good-faith effort to do so, it shall not be actively considered for future public construction contracts in Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1053 (part), 1987: prior code § 24-7)  
2.66.080 - Contractor qualifications and sanctions. 
A.  All bidders and all subcontractors under the bidder for projects subject to G.L. c. 149, §44A(2) and G.L.c 30 §39M shall, as a condition for bidding, agree in writing that they shall comply with the following obligations: 
1.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder shall comply with the Cambridge Employment Plan as it currently exists and as it may, from time to time, be amended, and specifically shall comply with the worker hours requirements of Section 2.66.060(A). 
2.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must comply with the obligations established under G.L. c. 149 and G.L. c 30 §39M to pay the appropriate lawful prevailing wage rates to their employees. 
3.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain or participate in a bona fide apprentice training program as defined by c. 23, §§11H and 11I for each apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in their workforce that is approved by the Division of Apprentice Training of the Department of Labor and Industries and must abide by the apprentice to journeymen ratio for each trade prescribed therein in the performance of the contract. 
4.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must furnish, at their expense, hospitalization and medical benefits for all their employees employed on the project and/or coverage at least comparable in value to the hospitalization and medical benefits provided by the health and welfare plans in the applicable craft recognized by G.L. c. 149, §26 and G.L. c30 §39M in establishing minimum wage rates. 
5.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain appropriate industrial accident insurance coverage for all the employees employed on the project in accordance with G.L. c. 152. 
6.  The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must properly classify employees as employees rather than independent contractors and treat them accordingly for purposes of workers' compensation insurance coverage, unemployment taxes, social security taxes and income tax withholding. G.L. c. 149, §148B and G.L. c 30 §39M . 
B.  All bidders and subcontractors under the bidder who are awarded or who otherwise obtain contracts on projects subject to G.L. c. 149, §44A(2) and G.L. c 30 §39M shall comply with the obligations numbered 1 through 6 as set forth in subsection A of this section for the entire duration of their work on the project, and an officer of each such bidder or subcontractor under the bidder shall certify under oath and in writing on a weekly basis that they are in compliance with such obligations. 
C.  Any bidder or subcontractor under the bidder who fails to comply with any one of obligations 1 through 6 as set forth in subsection A of this section for any period of time shall be, at the sole discretion of the City Manager, subject to one or more of the following sanctions: (1) cessation of work on the project until compliance is obtained; (2) withholding of payment due under any contract or subcontract until compliance is obtained; (3) permanent removal from any further work on the project; (4) liquidated damages payable to the City in the amount of five percent of the dollar value of the contract. 
D.  In addition to the sanctions outlined in subsection C of this section, a general bidder or contractor shall be equally liable for the violations of its subcontractor with the exception of violations arising from work performed pursuant to subcontracts that are subject to G.L. c. 149, §44F and G.L. c 30 §39M . Any contractor or subcontractor who has been determined to have violated any of the obligations set forth in subsections A and B of this section shall be barred from performing any work on any future projects for six months for a first violation, for three years for a second violation, and permanently for a third violation. 
E.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to construction projects for which the low general bid was less than one hundred thousand dollars or to work performed pursuant to subcontracts that are subject to G.L. c. 149, §44F and G.L. c 30 §39M and that were bid for less than twenty-five thousand dollars, or to re-bids for construction projects for which the City receives fewer than three qualified general contract bidders in the original bid. 
(Ord. 1162, 1995; Ord. 1260, 2002) 
(Ord.1260, Amended, 09/09/2002)  
Chapter 2.68 - PLANNING BOARD 
 
2.68.010 - Established—Appointment—Term. 
The Planning Board of the City, established under the provisions of M.G.L., c. 41 § 70 through 72, shall consist of seven members and two associate members. The City Manager shall appoint such members and associate members for terms of five years. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1990; prior code § 2-129) 
(Ord. 1157, Amended, 05/02/1994)  
2.68.020 - Organization. 
The Board shall choose a Chair and a Secretary from its own membership. The Chair may designate an associate member to sit on the Board for the purpose of acting on a special permit application in the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member of the Board, or in the event of a vacancy on the Board. 
(Prior code § 2-131) 
(Ord. 1157, Amended, 05/02/1994)  
2.68.030 - Powers. 
The Board shall have all powers and authority, and perform the duties set forth in 1 G.L., c. 41, §§ 70 through 72 relative to local planning boards and under any acts in amendments or addition thereto. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1990; prior code § 2-132)  
2.68.040 - Vacancies. 
Vacancies occurring on the Board shall be filled by appointment by the City Manager for the unexpired terms. 
(Prior code § 2-130)  
Chapter 2.70 - WATER BOARD 
 
2.70.010 - Established—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Water Works Department shall be under the charge of the Water Board, which shall consist of five persons, to be appointed by the City Manager. 
B.  The City Manager shall annually, in the month of June, appoint one member of the Water Board, who shall hold office for the term of five years from June 30th, in the year of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified. A vacancy shall be filled in the same manner, and the person appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the remainder of the term for which his predecessor was appointed. No member of the City Council shall be appointed a member of the Board. 
(Prior code § 19-1)  
2.70.020 - Powers. 
The Board, so constituted and organized, shall have and exercise all the powers vested in the City Council by any acts of the Legislature now or hereafter in force so far as the same can be legally delegated, and it may appoint a Chief Superintendent and all other subordinate agents and assistants, and fix their compensation and that of the Clerk before mentioned excepting those for police service. When such services are required, the Water Board shall apply to the Chief of Police for a detail of as many officers as it requires for patrol service and while in the employ of such Board the officers shall be under the control of the Water Board, and shall be paid by the Board. 
(Prior code § 19-4)  
2.70.030 - Organization. 
The Water Board shall elect one of its members as President. The Board may choose a Clerk, and make such rules and regulations for its own government and in relation to all its officers as may be deemed expedient. 
(Prior code § 19-2)  
2.70.040 - President's duties. 
The President of the Board shall exercise a general supervision over all the water works, and the materials and property connected therewith, and over all subordinate officers and agents. In case of his absence or inability, his duties may be performed by a president pro tempore, to be chosen by the Board. 
(Prior code § 19-3)  
2.70.050 - Personal interest in contracts prohibited. 
No member of the Board, and no person appointed to any office or employed by virtue of this chapter, or of the acts of the Legislature, shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contact, bargain, sale or agreement, in relation to the water works, or any matter or thing connected therewith, wherein the City is interested; and any and all contracts, bargains, sales or agreements, made in violation of this section, shall be void as to the City. 
(Prior code § 19-6)  
2.70.060 - Chief Superintendent—Powers and duties. 
The Board shall appoint a Chief Superintendent, who shall be a citizen of the City, and who shall perform his duties under the direction of the Board. He shall have general control of all persons employed in the Department, and shall have full charge of the aqueducts, lands, reservoirs, storage basins and other works and property connected with the water works which may be required in conveying and distributing water to the City and its inhabitants. He shall annually in the first week in July, present to the Board a report of the general condition of the works, and shall perform such further services in relation thereto as may be required of him by the Board. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 19-8)  
2.70.070 - Chief Superintendent—Supervision over use of water. 
The Chief Superintendent under the direction of the Board, shall cause to be visited, once in each year, all premises where the water is taken, and shall exercise a constant supervision over the use of the water. 
(Prior code § 19-9)  
2.70.080 - Disposition of revenues—Interest payments. 
All moneys paid into the Treasury on account of meter works shall be placed to the credit of the water works, and shall not be paid out except under the provisions of this section and Sections 2.32.070 and 2.32.080 of this Title. The City Manager may draw his draft for all sums of money becoming due for interest on the City water loan, and the amounts so paid shall be charged to the water works. 
(Prior code § 19-10)  
2.70.090 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Board, in July of each year, shall present to the City Manager a report containing a statement of the condition of all the waterworks and of the lands and other property connected therewith with an account of all receipts and expenditures and a schedule of property on hand, together with any information or suggestion which it may deem important; and shall at the same time transmit to the City Manager the reports of the Chief Superintendent. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 19-24)  
Chapter 2.72 - CAMBRIDGE HEALTH POLICY BOARD 
 
2.72.010 - Established—Composition. 
There shall be a Cambridge Health Policy Board consisting of eighteen members, which number may be altered by an amendment to the ordinance codified in this chapter by the City Council. 
(Ord. 1124, 1991: Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-4(a))  
2.72.020 - Appointment—Term. 
The members shall be appointed by the City Manager for terms of three years. Initial appointments shall be for the following terms: Five members for a term of three years, five members for a term of two years and five members for a term of one year. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-4(b))  
2.72.030 - Appointment—Nomination. 
A.  One month prior to making such appointments or reappointments, the City Manager shall solicit nominations from as many public service groups and other sources as possible, including but not limited to: 
1.  Medical professionals: Physicians, dentists, nurses and social workers; 
2.  Other professionals and people representing the public interest: Lawyers, clergy, environmentalists, financial professionals (bankers, accountants), and individuals suggested by business organizations, social agencies and universities; 
3.  Consumers: Representing low income, elderly, non-English speaking and other consumer groups. 
B.  The City Manager shall at all times endeavor to achieve and maintain a fair balance on the Board among these three major categories. He shall endeavor to locate individuals who have made significant contributions to public service activities, and who represent a broad cross-section of the City's consumer interests. Such individuals must also have been residents of the City for at least four years. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-4(c))  
2.72.040 - Meetings. 
The Health Policy Board shall hold regular meetings at least once each month, and if Board members fail to attend a third of the regular meetings without adequate explanation, the City Manager shall replace them automatically by the same method. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-4(d))  
2.72.050 - Subcommittees—Appointment—Duties. 
A.  The Health Policy Board shall effectively address all aspects of the health of the City and to accomplish this end, shall establish subcommittees as outlined in this section. 
B.  There shall be at least but not limited to four standing subcommittees, one on the Cambridge Hospital and Clinics, a second on the Michael J. Neville Manor, a third concerned with public health, environment, code enforcement and sanitation and a fourth for overall planning. These subcommittees shall advise the administrative directors concerned, who shall attend their respective subcommittee meetings. To the extent possible, each subcommittee should reflect the composition of the Board as outlined in Section 2.72.030 of this chapter. 
C.  Each subcommittee shall report in writing to the full Board on matters taken up in subcommittee. 
D.  All matters necessitating a vote shall be put to the full Board. The City Manager shall appoint a part-time Secretary for the subcommittee on the Hospital and Clinics, and for such other subcommittees as the Board shall request assistance therefor. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-4(e))  
2.72.060 - Secretary—Appointment. 
The City Manager shall appoint a Secretary or a part-time Secretary for the Health Policy Board who shall prepare meeting agendas, coordinate the gathering of information for the Board, record minutes of Board meetings, distribute the above material to Board members, and perform whatever additional functions as may be assigned by the Board from time to time. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-4(f))  
2.72.070 - Compensation. 
Members of the Health Policy Board shall serve without compensation, but they may be reimbursed for any expense which may reasonably be incurred through service on the board. 
(Ord. 896 (part), 1978: prior code Ch. 11 § 11-3(b))  
Chapter 2.74 - POLICE REVIEW AND ADVISORY BOARD 
 
2.74.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The general purpose of this chapter is to provide for citizen participation in reviewing Police Department policies, practices and procedures and to provide a prompt, impartial and fair investigation of complaints brought by individuals, police officers upon whom a complaint has been brought and employees of the Police Department. 
B.  The City Manager shall make every effort to insure that individuals appointed to the Board, fairly and accurately represent the City's racial, social and economic composition. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 1) 
(Ord. 1268, Amended, 09/29/2003)  
2.74.020 - Established—Composition. 
A.  There shall be a five-member City of Cambridge Police Review and Advisory Board (the "Board"). Members of the Board shall be appointed by the City Manager. Prior to appointing any member to the Board, the City Manager shall seek qualified candidates by advertising in the local newspapers for individuals who desire appointment to the Board. The term of membership on the Board is five years. No person may serve more than two consecutive terms as a member of the Board. The City Manager may remove members of the Board only for cause as defined in the City Charter. All members of the Board shall be residents of the City at the time of appointment. If a Board member ceases to be a resident of the city, he/she shall remain on the Board until the City Manager appoints a suitable candidate to fill the position. 
B.  The members of the Board shall not hold any other position for the city while he or she is a member of the Board. 
C.  No member of a City employee's immediate family (husband, wife, brother, sister, son or daughter) shall be appointed to, or hired by the Board. 
D.  No member of the Board shall have been an employee of the City within two years of his or her appointment to the Board, and no member of such person's immediate family shall be appointed to, or hired by the Board. 
E.  The Board shall elect a Chairperson annually. The Board shall meet at the call of its Chairperson, but shall meet at least once a month. Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public except when the Board, in its discretion, meets in executive session in private. All meetings of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with the open meeting laws of the Commonwealth. 
F.  Members of the Board shall not receive compensation for services but shall receive reasonable expenses and fees incurred as a result of their membership on the Board. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 2) 
(Ord. 1284, Amended, 04/11/2005)  
2.74.030 - Officers and staff. 
A.  Executive Secretary to the Board. The Board shall appoint an Executive Secretary. The Executive Secretary shall be responsible for the daily administration of the Board. The Executive Secretary's terms and conditions of employment shall be fixed by the Board. The Executive Secretary to the Board shall, with the consent and approval of the Board, be empowered to hire clerical help when needed. 
B.  Investigative Staff. 
1.  The Board shall also appoint a Board Investigator if it deems necessary and such additional staff of investigators as it deems necessary. The terms and conditions of employment for such Board Investigator shall be fixed by the Board, but the salary of the Board Investigator shall be equivalent to that received by investigators of similar Boards of Investigation. 
2.  The terms and conditions of employment for all other investigative staff shall be fixed by the Board. All Board investigators must possess skills and experience necessary for investigative work. 
C.  Other Staff. The Board, from time to time, may contract, in accordance with existing regulations and law, for such additional staff as is necessary to carry out its duties. 
D.  All members of the staff are under the direction of the Board. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 4) 
(Ord. 1284, Amended, 04/11/2005)  
2.74.040 - Duties. 
The Board shall have the following duties: 
A.  The Chief of Police in consultation with the Board, shall establish policies, rules and regulations for the Police Department (the "Department"); 
B.  The Board and the City Council shall review the Department budget before it is submitted to the City Manager; 
C.  The Board shall receive and resolve, as provided in Sections 2.74.080 and 2.74.090 of this chapter, any complaint concerning the operation of the Department; 
D.  The Board shall make recommendations to the Chief of Police and/or the City Manager in matters concerning the discipline of employees of the Department; 
E.  The Board shall make quarterly reports to the City Manager, the Mayor, City Council and to the public, of the Department's activities during the previous year, including the handling of complaints, and of future plans. The final disposition of complaints shall be made public; 
F.  The Board, with the assistance and approval of the City Solicitor, shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. The Board, through the office of the City Solicitor, shall apply to the appropriate court to enforce a subpoena or order for production of evidence or to impose any penalty prescribed for failure to obey a subpoena or order. The Board may delegate in writing to a member of its staff the powers to administer oaths and take testimony. A delegation is revocable at the will of the Board and does not prevent exercise of any power by the Board. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 3)  
2.74.050 - Chief of Police—Duties. 
The Chief of Police shall administer the Department pursuant to existing laws, and the rules and regulations of the Department and the State civil service rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 5)  
2.74.060 - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be called by the Executive Secretary or by three members of the Board, upon personal notice being given to all members of the Board, or written notice being mailed to each member and received at least forty-eight hours prior to such meeting, unless such notice is waived by such members. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 10)  
2.74.070 - Discipline. 
A.  Manual. The Chief of Police, in consultation with the Board, shall adopt a manual of rules, regulations and procedures for the Department. The manual shall defined categories of major and minor offenses and shall set forth the maximum and minimum penalties for each offense. The offenses and penalties shall not be defined in a manner that is inconsistent with existing civil service laws. 
B.  Summary Discipline. The Chief of Police may implement summary discipline for a minor offense. 
C.  General Discipline. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the City Manager the discharge or indefinite suspension of any employee of the Department for a major offense. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 6)  
2.74.080 - Complaints. 
A.  A complaint by a member of the public, hereinafter referred to as "a civilian complaint," or any police officer or civilian employee concerning the Department may be filed either with the Department or the Board. Complaints concerning the Department and filed with the Department shall be forwarded immediately to the Board Secretary. Copies of the complaint shall be made available to each member of the Board, the Board Investigator and the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall investigate such a complaint immediately and file a report of findings with the Board within thirty days. Complaints concerning the Department and filed with the Board shall be investigated immediately by the Board. Copies of the complaint shall be made available to the Chief of Police. The Board shall immediately order a preliminary investigation by its investigative staff. The purpose of such preliminary investigation shall be to determine if there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full investigation of the allegations contained within the complaint by the Board. The preliminary investigation shall be completed within ten days, unless for cause a member of the Board extends such time. No preliminary investigation shall be extended for more than thirty days. After completion of such preliminary investigation, the Board shall either order a full investigation if sufficient evidence exists to warrant same or if sufficient evidence does not exist to warrant same, summarily dismiss the complaint. 
B.  In addition to the above, the Board may also cause to be investigated any complaint concerning the Department or its rules and regulations. 
C.  The Board Secretary shall keep a public docket of complaints and the disposition of each complaint after investigation. 
D.  The Board shall issue a written response to all complaints and it shall deliver a copy of its response and/or findings to all parties. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 7)  
2.74.090 - Resolution of complaints. 
A.  If a complaint is not resolved as a result of investigation to the satisfaction of the complainant, the respondent employee, or a member of the Board, either the complainant, the respondent employee or the Board member may request the full Board to hear or review the matter. The Board may, as its option, when it determines that a hearing or review is warranted by the evidence, hear or review the matter itself or refer the matter to a fact finder. A representative of the City Solicitor's office shall be present at any hearing before the Board. 
B.  The fact finder shall be an attorney and, in the conduct of the hearing, may with the assistance and approval of the City Solicitor, subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. To enforce a subpoena or order for production of evidence or to impose any penalty prescribed for failure to obey a subpoena or order, the fact finder shall apply to the appropriate court. The costs of the fact finder shall be borne by the City. 
C.  After a hearing, the fact finder shall, within thirty days, submit findings of fact to the Board. The Board, upon receipt of the report of the fact finder, if any, shall within thirty days recommend to the City Manager any discipline to be imposed. Any report or action involving a civilian complaint shall be made public. 
D.  Any employee against whom a complaint is filed is presumed innocent and shall not forfeit any pay or seniority rights pending final action by the Board, except with the concurrence of four members of the Board. All pleadings filed and all hearings before the Board and the fact finder which involve a civilian complaint shall be public. The parties to any hearing are the complainant and the respondent employee. Each has a right to counsel. The complainant's case may be presented by the complainant or complainant's counsel. Any probative evidence may be admitted. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 8)  
2.74.100 - Hiring and promotions. 
A.  Entry into employment with the Department as a police officer is by appointment of the City Manager, in accordance with the rules, regulations and procedures of the Department and the Commonwealth's civil service laws. 
B.  Promotions shall be made on the basis of training, experience, education and competitive examinations, all in accordance with existing law. The City Manager shall make all promotions within the Department. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 9)  
2.74.110 - Hearing by petition. 
On the written petition of fifty or more residents of the City, filed with the Board, the Board shall hold a special hearing for the purpose of responding to such petition. Copies of the petition shall be delivered to the City Manager, City Clerk and the City Council. Notice of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as provided for other hearings of the Board. The Board shall conduct such hearing upon the subject matter of the petition within thirty days of the filing of such petition with the Board. 
(Ord. 1018 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 15 Art. 4 § 11)  
Chapter 2.76 - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
 
2.76.010 - Established. 
A.  There shall be a Cambridge Human Rights Commission consisting of eleven members, which may be altered by an amendment to the ordinance codified in this chapter by the City Council. 
B.  The Commission shall be considered a department of the City, with all the rights and responsibilities thereof. The Executive Director of the Commission shall be considered the Department Head. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 1)  
2.76.020 - Purpose. 
The Cambridge Human Rights Commission shall work with the City Manager and/or their assistants on matters pertaining to the human rights of City citizens. The main purpose for which the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted is to protect the human rights of all the citizens of the City. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 3(D))  
2.76.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
1.  "Age" means the actual or supposed chronological age of an individual eighteen years or older. 
2.  "Bona fide occupational qualification" means a valid consideration of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income that is a requirement for employment and has been certified as such by the Cambridge Human Rights Commission (referred to in this chapter as "the Commission") or by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination under Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
3.  "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being regarded as having such impairment. 
4.  "Discrimination" means a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates, creates unequal status, separates or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income. 
5.  "Educational facility" means any person, whether organized for profit or not-for-profit, that holds itself out to the public as providing instruction in the arts, sciences, trades or any other area of learning. 
6.  "Family status" means the actual or supposed condition of having minor children living with the individual or not. 
7.  "Gender Identity" means a person's gender-related identity, appearance or behavior, whether or not that that gender-related identity, appearance or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person's physiology or assigned sex at birth. 
8.  "Labor organization" means any association, regardless of its form of organization, or employees or persons involved in similar trades or industries for the purpose of collective bargaining, resolving grievances in the terms and conditions of employment, or any other mutual aid or protection. 
9.  "Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been married, separated or divorced, or not. 
10.  "Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being or having been in the service of the military, or not. 
11.  "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, the City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and commissions thereof. 
12.  a.  "Public accommodation" means any place or site, business or other establishment, or medium of communication, whether owned privately or by a public agency, that is intended for the patronage or use or convenience, whether for a charge or fee or not, of the general public, including but not limited to, inns, hotels, motels, roadhouses, trailer parks, campsites, any place where food or beverage is sold, retail stores, shopping malls, dispensaries, clinics, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, hospices, physicians' offices or other medical facilities, restrooms, bathhouses, parks, public grounds, gardens, theaters, lecture halls, newspapers and magazines and other publications, barber shops, beauty parlors, motion picture houses, music halls, bowling alleys, amusement parks and arcades, skating rinks, ball parks, billiard and pool parlors, recreation parks, fairs, golf courses, gymnasiums, health clubs, shooting galleries, art galleries, libraries, laundries, garages, all public conveyances whether owned privately or by a public agency, transportation terminals and stations, public portions of buildings accommodating the public, clubs, societies and social associations that are public or quasi-public banks, finance companies, insurance companies, streets and parking lots. 
b.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to include or apply to any place of accommodation that is by its nature distinctly private; provided, that where public use is permitted that use shall be covered by this chapter and further provided, that an establishment that has membership requirements but otherwise qualifies as a public accommodation shall be deemed a public accommodation for the purpose of this chapter if its membership requirements (1) consist only of the payment of fees or dues; (2) consist of requirements under which a substantial portion of the residents of or visitors to the City could qualify; or (3) consist primarily of a discrimination or exclusion based upon race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income. 
13.  "Real estate transaction" means any intercourse among any persons that involves a building, structure or portion thereof, or parcel of land, developed or undeveloped, whether privately owned or owned by a public agency, including the design, construction, alteration, repair, sale, lease, sublease, mortgage, rental or other provision, term or offer of the same. 
14.  "Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief or moral philosophy of an individual or the lack thereof. 
15.  "Same sex" means occupying the same social and identity roles as another with respect to being male or female. 
16.  "Sexual orientation" means the actual or supposed heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality of an individual. 
17.  "Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of income" shall not include income derived from criminal activity. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1182, Amended, 02/24/1997; Ord. 1155, Amended, 01/10/1994; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 9(E))  
2.76.040 - Appointment—Term. 
The members shall be appointed by the City Manager for terms of three years. Initial appointments shall be for the following terms: Three members for a term of three years, four members for a period of two years and four members for a period of one year. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled by appointment by the City Manager for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 2)  
2.76.050 - Nominations. 
A.  Not less than two months prior to making such appointments, or reappointments, the City Manager shall solicit nominations from as many public service groups and other sources which they deem appropriate as possible. 
B.  In keeping with the policy of the City Council, the members of the Commission shall be representative of the population of the City. The Commission shall contain members of groups traditionally targets of discriminatory behavior. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 3(A))  
2.76.060 - Residency requirement. 
All members of the Commission shall be residents of the City when appointments are being made by the City Manager, and throughout their tenure. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 3(B))  
2.76.070 - Officers—Quorum—Adoption of rules and regulations—Compensation. 
A.  The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. The Chairperson shall be elected at the first meeting each year. The Commission members shall make an attempt to rotate the election of a Chairperson each year thereafter. 
B.  Six members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business of the Commission and all decisions shall be by majority vote of the Commission members present and voting. 
C.  The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth to carry out the policy and provisions of this chapter and the powers and duties of the Commission in connection therewith. The rules shall insure the due process rights of all persons involved in investigations and hearings. 
D.  All records of the Commission shall be public except as provided by State law. 
E.  Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but reasonable per diem and necessary expense reimbursement shall be paid out of the budget of the Commission. 
F.  The Commissioners shall be classified as special municipal employees for the purposes of Chapter 268A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 3(C))  
2.76.080 - Recommendations of deficiencies. 
A.  The Commission shall discuss human rights problem areas with the City Manager and make recommendations necessary to protect the human rights of all City citizens and employees. 
B.  The Commission shall request of the City Manager, department heads and Superintendent of Schools, such information and staff support as is reasonable so that it may be properly informed. 
C.  The Commission may review and comment on all matters pertaining to the human rights of citizens. They may examine and scrutinize and comment on department budgets including the School Department budget. 
D.  The City with the advice of the Commission shall employ an Executive Director who shall be the executive officer of the Commission and shall be responsible for carrying out the policies and decisions of the Commission. The City may employ an Administrative Assistant or such other personnel as it may from time to time deem necessary. 
E.  The Commission shall, when appropriate, request the assistance of the staff and commissions of the City engaged in related work, such as the Commission on the Status of Women, the Civic Unity Committee, the Commission for Persons with Disabilities, the Lesbian Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Plus (LGBTQ+) Commission, the Office of Equity and Inclusion, the Consumers' Council, the Council on Aging and the Veterans' Service Department, and shall at all times work cooperatively with these groups. 
F.  The Commission shall receive aid, advice and opinions from the City Solicitor and the Legal Department, and be represented in court by the City Solicitor. 
G.  The City Manager shall provide office space to the Commission in order to give easy access to citizen complaints. 
H.  Each year, the Commission and the City Manager, together or separately, shall report to the City Council in writing as to the progress that is being made under this chapter. These written reports may properly contain suggestions and recommendations which will further the aims of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 4)  
2.76.090 - Authority to conduct investigations. 
The Commission may at any time question matters pertaining to City bona fide residents who are faculty members and/or students of local schools and universities who are involved in human rights complaints. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 5)  
2.76.100 - Covenant for new contracts—Existing contracts. 
A.  Any contract entered into by the City or the Cambridge Schools, or any of their agencies, departments or subdivisions shall contain a covenant by the contractor and their subcontractors not to violate this chapter. Breach of this covenant shall be regarded as a material breach of the contract. 
B.  This section shall not impair the obligation of any presently existing contract. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 6)  
2.76.110 - Posting of discrimination policy required. 
A.  The City, every City contractor and subcontractor, every employer with one hundred or more employees, every owner of an apartment building or housing complex of fifteen or more units, every employment agency, every realtor and real estate agency, and every apartment or roommate service shall prominently post and keep posted the following notice at its place of business or in such apartment building or housing complex: 
Discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income is unlawful in the City of Cambridge. Chapter 2.76, Cambridge Municipal Code. 
Cambridge Human Rights Commission 
51 Inman Street 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
(617) 349-4396 
B.  The blanks in the model set out in subsection A of this section shall be properly filled with the address and telephone number of the offices of the Commission. 
C.  It shall be a crime punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars per violation to willfully violate this section. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1182, Amended, 02/24/1997; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 7)  
2.76.120 - Acts deemed lawful and unlawful—Exemptions. 
The Commission shall receive and investigate complaints of presence in the City of prejudice, intolerance or bigotry, including but not limited to such matters as the choice of lifestyle and the consequences such attitudes in the community engender and initiate its own investigation of the following activities and unlawful practices except that complaints against the City of Cambridge, City Departments and/or City employees shall be referred to the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination ("MCAD") for investigating and resolution: 
A.  It is an unlawful practice to deny any person or group equal access to services in employment, housing, education, recreation or other areas where such denial is based on limited English language skills. 
B.  1.  It is an unlawful practice for an employer directly or indirectly to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or to discharge from employment, training or apprenticeship or to discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions or privileges of employment, training or apprenticeship, because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual, unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification. An employer who asserts that a discriminatory practice is justified because of a bona fide occupational qualification that has not been certified as such by the Commission or by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination under Chapter 151B of the Massachusetts General Laws, shall have the burden of showing: 
a.  That the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of a bona fide occupational qualification; and 
b.  That there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the occupational qualifications. 
2.  Reasonable accommodation shall be made to enable the employment or continued employment of a person with a disability unless the employer can demonstrate that the extent of the accommodation required to meet the limitations of the person would impose an undue hardship or safety hazard to the employer's business. 
3.  The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section: 
a.  Employment practices of an employer of fewer than six persons; 
b.  Employment of an individual by their parent, child or spouse; 
c.  Employment by a religious institution of individuals performing a service related to a bona fide religious purpose; 
d.  Employment of an individual for work within the home of the employer; 
e.  Employment of an individual for the rendering of services to the person of the employer or their family. 
4.  The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful: 
a.  Employment programs designed to effect affirmative action by giving special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that such employment programs shall not discriminate among women, racial minorities or veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
b.  Employment limited to the elderly or persons with disabilities; provided, that such employment shall not discriminate among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
c.  Observance by an employer of the conditions of a bona fide employee benefits system or plan (including, but not limited to, a contractual seniority system); provided, that no such system or plan shall provide an excuse for failure to hire any individual. 
C.  It is an unlawful practice for any employment agency directly or indirectly to fail or refuse to classify properly or refer for employment or otherwise discriminate against any individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual. An employment agency that specializes in the recruitment and placement of the elderly or persons with disabilities shall be exempt from the operation of this section with respect to such specialized services; provided, that such services shall not discriminate among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter. 
D.  It is an unlawful practice for a labor organization directly or indirectly to refuse to admit to membership, training, apprenticeship or classification or to otherwise discriminate against any individual because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual. 
E.  It is an unlawful practice for an employer, employment agency or labor organization directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise publicize that any individual is unwelcome or not employable because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such individual, unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification or one of the exceptions set forth in subsections B. and C. of this section. 
F.  1.  It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with. any person or to set discriminatory terms or conditions with respect to a real estate transaction with any person or to advertise or otherwise publicize that any person is unwelcome or may not enter into a real estate transaction because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person or of a person residing with such person. 
2.  This section does not create an affirmative duty to remove barriers for persons with disabilities in excess of the requirements of existing laws and ordinances, but reasonable accommodation shall be made to enable the provision of housing for a person with a disability. 
3.  The following practices shall be exempt from the operation of this section: 
a.  The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling or apartment which is occupied by the lessor as their residence and in which the roomer or boarder must pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by such lessor in order to gain access to the room or rooms thus let or rented; 
b.  The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the other residential unit of which is occupied by the lessor as their residence; 
c.  The leasing, rental or other provision with or without fee or space within a church, temple, synagogue, religious school or other facility used primarily for religious purposes. 
4.  The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful: 
a.  The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated either directly by government agencies or indirectly through government subsidization and regulation, which programs are designed to assist the elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged individuals; provided, that such programs shall not discriminate among the elderly, persons with disabilities or economically disadvantaged on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
b.  The establishment of housing set aside for or limited to the elderly or persons with disabilities; provided, that such establishment shall not discriminate among the elderly or persons with disabilities on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter. 
c.  The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by educational facilities; provided that such establishment shall not discriminate on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter. 
d.  The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum or residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special medical, rehabilitative, social or psychological support, including but not limited to half-way houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification facilities, shelters for the homeless, and the like. 
G.  It is an unlawful practice for any bank, financial institution or any other credit-granting or credit-approving institution or person, including a retail store that sells goods or services on credit, directly or indirectly to discriminate in the granting, reporting, approval or extension of any form of loan or credit to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person. It shall not be an unlawful practice under this section to establish or review the creditworthiness of any person by seeking information relevant to such creditworthiness as amount and source of income, age, employment history, credit references and the number and age of dependents. 
H.  1.  It is an unlawful practice for any insurance company, insurance agent or person engaged in the service of providing insurance to refuse to insure any person or discriminate in the terms of insuring any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person, unless based on a bona fide actuarially determined insurance factor, such as the age or health of the person, that affects the risk for which insurance is being sought. 
2.  In accordance with federal court cases, it is the intention of this section that actuarial data be gender-neutral. 
I.  It is an unlawful practice for any bonding institution or person engaged in the service of providing financial and performance bonds to refuse to bond any person or discriminate in the terms of bonding because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person. 
J.  1.  It is an unlawful practice for any educational facility directly or indirectly to fail or refuse to admit, or to curtail or terminate admission to, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of educational services, programs opportunities or curriculum offered by it to any person because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person. 
2.  The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful: 
a.  The establishment by an educational facility of minimum or maximum age requirements for any educational program; provided, that such establishment shall not discriminate among the potential students on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
b.  The selection of students by a religious educational facility that is limited exclusively or gives preference to members of such religion; provided, that such selection shall not discriminate among the members of such religion on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
c.  The maintenance or establishment by an educational facility of a school or program limited to members of only one sex or otherwise segregated by sex; provided, that such facility shall not discriminate among the members of such sex on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
d.  Educational programs or policies designed to effect affirmative action by giving special preference to women, racial minorities or veterans; provided, that such programs or policies shall not discriminate among women, racial minorities, or veterans on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter; 
e.  The establishment by an educational facility of special programs designed to assist or provide special training for persons with disabilities, the elderly, individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged; provided, that such selection shall not discriminate among persons with disabilities, elderly, individuals not fluent in English, or the economically disadvantaged on the basis of other discriminatory criteria as set forth in Section 2.76.030 of this chapter. 
K.1.  a.  It is an unlawful practice for any person who owns, operates, leases, or leases to a place of public accommodation, to fail to take action to remove architectural barriers, and communication barriers that are structural in nature, in existing places of public accommodation, unless such barrier removal action is not readily achievable, i.e., easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without much difficulty or expense. For the purposes of this section, "barrier" means any physical element of a facility that impedes access by people with disabilities. 
b.  In determining whether an action is readily achievable, factors to be considered include: 
i.  The nature and cost of the action needed under this section; 
ii.  The overall financial resources of the public accommodation involved in the action; the number of persons employed at such public accommodation; the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact otherwise of such action upon the operation of the public accommodation; 
iii.  The overall financial resources of the public accommodation; the overall size of the business of a public accommodation with respect to the number of its employees; the number, type, and location of its facilities; and 
iv.  the type of operation or operations of the public accommodation, including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of such public accommodation; the geographic separateness, administrative or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the public accommodation. 
c.  Where a public accommodation can demonstrate that the removal of a barrier under clause 1.a. is not readily achievable, it is an unlawful practice for that public accommodation to fail to make such goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations available through non-structural methods, if such methods are readily achievable. 
d.  These provision shall not apply to entities other than those entities regulated by Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. 12181-2189. 
2.  It is an unlawful practice for any person directly or indirectly to advertise or otherwise publicize that any person is unwelcome to the full use of any public accommodation because of the race, color, disability or source of income of such person. 
3.  The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful: 
a.  The designation of a public accommodation for the exclusive or preferential use of the elderly or persons with disabilities; 
b.  The designation of a rest room or of a privately owned athletic or exercise facility for the exclusive or preferential use of members of a single sex; 
c.  The advertisement of a public accommodation as being for the preferential use of persons of a particular sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status or military status, provided such preference is not advertised as or implied to be a requirement for entry or use of such public accommodation. 
L.  It is an unlawful practice for any person to harass, intimidate, threaten, assault or otherwise discriminate against any person in or upon any public accommodation because of the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of such person, or attempt to do so. 
M.  It is an unlawful practice for any person to commit any act forbidden by this chapter for any reason that would not have been asserted, wholly or partially, but for the race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income of any person. 
N.  It is an unlawful practice for any person to aid, abet, incite, compel, coerce or conspire to the commission of any of the acts forbidden by this chapter or to attempt to do so. 
O.  It is an unlawful practice for any person to discharge, expel, evict, harass, retaliate in any manner or otherwise take action against any person because such person has opposed any act forbidden by this chapter or because such person has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1314, Added, 03/03/2008; Ord. 1182, Amended, 02/24/1997; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 8(A))  
2.76.130 - Cooperation with other government agencies. 
The Commission shall work cooperatively with federal, State and City agencies, including, but not limited to the School Department and, the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination, in developing materials, workshops, public presentations and other educational resources designed to eliminate prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and discrimination and to enlist the cooperation of the various racial, religious and ethnic groups, civic and community organizations, labor organizations, fraternal and benevolent organizations and other groups to further the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 8(B))  
2.76.140 - Investigation of discrimination—Powers and duties. 
A.  The function of the Commission shall be to implement the policy of this chapter by receiving and investigating complaints of discrimination, initiating its own investigations of discrimination, mediating complaints, holding hearings and presenting findings to the City Manager and/or government agencies such as the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination or the courts. 
B.  The Commission shall exercise its authority through the following powers and duties: 
1.  To receive and investigate complaints and to initiate its own investigations of violations of this chapter; 
2.  To transmit for filing with other government agencies copies of any and all complaints filed with the Commission, or which the Commission is otherwise aware, that relate to acts of discrimination under the jurisdiction of such agencies; 
3.  To attempt by mediation to resolve any discrimination complaint over which it has jurisdiction and to recommend to all appropriate government agencies such action as it feels will resolve any such complaint and, if deemed expedient, to hold hearings, summons, witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take the testimony of any person under oath and in connection therewith to require the production of any relevant evidence. The power to summons witnesses as defined in this chapter shall be limited to those powers and procedures set forth in Chapter 233, Section 8 of the Massachusetts General Laws. At any hearing before the Commission, or any committee thereof, a witness shall have the right to be advised and represented by counsel present during any such hearing; 
4.  With respect to complaints not resolved by mediation, to file a complaint or report of its findings and recommendations with any court or government agency having jurisdiction over the matter in question; to seek or apply remedies as enumerated in Section 2.76.150 of this chapter; and in all cases urging and using its best efforts to bring about compliance with its recommendations; 
5.  To seek or accept grants, gifts or bequests to help finance its activities. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 8(C))  
2.76.150 - Complaint resolution procedures. 
A.  Any person or class of persons claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged violation of this chapter may make, sign and file with the Commission a verified complaint in writing which shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have committed such violation and the particulars and other such information as may be required by the Commission. The Commission may also on its own motion issue a complaint, whenever it has reason to believe that any person has engaged in an unlawful practice in violation of this chapter. 
B.  No complaint shall be considered unless it is filed within one hundred eighty days after the occurrence of the alleged unlawful practice, or unless it has been referred to the Commission by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission after having been timely filed with either or both agencies. 
C.  The filing of a complaint, the failure to file a complaint, or the dismissal of a complaint by the Commission shall not bar the complainant from seeking relief in any other administrative or judicial forum. Nor shall filing or failing to file a complaint with other federal, State or City agencies or courts bar the complainant from seeking relief through the Commission. 
D.  After the filing of any complaint, the Executive Director shall designate an Investigating Officer to oversee a prompt investigation under the direction of the Executive Director and with the assistance of the staff of the Commission. 
E.  If such Executive Director determines after such investigation that no probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complaint, they shall promptly file a report of such findings with the Commission. One or more Reviewing Commissioner(s) designated by the Chair of the Commission shall review and sign the final investigative report. Once signed by the Reviewing Commissioner(s), the report, the findings of fact and determination contained therein shall become the findings and determination of the Commission. 
F.  If the Executive Director determines after such investigations that probable cause does exist for crediting the allegations of the complaint or if the Commission so determines, notwithstanding a negative report from the Executive Director, the Commission shall forthwith endeavor by conference, conciliation and persuasion to eliminate the unlawful practice. The Commission and its staff shall not disclose what has occurred in the course of such endeavors except to disclose the terms of conciliation when the complaint has been disposed of in this manner. 
G.  In the case of failure to eliminate an alleged unlawful practice by the process of mediation or after ninety days have passed from commencement of mediation, or if probable cause exists that a conciliation agreement has been violated, the Commission shall issue and serve in its name a written notice, together with a copy of the complaint, requiring the person named in the complaint (hereinafter called the "respondent") to answer the charges of the complaint at a hearing of the Commission at a reasonable time and place specified in such notice. The respondent may file a written verified answer to the complaint and appear at such hearing in person, with or without counsel, and submit testimony. The Commission may designate a staff member to present evidence on behalf of the complainant or may permit the complainant to do so themself or by counsel. The Commission shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in the courts. The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and recorded, and shall be transcribed at the request of any party. 
H.  If, upon all the evidence, the Commission shall find that a respondent has not engaged in any unlawful practice or violation of this chapter, the Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant an order dismissing the complaint as to such respondent. 
I.  If, upon all the evidence, the Commission shall find that a respondent has engaged in any unlawful practice or violation of this chapter, the Commission shall state its findings of fact and shall forthwith seek relief through one or more of the following actions: 
1.  File a criminal complaint against the respondent in the Cambridge District Court or in the district court for the judicial district in which the respondent resides, seeking fines of up to three hundred dollars, or the maximum under State law, for each such violation; 
2.  Levy a civil fine of up to three hundred dollars for each such violation. Each day of any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. Any such penalty or penalties shall be enforced through non-criminal disposition as set forth in G.L. c. 40 § 21D; 
3.  File a complaint against the respondent in Superior Court seeking injunctive relief, including a temporary restraining order; or 
4.  File a complaint against the respondent in a court of appropriate jurisdiction seeking the award to the complainant of damages, expenses, punitive damages and other relief, as appropriate. 
J.  The Commission may be represented in court by the City Solicitor. 
K.  It shall be a crime punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars, or the maximum under State law, per violation to commit any unlawful practice under this section and Sections 2.76.110, 2.76.120 and 2.76.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 8(D))  
2.76.160 - City discrimination policy. 
A.  Any practice that by design or effect discriminates against individuals, because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income is of public concern, as such discrimination creates strife, hostility and unrest, threatens or impairs the rights and privileges of individuals and deprives individuals of the benefits of a free and open society. Discrimination that deprives individuals of equal opportunities is unjust and results in serious injury to the public safety, health and welfare of the City. 
B.  Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to safeguard the equal opportunities of all individuals in the City in accordance with their abilities, regardless of their race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, family status, military status or source of income and to prevent discrimination against such individuals in the provision of City services and in employment, housing and real estate, education, credit, bonding, insurance and public accommodations. 
C.  Further, it is the policy of the City to encourage harmony and mutual respect among its inhabitants and visitors and to reduce tensions and strife caused by discrimination. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 9(A))  
2.76.170 - Applicability—Police powers. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter, and any ordinances or portions thereof inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter shall not apply. 
B.  This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City for the protection of the public safety, health, prosperity and welfare. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 9(B))  
2.76.180 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit civil rights granted or hereinafter afforded by the laws of the federal government or of the Commonwealth. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to exempt or relieve any person from any liability, duty, penalty or punishment provided by any present or future law of the Commonwealth or the United States, other than any such law which purports to require or permit the doing of any act which would be unlawful under this chapter. 
C.  Any remedies provided by this chapter shall be cumulative with any other remedies provided by local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. 1401, 9/17/2018; Ord. 1016 (part), 1984: prior code Ch. 25 § 9(C))  
Chapter 2.78 - HISTORICAL BUILDINGS AND LANDMARKS  
Article I. - Administration 
 
2.78.010 - Established—Appointment—Terms. 
The Cambridge Historical Commission established under the Historic Districts Act, General Laws Chapter 40C, with all the powers and duties of an historic district commission, shall consist of seven members and three alternate members to be appointed by the City Manager with the approval of the Council, including one member from two nominees submitted by the Cambridge Historical Society, one member from two nominees submitted by the Chapter of the American Institute of Architects covering Cambridge, one member or alternate from two nominees submitted by the Boston Society of Landscape Architects, and one member from two nominees of the Board of Realtors covering Cambridge. One or more of the members so appointed shall be a resident of an historic district established in the City pursuant to the Historic Districts Act, and at least one member or alternate shall be a lawyer. 
The members and alternate members shall serve for terms of three years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. If within thirty days after submission of a written request for nominees to any of the above-named organizations no such nominations have been submitted, the City Manager may make such appointment without nomination by such organization. 
To the extent a person meets more than one of the foregoing specific membership requirements, then each such specific membership requirement so met shall be satisfied by such person's appointment (whether as member or alternate) to the Commission. 
The Commission shall, in addition to the powers and duties contained in this chapter and under the Historic Districts Act as in effect from time to time, also have all the powers and duties of an Historical Commission as provided in Section 8D of General Laws, Chapter 40 as in effect from time to time. 
(Ord. 1166 §§1, 14, 1995; Ord. 869 (part), 1976: prior code § 2-145)  
2.78.020 - Powers and duties. 
The Commission shall have in addition to the powers and duties of an historical district commission and of an historical commission the following further powers and duties (and may in exercise of any of its powers or duties accept money, gifts and expend the same, and subject to appropriation or receipt of such gifts, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants): 
A.  To conduct a survey of Cambridge buildings for the purpose of determining those of historic significance architecturally or otherwise, and pertinent facts about them, acting in collaboration with the Planning Board and the Redevelopment Authority to the extent either may from time to time be able to undertake such work, and to maintain and from time to time revise detailed listings of historic sites and buildings, and data about them, appropriately classified with respect to national, State or local significance, to period or field of interest, or otherwise; 
B.  To propose from time to time as it may deem appropriate, the establishment in accordance with the provisions of the Historic Districts Act of additional historic districts and changes in historic districts; 
C.  To determine an appropriate system of markers for selected historic sites and buildings not already sufficiently marked, to arrange for preparation and installation of such markers, and to arrange for care of historic markers; 
D.  To arrange for preparation and publication of maps and brochures and descriptive material about City historic sites and buildings, arranged for convenient walks or tours, or otherwise; 
E.  To arrange for construction and placing under appropriate cover at a convenient place on or near the Cambridge Common of a model of Cambridge as it existed in the latter part of 1775; 
F.  To cooperate with and advise the Planning Board, the Redevelopment Authority, the Public Works Department and other City agencies in matters involving historic sites and buildings; 
G.  To cooperate with and enlist assistance for the City from the National Park Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities and other agencies, public and private, from time to time concerned with historic sites and buildings; 
H.  To advise owners of historic buildings in the City on problems of preservation; and 
I.  To make recommendations with respect to any place determined by the Commission to be of historical or archaeological value to the Massachusetts Historical Commission that such place be certified as an historical or archaeological landmark or nominated to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(Ord. 1166 §2, 1995; Ord. 869 (part), 1976: prior code § 2-147(a)—(i))  
2.78.030 - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Historic Districts Act or this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-149)  
2.78.040 - Advisory Committee—Appointment—Recommendation. 
The Commission may recommend to the Manager from time to time as needed appointment of advisory committees of historians and persons experienced in architecture or other arts or in historic restoration or preservation, to assist in manner comparable to the National Park Service Advisory Board or Consulting Committee. 
(Prior code § 2-148)  
2.78.050 - Historic district established. 
A.  There is hereby established under the provisions of the Historic Districts Act an Old Cambridge Historic District consisting of the areas heretofore known as the Cambridge Common Historic District, the Longfellow Historic District, the Lowell Historic District, and the Fayerweather-Lee Historic District and the other areas bounded as shown on the map entitled "Old Cambridge Historic District Map 1976" attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part of this chapter. 
B.  There is further established under the provisions of the Historic Districts Act (Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C) a Fort Washington Historic District consisting of Fort Washington Park and an additional area shown on the map entitled "Fort Washington Historic District, 1981," attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated in this chapter in full. 
C.  The Old Cambridge Historic District, established by vote of the City Council on December 13, 1976, is extended pursuant to the provisions of the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, by the addition thereto of properties located on Arsenal Square, Berkeley Place, Berkeley Street, Concord Avenue, Craigie Street and Follen Street and portions of said streets bounded as shown on the map entitled "Old Cambridge Historic District Extension 1986," attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated in this chapter in full. As so extended, the Old Cambridge Historic District remains in full effect and such extended district shall be subject to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C and this section. 
(Ord. 1166 §§3—5, 1995; Ord. 1037, 1986; Ord. 975, 1982; Ord. 869 (part), 1976: prior code § 2-146) 
D.  The Old Cambridge Historic District is extended pursuant to provisions of the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, by the addition thereto of properties located on Arsenal Square, Concord Avenue, and Garden Street and the portions of said streets bounded as shown on the map entitled "Proposed Arsenal Square Extension of the Old Cambridge Historic District Extension, April 3, 1998" incorporated in this chapter in full. As so extended, the Old Cambridge Historic District remains in full effect and such extended district shall be subject to the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40C and this Section. In making determinations concerning properties in the extension, the Commission shall be guided by the terms of the Revised Final Report on the Proposed Arsenal Square Extension of the Old Cambridge Historic District and/or the Proposed Landmark Designation of 22, 24, and 26-28 Garden Street , issued July 27, 1998. 
(Ord. 1213, Added, 01/11/1999, addition of Section D to 2.78.050; Ord. 1213, Amended, 01/11/1999, new section D to 2.78.050)  
2.78.060 - Application for certificate of appropriateness—Time limitations. 
When taking action under the provisions of the fourth paragraph of Section 11 of the Historic Districts Act, the Commission shall make its determination within forty-five days after the filing of the application for a certificate of appropriateness, or such further time as the applicant may in writing allow. 
(Prior code § 2-150)  
Article II. - Demolition of Buildings Determined to be Historically Significant 
 
2.78.070 - Purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this article is adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant buildings within the City which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the city; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose; to encourage owners of preferably-preserved significant buildings to seek out persons who might be willing to purchase and to preserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings, rather than demolish them; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare, to preserve the resources of the City and to make the City a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. To achieve these purposes, the Cambridge Historical Commission is empowered to advise the Building Commissioner with respect to the issuance of permits for demolition, and the issuance of demolition permits for significant buildings is regulated as provided in this article. 
(Ord. 965 § 1, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
2.78.080 - Definitions for Article II. 
The following terms, when used whether or not capitalized in this article, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  "Application" means an application for a permit for the demolition of a building, which application contains the information referred to in Section 2.78.100 of this article. 
B.  "Building" means any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property. 
C.  "Building Commissioner" means the person occupying the office of Commissioner of Buildings or otherwise authorized to issue demolition permits. 
D.  "Business day" means a day which is not a legal municipal holiday, Saturday or Sunday. 
E.  "Commission" means the Cambridge Historical Commission. 
F.  "Commission staff" means the executive director of the Commission, the person performing the functions of such director in the event there is no person with the title of Executive Director as such, or any other person regularly providing staff services for the Commission to whom the Commission has delegated authority to act as Commission staff under this article. 
G.  "Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a building or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same. 
H.  "Historic district" means the Old Cambridge Historic District and any other historic district that may from time to time have been established by ordinance. 
I.  "Initial determination" means any determination contemplated in Section 2.78.090C of this chapter made by the Commission or the Commission staff. 
J.  "Permit" means a permit issued by the Building Commissioner for demolition of a building pursuant to an application therefor. 
K.  "Preferably preserved significant building" means any significant building which the Commission determines, as provided in Section 2.78.090D of this chapter, that it is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated rather than to be demolished. 
L.  "Significant building" means any building within the City which is in whole or in part fifty years or more old and: 
1.  Which is within any historic district; or 
2.  Which is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register of Historic Places, or which is the subject of a pending application for listing on the National Register; or 
3.  Which is or has been designated by the Commission to be a significant building after a finding by the Commission that a building either: 
a.  Is importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or the Commonwealth, or 
b.  Is historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of building construction or association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings. 
(Ord. 1166 § 6, 1995; Ord. 965 § 2, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
2.78.090 - Procedures for demolition. 
A.  No permit for the demolition of a building which is in whole or in part fifty years or more old shall be issued other than in conformity with the provisions of this article, as well as in conformity with the provisions of other laws and ordinances applicable to the demolition of buildings and the issuance of permits therefor generally. An application for demolition of a building over fifty years in age shall be made only by the person, partnership, corporation or realty trust which is the owner thereof at the time of such application. 
B.  The Building Commissioner shall cause a copy of each application for a demolition permit to be forwarded to (or shall satisfy himself that a duplicate of such application has been submitted to) the Commission for determination by the Commission whether the building which is the subject of such application is a preferably preserved significant building. 
C.  If the Commission staff shall make an initial determination that the building which is the subject of the application is or may be a significant building, the members of the Commission and the Building Commissioner shall be so advised, and no demolition permit or building permit for new construction or alterations as defined in Ch. 40C §6 shall at that time be issued pending review of the initial determination by the Commission pursuant to subsection D of this section. If the Building Commissioner shall not receive advice of any such initial determination within five business days of the date that a copy of the application is submitted to the Commission staff, then, subject to Section 2.78.130 of this article, the Building Commissioner may grant the permit applied for unless prior to such grant he is advised that such an initial determination has been made. 
D.  If the Commission staff shall have made an initial determination that a building which is the subject of the application is or may be a significant building, the Commission shall review the application and such initial determination at a public meeting of the Commission for which the Commission shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City notice that such application will be considered. Such notice, which shall specify the address of the subject building, shall be published in an issue of such newspaper distributed in the week preceding the week in which such meeting is held, or in an earlier week. If requested either by the applicant for the demolition permit or by ten citizens not later than the date of such public meeting, or if at any time the Commission wishes to have the benefit of a public hearing, the Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to making the determination provided for in this section. If the Commission determines, after such a hearing if one has been held or without such hearing if no hearing has so been requested, that the demolition of the subject building would result in the demolition of a significant building whose loss would be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the City, such building shall be considered a preferably preserved significant building. The Commission may delegate to the Commission staff authority to determine without any hearing that a building is not a preferably preserved significant building and to so advise the Building Commissioner. Upon determination by the Commission or by the Commission staff that a building is not a preferably preserved significant building or upon failure by the Commission to make any determination within forty-five days of the date that a copy of the application was submitted to the Commission, the Building Commissioner may, subject to Section 2.78.130 of this article, grant the permit applied for. 
E.  Upon a determination by the Commission that any building which is the subject of an application is a preferably preserved significant building, it shall so advise the person who submitted the application and the Building Commissioner, and no demolition permit or building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises shall be issued until six months after the date of such determination by the Commission except as may be provided for in subsection I of this section. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Building Commissioner may issue a demolition permit for a preferably preserved significant building at any time after receipt of written advice from the Commission to the effect either (1) that the Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner or some other person or group willing to purchase the preferably preserved significant building would be willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore such building, or (2) that the Commission is satisfied that for at least six months since the owner first sought the advice of the Commission or the Commission staff in locating a person or group that might be willing to purchase such building and to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the same, the owner of the preferably preserved significant building has made continuing, bona fide, reasonable and unsuccessful efforts to locate such a purchaser. 
F.  No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved significant building under subsection D of this section shall be granted until all proceedings relating to amendments of the zoning ordinance of the City have been completed, if such proceedings have been initiated prior to the expiration of any period of delay of demolition resulting from such determination, and if such amendments affect the site of the building whose demolition has been thereby delayed. 
G.  No permit for erection of a new structure on the site of an existing building over fifty years old may be issued prior to issuance of a permit for demolition of such existing building. 
H.  No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved significant building under subsection D of this section shall be granted until plans for use or development of the site after demolition have been filed with the Building Department and found to comply with all laws pertaining to the issuance of a building permit, or if for a parking lot, a certificate of occupancy, for that site. All approvals necessary for the issuance of such a building permit or certificate of occupancy including without limitation any necessary zoning variances or special permits, must be granted and all appeals from the granting of such approvals must be concluded, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit under this section. 
I.  During the six-month delay of demolition, no application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a preferably reserved significant building shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though the property were designated as a landmark under Article III of this chapter 2.78. Until the expiration of the six-month delay period, the Commission shall review all construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of the structures on the premises of a preferably preserved significant building. 
(Ord. 1166 §15, 1995; Ord. 965 § 3, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
2.78.100 - Application—Publication of notice. 
A.  Application Contents. Every application for a demolition permit for a building shall contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and interest in the property; 
2.  The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's; 
3.  The address or location of the building to be demolished; 
4.  A brief description of the type of building and the condition requiring issuance of the permit; and 
5.  A brief description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction or replacement of the premises upon which the building is located. 
B.  Notice. In addition to the publication provided for in Section 2.78.090D of this article, notice of any hearing or determination provided for in this article shall in any event be given by the Commission to the applicant for the demolition permit, and shall also be given to such other persons and in such manner as the Commission may determine. The Commission may among other forms of notice require that the applicant maintain on the building which is the subject of an application a notice, in a form designated by the Commission, visible from the nearest public way, of any hearing upon the subject matter of such applicant; and the applicant shall comply with such requirement. 
(Ord. 965 § 4, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
2.78.110 - Emergency demolition. 
A.  In the event that a Board of Survey is convened to consider the condition of a building over fifty years old, the Executive Director of the Cambridge Historical Commission shall be notified to accompany the Board during its inspection. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall pursue all reasonable courses of action to prevent emergency demolition of such a building which the Executive Director makes an initial determination is or may be a significant building, including but not limited to requiring the owner to secure it against further danger to the public. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any feature which the Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall certify is required for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(Ord. 1166 §1A 1995: Ord. 965 § 5, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
2.78.120 - Enforcement and remedies. 
A.  Enforcement. The Commission and/or the Building Commissioner are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in equity, as they may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. 
B.  Building Permit to be Withheld. No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon which a building fifty years or more old has been voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a demolition permit granted after compliance with the provisions of this article for a period of two years after the date of the completion of such demolition. As used in this article "premises" refers to the parcel of land upon which the demolished building was located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control. 
C.  Securing of Building Required. Upon a determination by the Commission that a building is a preferably preserved significant building, the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the building in compliance with the regulations of the Building Department. Should the owner fail so to secure the building, the loss of such building through fire or other cause shall be considered voluntary demolition for the purposes of subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 965 § 7, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
2.78.130 - Conflicts with Historic Districts Act. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of the Historic Districts Act, General Laws Chapter 40C, with respect to requirements as to notice, hearing and issuance by the Commission of a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship prior to demolition of any building in an historic district; provided, however, that any temporary building erected or maintained in an historic district pursuant to a certificate issued by the Commission may be demolished in a manner not inconsistent with the terms of such certificate. 
(Ord. 965 § 6, 1981: Ord. 909 (part), 1978: prior code § 2-147(j) (part))  
Article III. - Establishment of Neighborhood Conservation Districts and Protected Landmarks 
 
2.78.140 - Purpose. 
The City Council finds it necessary to enact this article under Section 6 of the Home Rule Amendment in order to preserve, conserve and protect the beauty and heritage of the City and to improve the quality of its environment through identification, conservation and maintenance of neighborhoods, areas, sites and structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City; to resist and restrain environmental influences adverse to this purpose; to foster appropriate use and wider public knowledge and appreciation of such neighborhoods, areas or structures; and by furthering these purposes to promote the public welfare by making the City a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the City may designate neighborhood conservation districts and landmarks to be administered as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(1))  
2.78.150 - Definitions for Article III. 
In addition to the terms defined in Section 2.78.080 of this chapter, the following terms, when used whether or not capitalized in this subsection, shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
A.  "Demolition" means the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing structures, or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same. 
B.  "Exterior architectural features" means and includes such portion of the exterior of a structure as is open to view from a public street, way, park or body of water, including but not limited to the architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, material and texture of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures. 
C.  "Historic district" means an area so established under the authority of Chapter 40C of the General Laws. 
D.  "Landmark" means any property within the City so designated in accordance with Section 2.78.180 of this article. 
E.  "Neighborhood conservation district" means any area within the City so designated in accordance with Section 2.78.180 of this article. 
F.  "Neighborhood conservation district commission" or "district commission" means a commission provided for by Section 2.78.160 of this article. 
G.  "Structure" means a combination of materials including a building, sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk, driveway, street, bridge, statue, monument or other manmade feature. 
H.  "Gross floor area" means the floor area so defined in Article 2.000 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1166 §§7, 16, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(2))  
2.78.160 - Neighborhood conservation district commission—Established—Membership requirements. 
A.  Upon designation as provided in Section 2.78.180 of this article of any neighborhood conservation district, and unless the designation provides that the Historical Commission itself shall exercise authority with respect thereto, the City Manager shall appoint a neighborhood conservation district commission to consist of five members and three alternates. The members shall include three residents of the neighborhood, not less than two of whom shall be homeowners; one neighborhood property owner (who may or may not be a neighborhood homeowner); and one member or alternate of the Cambridge Historical Commission. One member and/or one alternate of a neighborhood conservation district commission, in addition to the mandated member of the Cambridge Historical Commission, may be a Cambridge resident who lives outside the district. The remaining alternates shall be neighborhood property owners. The neighborhood conservation district commission shall act solely in the exercise of those functions described in this article which are applicable to the district under its administration. 
B.  Any member or alternate of the Historical Commission may be appointed to a neighborhood conservation district commission for a term coterminous with such person's term as a member or alternate of the Historical Commission. Members and alternates of a neighborhood conservation district commission who are not members of the Historical Commission shall by reason of experience or education have demonstrable knowledge and concern for improvement, conservation and enhancement of the district, and at least two of the members or alternates shall have professional qualifications related to real estate or architecture or historic preservation. The members of the neighborhood conservation district commission shall be appointed by the City Manager with regard to the diverse viewpoints expressed in the creation of the district. Such members shall serve for a term of three years, except that the initial appointments shall be for one member to serve one year and one member to serve two years, and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of office. Each member and alternate shall continue in office after expiration of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed and qualified, except that no member shall serve more than two consecutive terms. 
C.  The neighborhood conservation district commission shall elect annually a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from its own number. In the case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of self-interest on the part of a member, his or her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman, if available, otherwise by the Vice-Chairman if available, otherwise by a majority vote of the members and alternate members of the Commission present. The person exercising the function of Executive Director of the Historical Commission shall serve as secretary of each neighborhood conservation district commission. Persons serving as members or alternate members of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall, as a result of such service, be considered as "special municipal employees" for purposes of Chapter 268A of the General Laws. 
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 § 8, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(3))  
2.78.170 - Powers and duties. 
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall have like powers, functions and duties with respect to each landmark and neighborhood conservation district over which it has jurisdiction as is provided Historic District Commissions under clauses (a) through (g) under Section 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect to historic districts, including without limitation with respect to the approval and disapproval of certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability and hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the keeping of records and adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the City Clerk and Building Department of certificates and determinations of disapproval by it, and the determination of designs of appurtenances (excluding colors) which will meet the requirements of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(9))  
2.78.180 - Designation procedures. 
A.  The Historical Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as a landmark any property within the City being or containing a place, structure, feature or object which it determines to be either (1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City or the Commonwealth or (2) historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of construction or association with a famous architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of structures; may recommend for designation as a neighborhood conservation district any area within the City containing places and structures which it determines are of importance to the architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political, economic or social history of the City, and which considered together cause such area to constitute a distinctive neighborhood or to have a distinctive character in terms of its exterior features; and may recommend amendments to any designation of landmark or neighborhood conservation district theretofore made. 
B.  Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of designation of any landmark or neighborhood conservation district an investigation and report on the historical, architectural and other relevant significance thereof shall be made. The report shall recommend the boundaries of any proposed landmark or neighborhood conservation district and shall recommend for incorporation in the order of the City Council designating each landmark or neighborhood conservation district general and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the purposes of this article and the provisions of Section 2.78.190 of this article that are to be applied in making any determination of the type referred to in Sections 2.78.170, 2.78.210 and 2.78.220 of this article, with respect to the designated landmark or within the designated neighborhood conservation district. 
C.  In the case of a landmark, the report shall be prepared by the Historical Commission. In the case of a neighborhood conservation district, the report shall be prepared by a study committee consisting of three members or alternates of the Historical Commission and four persons appointed by the City Manager, including at least one person who resides in the district under consideration, at least one person who owns property in the district under consideration, and one person who owns property or resides elsewhere in the City and has demonstrated knowledge and concern for conservation and enhancement of those exterior features of the City which are important to its distinctive character. 
D.  Any ten registered voters of the City may petition that the Historical Commission initiate, or the Historical Commission on its own may initiate, the process of designating a landmark or neighborhood conservation district or amending or rescinding any such designation theretofore made. The Commission shall within forty-five days following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary hearing and arrange for the preparation of a report and, if required, request the appointment of a study committee. The Historical Commission shall not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or rescission of designation within one year of its previous hearing thereon, unless two-thirds of all its members vote to do so. No later than forty-five days after the transmittal of a report to the Commission pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission shall hold a public hearing. The Commission shall give not less than fourteen days notice of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and by mailing notice thereof to the owner of the proposed landmark and to every owner abutting the proposed landmark or within the proposed neighborhood conservation district, each such owner to be determined from the then current records of the Assessing Department, and to the City Manager, the Planning Board and the City Clerk. 
E.  Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of the report to the Planning Board for its consideration and recommendations. 
F.  The recommendation of the Historical Commission with regard to any designation, amendment or rescission shall be transmitted to the City Manager and to the City Clerk with a copy of the approved designation report. Designation of a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district or amendment or rescission of designation shall be by order of the City Council. In the case of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons for such designation and a statement of standards which the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission is to apply under Sections 2.78.170 and 2.78.190 through 2.78.220 of this article. 
G.  No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become effective until a map setting forth the boundaries of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district or change in the boundaries thereof, has been filed with the City Council and has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds for the South District of Middlesex County. 
H.  If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district contains provisions for both regulatory and educational/incentive programs, the regulatory provisions of the order shall not be effective unless and until the educational/incentive provisions of the order are funded. 
I.  Following acceptance of a designation petition by the Historical Commission, no application for a building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises of a property being considered for designation shall be granted until reviewed by the Commission as though the property were designated as a landmark or a neighborhood conservation district under this Article III. Beginning with the acceptance of a designation petition and until (a) the Historical Commission makes a negative recommendation on a proposed designation, (b) the City Council determines not to enact the proposed designation, or (c) one year has elapsed, whichever is less, the Commission shall review all proposed construction, demolition, or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of the structures on the premises of a proposed landmark or within a proposed neighborhood conservation district. 
J.  Notwithstanding the prior provisions of this section 2.78.180, a neighborhood conservation district previously established by order of the City Council, in accordance with this section, which order instructs that there be a review of the activities of the neighborhood conservation district commission established pursuant to that order, following one or more public hearings by such neighborhood conservation district commission and by the Historical Commission, and a report to the City Council by such commissions containing a summary of testimony at such hearings and recommendations by such commissions for amendments to the powers, responsibilities and procedures of such neighborhood conservation district commission (including amendments to the boundaries of the affected neighborhood conservation district), may be amended by the City Council, in a manner consistent with the recommendations of such report, or be rescinded without the necessity of the appointment of a new study committee or of a de novo study process. 
(Ord. 1331, 12/14/2009; Ord. 1166 §§9, 10, 17, 18, 1995; Ord. 1009A (part), 1984; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(4))  
2.78.190 - Review procedures. 
A.  Except as the order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may otherwise provide in accordance with this article, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall review all construction, demolition or alteration that affects the exterior architectural features, other than color, of any landmark or within any neighborhood conservation district. 
B.  The order designating or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may provide that the authority of the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall not extend to the review of one or more of the following categories of structures or exterior architectural features of the landmark or within the neighborhood conservation district in which event the structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed or altered without review by the Commission: 
1.  The application of exterior wall material in a manner that does not require the removal or enclosure of any cornice, fascia, soffit, bay, porch, hood, window or door casing, or any other protruding decorative element; 
2.  Alternations to the exterior of existing structures that do not increase or diminish the size and location of windows and doors, cause the removal of any bay, porch, hood, window or door casing or any other protruding decorative element, or alter the appearance of a roof; 
3.  The exterior appearance of a new structure that does not require a variance or special permit under the zoning ordinance then in effect; 
4.  Signs, temporary structures, lawn statuary, or recreational equipment, subject to such conditions as to duration of use, dimension, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the Commission may reasonably specify; 
5.  Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures substantially at grade level; 
6.  Walls and fences; 
7.  Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennae, trelliswork and similar appurtenances. 
C.  The Historical Commission or a neighborhood conservation district commission may determine from time to time after a public hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or structures, including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in this section, if the provisions of the applicable order do not limit the authority of such commission with respect thereto, may be constructed or altered without review by such commission without causing substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this article. 
D.  If the order establishing or amending a neighborhood conservation district provides, the determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission shall be binding only with regard to applications to construct a new building, to demolish an existing structure if a demolition permit is required, to construct a parking lot as a principal use, and to construct an addition to an existing structure that would increase its gross floor area, and in all other cases the determinations of a commission shall be advisory only and not binding on an applicant. In no case shall a building permit be issued until the commission has made a determination under the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(5))  
2.78.200 - Maintenance, repair and reconstruction. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district which does not involve a change in design or material or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified by duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, not construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of the order which designates that landmark or district, nor construed to prevent the reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(6))  
2.78.210 - Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or hardship. 
A.  Except as the order establishing or amending a landmark or neighborhood conservation district may otherwise provide, no structure designated a landmark or within a neighborhood conservation district shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior architectural features unless the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction shall first have issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship with respect to such construction or alteration. 
B.  Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the commission may reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the application. 
C.  No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature of a landmark or construction of a structure or for alteration of an exterior architectural feature within a neighborhood conservation district and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a landmark or of a structure within a neighborhood conservation district shall be issued by the City or any department thereof until the certificate required by this article has been issued by the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1166 §§11, 12, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(7))  
2.78.220 - Factors considered by Commissions. 
A.  In passing upon matters before it, the Historical Commission or neighborhood conservation district commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of the site or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture and material of the features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing structures a commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the structure both in relation to the land area upon which the structure is situated and to structures in the vicinity, and a Commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required by applicable provision of the zoning ordinance. A Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view. 
B.  A Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects, architectural significance or the distinctive character of the landmark or neighborhood conservation district. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(8))  
2.78.230 - Public meetings and hearings. 
The Historical Commission and each neighborhood conservation district commission shall adopt rules for the reasonable conduct of its meetings and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by historic district commissions under Section 11 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws; and in the absence of the adoption of any such rules, meetings and public hearings of the Historical Commission and of each neighborhood conservation district commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section 11 of Chapter 40C applicable to historic district commissions. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(10))  
2.78.240 - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by a designation of a landmark or district may appeal to the superior court within thirty days after such designation. Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of a neighborhood conservation district commission or ten registered voters of the City opposing a determination under this article may appeal to the Historical Commission within twenty days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the City Clerk. The Historical Commission may overrule the determination and return it for reconsideration consistent with that finding. If the applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Historical Commission, or if action is not taken by the Historical Commission within thirty days of filing for review, the applicant may appeal to the superior court. Appeal from a Historical Commission determination shall be taken within thirty days of the formal decision; appeal from a failure to act shall be taken within sixty days after the filing for review. The superior court may reverse a determination if it is not supported by substantial evidence in the record. In all other respects, the appeal shall be made in the same manner as provided under Section 12A of Chapter 40C of the General Laws. 
(Ord. 1166 §13, 1995; Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(11))  
2.78.250 - Historical Commission authority not limited. 
No provisions of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions of the Historical Commission under the authority of Chapter 40, Section 8D and Chapter 40C of the General Laws, or apply to any historic district currently administered by such commission, or restrict the establishment of any future historic district under Chapter 40C of the General Laws. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(13))  
2.78.260 - Limitation on applicability. 
The provisions of Article II of this chapter (relative to procedures for demolition permits for significant buildings) shall not be applicable with respect to the demolition of any structure within a neighborhood conservation district if the appropriate neighborhood conservation district commission has issued a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of hardship permitting the demolition of such structure. 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(14))  
2.78.270 - Enforcement and remedies. 
The Historical Commission and any neighborhood conservation district commission are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions, proceedings in law and in equity, as they deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. Any violation of any provision of this article may be punished to the like extent provided in Section 13 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws for a violation of said Chapter 40C. In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall be issued, with respect to any premises upon which a landmark or a structure within any neighborhood conservation district has been voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted after compliance with the provisions of this article, for a period of two years after the date of the completion of such demolition (the word "premises" for the purposes of this sentence referring to the parcel of land upon which the demolished structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control.) 
(Ord. 1002 (part), 1983: prior code § 2-147(k)(12))  
Chapter 2.80 - CAMBRIDGE INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION 
 
2.80.010 - Established—Appointment—Terms. 
The Cambridge Industrial Commission shall consist of three citizens of the City. The City Manager shall annually in the month of March, appoint one member to serve for the term of three years from April 1st. Upon the expiration of the term of a member, his successor shall be appointed in the manner aforesaid for three years. Vacancies, other than by reason of expiration of term, shall be filled in like manner for the balance of the unexpired term. The Commission shall annually elect one of its members as Chairman. 
(Prior code § 2-151)  
2.80.020 - Powers and duties. 
The Commission shall have all the powers and duties provided by Chapter 393 of the Acts of 1913, as amended by Section 1 of Chapter 223 of the Special Acts of 1917 and Section 1 of Chapter 79 of the Special Acts of 1919 and any acts hereafter passed relating to the Cambridge Industrial Commission. 
(Prior code § 2-152)  
2.80.030 - Dissemination of information. 
The Commission is empowered and authorized to disseminate information relative to the advantages and desirability of the City for industrial and other commercial purposes and its accessibility as a shipping center and in connection therewith to prepare a program for advertising and other publicity and may incur expenditures for advertising or other appropriate mediums, in an effort to attract and induce industries and other business concerns to locate in the City. 
(Prior code § 2-153)  
2.80.040 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Commission shall annually, in July, and whenever requested by the City Manager, make a full and detailed report of all matters pertaining to its activities and accomplishments, with such suggestions as it may deem proper. 
(Amended during 1987 codification; prior code § 2-154)  
Chapter 2.82 - CAMBRIDGE ANIMAL COMMISSION 
 
2.82.010 - Established. 
There shall be and is established a Cambridge Animal Commission. 
(Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 4 Art. 3 § 4-16)  
2.82.020 - Function and purpose. 
It shall be the function of the Commission to facilitate and promote programs affecting animal control within the City. Such programs shall include: 
A.  A low cost spaying and neutering program; 
B.  A euthanasia program; 
C.  A dog pound and adoption program; 
D.  An animal census program; 
E.  A citizen education program; 
F.  Such other activities which, by and with the approval of the City Manager, are considered necessary and appropriate to insure effective animal control within the City. 
(Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 4 Art. 3 § 4-17)  
2.82.030 - Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Commission shall consist of seven members. The Chief of the Police Department and the Commissioner of Health and Hospital shall be permanent members of the Commission. The remaining five members shall be appointed initially by the City Manager to serve for the following terms: 
1.  One member shall serve for a one-year term; 
2.  Two members shall serve for a two-year term; 
3.  Two members shall serve for a three-year term; 
B.  After the initial terms all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
C.  Members of the Commission shall have demonstrated ability in the animal welfare field with related experience in any of the following: 
1.  Public information programs; 
2.  Animal shelter operations; 
3.  Spaying and neutering programs; 
4.  Affiliations with national and local animal protection societies; 
5.  Knowledge of animal health care and diseases. 
(Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 4 Art. 3 § 4-18)  
2.82.040 - Director—Appointment—Duties. 
A.  The City Manager shall appoint a Director from a list of names recommended by the Commission. The Director shall have general charge of all animal control activities in the City. 
B.  It shall be the function of the Director to coordinate activities of all departments and divisions of City government which affect the control of animals within the City, and to provide such other related services as are deemed necessary and proper by the Commission, subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
C.  The Director shall serve a term of employment to be determined by the Commission by and with the approval of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code Ch. 4 Art. 3 § 4-19)  
Chapter 2.84 - COORDINATING COUNCIL FOR CHILDREN, YOUTH AND FAMILIES, ALSO KNOWN AS "KIDS COUNCIL" 
 
2.84.010 - Established. 
There shall be established in Cambridge a Coordinating Council for Children, Youth and Families (the Council). 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1991)  
2.84.020 - Function and purpose. 
The Council will direct a comprehensive local response to the needs of children, their families and other caregivers, in accordance with the guiding principles set forth in the Children, Youth and Family Policy Plan. These principles are: 
To promote services and other activities that are preventive rather than reactive; 
To promote services and other activities that are coordinated rather than fragmented, and that result in improved accessibility; 
To encourage innovative responses to needs; 
To generate activities that create opportunities for all children, their families, and other caregivers; 
To support families, their choices, and their strengths, recognizing diversity and the many different choices that families make about how to bring up happy and healthy children; 
To promote services and other activities that are comprehensive, oriented to the needs of children and families seen as whole people. 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1991)  
2.84.030 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  Council members shall be comprised of the following offices, disciplines and interests: 
The Mayor; a member of the City Council; a member of the School Committee; the City Manager or a designee of the City Manager; the Superintendent of Schools; the Assistant City Manager for Human Services; the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals; the Police Commissioner; the Director of the Cambridge Public Library; in the absence of a permanent appointment for any of the above five positions, i.e. the Superintendent of Schools; the Assistant City Manager for Human Services; the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals; the Police Commissioner, or the Director of the Cambridge Public Library, the City Manager shall appoint an interim, temporary designee in his or her place until the position is filled. A member of the philanthropic community; a representative from a State agency serving children, youth and families; a representative of the corporate/business community; a representative of the university community; a representative from the early childhood community; five members shall represent the community-at-large and/or represent active parents' groups or other groups involved with children and their families. These members shall be residents of the City. Three members shall be identified to serve one-year terms. These members shall represent specific areas to be addressed by the Council's agenda or other identified interests relating to children (for example, a person involved with children's issues nationally). Three youth members shall be identified to serve two-year terms. These members shall be young people who are residents of the City and within the ages of fourteen to eighteen. 
B.  The Council may have an Executive Committee comprised of a subset of the Council and including the Chair to enact the business of the full Council between Council meetings. The membership of the Executive Committee shall be elected by the full Council and be no more than one-fourth of the full Council with a balanced representation by elected and appointed city official members to that of the other members of the Council. 
C.  The Council at all times shall be representative of the socioeconomic, racial and ethnic composition of the City as well as of different neighborhoods and shall have members who are resource people as well as individuals with children who are consumers of services. 
D.  City Council and School Committee members, and a representative of the Mayor, if he or she so desires, shall be appointed by the City Manager with advice and recommendations from the Mayor. All other members shall be appointed by the City Manager with advice and recommendations from the Kids' Council. The Kids' Council shall consult with groups involved with children and shall advertise widely to obtain names of qualified candidates. 
E.  Elected and appointed officials shall hold terms coterminous with their election or appointment. 
F.  The other members shall be appointed initially for terms of one, two and three years. After the initial term, all Council Members shall be appointed for a term of three years, except for the three, one-year term members and the three, two-year term youth members. 
G.  If any appointed Council Member misses half of the scheduled meetings of the Council during any calendar year, the absences of the Council Member shall be reviewed by the Chair and the Chair shall recommend appropriate action to the City Manager. 
H.  Vacancies on the Council shall be filled no later than sixty days after the vacancy occurs; and if a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. 1158 (part), 1994; Ord. 1120 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. 1279, Amended, 09/13/2004, Sections A and F ; Ord. 1250, Amended, 09/10/2001; Ord. 1236, Added, 05/15/2000; Ord. 1219, Amended, 02/22/1999, amend Section 2.84.070 and 2.84.030)  
2.84.040 - Membership—Qualifications. 
A.  All prospective Council Members shall have belief in and support the special interests of children and must have a willingness to work on behalf of all the city's children to ensure they have the opportunity to maximize their individual potential and healthy development. 
B.  Every effort will be made to appoint Council Members residing in the city. 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1991)  
2.84.050 - Officers—Quorum—Rules and regulations—Committees. 
A.  The Council shall meet as often as necessary to conduct its business but no less than four times annually with a minimum of one meeting per quarter of any calendar year. 
B.  The Council shall be chaired by the Mayor. The Mayor shall choose a Co-Chair from among Council Members. In the event a Chair and a Co-Chair are unavailable, the Assistant City Manager for Human Services shall call meetings and the most senior member of the Kids' Council who is not a salaried employee of the city shall chair the Council. 
C.  Eleven members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business that requires the vote of the Council and all decisions shall be by majority vote of the Council members present and voting. 
(Ord. 1263, 2003) 
D.  The Council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth to carry out the policy and provisions of this chapter and the powers and duties of the Council in connection therewith. 
E.  All records of the Council shall be public except as provided by State law. 
F.  Council Members shall serve without compensation but reasonable per diem and necessary expense reimbursement shall be paid out of the budget of the Council. 
G.  Council Members shall be classified as special municipal employees for the purpose of Chapter 268A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
H.  The Council shall develop a committee structure. To broaden participation from the community, members of these committees will be a mix of Council Members and the community-at-large. Parents shall be represented on all committees. The chair or co-chair of each committee shall be a Council Member. The Council shall advertise widely to obtain names of qualified candidates. The committees will include: 
A Public Policy Committee to monitor and make recommendations regarding local, state and federal policies impacting children, youth and families; 
A Program Committee to continually assess social service needs and trends and to highlight areas that need attention; 
A Development Committee to assist the Council's grant writing and fundraising operations; 
A Research and Evaluation Committee to develop evaluation tools for the Council's identified plans and to measure, to the extent possible, outcomes of the Council's work. It shall produce every three years a report on the status of children in Cambridge. 
The Council shall have authority to create other such committees or redesign existing committees to ensure the Council's effectiveness. In some cases, advisory committees with particular expertise that coincides with Council priorities will be formed to guide the Council. 
(Ord. 1158 (part), 1994; Ord. 1120 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. 1263, Amended, 04/28/2003; Ord. 1236, Added, 05/15/2000)  
2.84.060 - Executive director. 
A.  There shall be an Executive Director of the Council, who shall be appointed by the City Manager with the advice and recommendations of the Council. 
B.  The Executive Director shall have demonstrated administrative expertise, a background of direct participation in the provision of children's services, and the ability to work cooperatively with the diverse segments of the City. 
C.  The Executive Director will be sited within a city department from which he or she will receive administrative support. 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1991)  
2.84.070 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Council shall include the following: 
A.  Recommend children, youth and family policy to the City Manager, the City Council, the School Committee and other appropriate committees; 
B.  Review and make recommendations regarding the City's allocation of resources affecting children, youth and families to the City Manager and other appropriate officials; 
C.  Act as a catalyst in mobilizing and coordinating other efforts within the City aimed at responding to the needs of children, youth and families; 
D.  Act as a clearinghouse for efforts within the City aimed at responding to the needs of children, youth and families; 
E.  Act as an advocate with regard to State and federal policies which impact on the City's children, youth and families; 
F.  Mobilize and coordinate resources available to Council Members and organizations they may represent to develop joint projects to respond to the needs of children, youth and families; 
G.  Enlist the cooperation of various racial, religious and ethnic groups, civic and community organizations, labor organizations, fraternal and benevolent organizations, and other groups and organizations to further the intent and purposes of this chapter; 
H.  Raise and direct funds to support the projects and priorities of the Council and accept money, gifts and services for these purposes; 
I.  Encourage youth input through the creation of specific opportunities for youth to provide their perspectives on their lives, community and issues facing them. 
(Ord. 1120 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. 1219, Amended, 02/22/1999)  
Chapter 2.86 - COMMUNITY SCHOOLS COMMISSION 
 
2.86.010 - Established. 
There shall be a Community Schools Commission in the City. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 1, 1973)  
2.86.020 - Membership—Appointment. 
The Commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall initially be appointed by the City Manager with the proviso that one member shall be an incumbent member of the City Council and one of the members shall be an incumbent member of the School Committee. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 2, 1973)  
2.86.030 - Membership—Terms. 
The initial appointments shall serve for the following terms: 
A.  Two citizen members shall be for one year terms; 
B.  The Council and School Committee appointments shall be for two-year terms, concurrent with their terms of office; 
C.  One citizen member shall be for a three-year term; 
After that, all appointments and/or elections to the Commission shall be for three-year terms with a limit of two consecutive terms for each member. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 3, 1973)  
2.86.040 - Membership—Advisory committee recommendations. 
After the initial appointment at least two of the positions on the Commission shall be filled by the City Manager from recommendations from the Community Schools Advisory Committee after nomination and election by a majority of its membership. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 4, 1973)  
2.86.050 - Compensation. 
The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 5, 1973)  
2.86.060 - Written plan—Preparation and implementation. 
The Commission shall prepare a written plan for implementation of a community schools program and for the most advantageous use of the schools and any other appropriate facilities for the implementation of such a program. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 6, 1973)  
2.86.070 - Written plan—Approval of City Council. 
The plans shall be submitted annually for the approval to the City Council, the school committee and the City Manager. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 7, 1973)  
2.86.080 - Neighborhood advisory committee—Established when. 
Each elementary school that functions as a community school shall have a neighborhood advisory committee representative of the area. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 8, 1973)  
2.86.090 - City-wide advisory committee—Membership. 
The City-wide advisory committee on community schools shall consist of one to four representatives of each elementary school in the City to serve for a term of four years and in no event for more than two such terms. The advisory committee shall elect from its own membership a chairman. This chairman may at his discretion appoint additional City-wide members of the advisory committee, providing that such appointees do not constitute more than one-third of the total remaining membership of the committee. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 9, 1973)  
2.86.100 - City-wide advisory committee—Meeting attendance—Initiation of proposals. 
Members of the advisory committee may attend all meetings of the Community Schools Commission, may participate in all discussions relating to programs, and may initiate proposals for modifications in existing programs and activation of new programs. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 10, 1973)  
2.86.110 - Decisions determined by majority vote. 
All decisions shall be made by a majority vote of the Commission. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 11, 1973)  
2.86.120 - Implementation of approved proposals. 
Once a plan submitted by the Commission is approved as set forth in Section 2.86.070 of this chapter, each City department concerned with such plan shall have a duty to carry out its terms. 
(Ord. 823 Ch. 40 § 12, 1973)  
Chapter 2.88 - CAMBRIDGE COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN 
 
2.88.010 - Established. 
There shall be a Cambridge Commission on the Status of Women. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-222)  
2.88.020 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Commission shall consist of twenty members, all of whom shall be appointed initially by the City Manager to serve for the following terms: 
1.  Six members shall serve for a one year term; 
2.  Seven members shall serve for a two-year term; 
3.  Seven members shall serve for a three-year term. 
After the initial terms all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
B.  If any Commissioner misses three unexcused meetings of the Commission during a calendar year, that position of the Commissioner shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the City Manager by the Commission. 
C.  After the initial appointments, subsequent members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Manager from recommendations provided by the Commission. The Commission shall consult with recognized groups working for the equal status of women to obtain names of qualified candidates. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled not later than thirty days after the vacancy occurs; and if a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. 
D.  The Commission at all times shall be representative of all socio-economic and racial segments of the City as well as different neighborhoods and also have members who are resource people as well as women with needs. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-225)  
2.88.030 - Membership—Qualifications. 
A.  All prospective Commissioners shall have belief in and support of the equal status of women in society and implementation of the aims of the Equal Rights Amendment. 
B.  Commissioners must be residents of the City at the time of appointment. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-227)  
2.88.040 - Election of Chairperson—Adoption of bylaws. 
The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members, and shall adopt bylaws for the Commission. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-226)  
2.88.050 - Executive Director—Appointment—Term. 
A.  There shall be an Executive Director of the Commission on the Status of Women whose selection and length of employment shall be determined by the City Manager with the advice of the Commission. 
B.  The prospective Executive Director of the Commission shall have demonstrated administrative expertise, a background of direct participation in women's advancement, and the ability to work cooperatively with women of various socio-economic backgrounds and of every race, color, national origin, age and sexual preference. 
C.  The Executive Director shall have adequate staff assistance. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-228)  
2.88.060 - Function and purpose. 
It shall be the function of the Commission to: 
A.  Act as a centralizing force in the City and the community which will deal with all women's issues providing information, referral, guidance, coordination, offering and providing technical assistance to other public agencies and private persons, organizations and institutions engaged in activities and programs intended to eliminate prejudice and discrimination against women because of their status as women or as a minority woman. 
B.  Take such action as the Commission considers appropriate to insure the equal status of women of every race, creed, color, national origin, age and sexual preference. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-223)  
2.88.070 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Commission shall include the following: 
A.  To insure the equal status of women in educational, economic, political, health, legal and social spheres; 
B.  To design and implement programs that promote equality for all women in the City; 
C.  To develop recommendations and recommend policy to all departments, divisions and agencies of the City, including the City Manager and the City Council; 
D.  To coordinate activities of all departments and divisions of City government on issues affecting women; 
E.  To initiate and coordinate and monitor the enactment of legislation which promotes equal status of women on the City, State and federal levels, and to assure that appropriate regulations are adopted and enforced pursuant to such legislation. 
(Ord. 885 (part), 1977: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 26 § 2-224)  
Chapter 2.90 - CAMBRIDGE COMMISSION ON NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT AND PEACE EDUCATION 
 
2.90.010 - Established. 
There shall be a Cambridge Commission on Nuclear Disarmament and Peace Education. 
(Ord. 987 (part), 1982: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 39 (part))  
2.90.020 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Commission shall consist of twenty members, all of whom shall be appointed initially by the City Manager to serve for the following terms: 
1.  Six members shall serve for a one year term; 
2.  Seven members shall serve for a two-year term; 
3.  Seven members shall serve for a three-year term. 
After the initial terms all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
B.  If any Commissioner misses three unexcused meetings of the Commission during a calendar year, that position of the Commissioner shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the City Manager by the Commission. 
C.  After the initial appointments, subsequent members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Manager from recommendations provided by the Commission. The Commission shall consult with recognized groups working for nuclear disarmament to obtain names of qualified candidates. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled not later than thirty days after the vacancy occurs; and if a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the members' term, an appointment shall be made for the remainder of the term. 
D.  The Commission shall be representative of the socio-economic and racial/ethnic populations of the City. 
(Ord. 987 (part), 1982: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 39 (part))  
2.90.030 - Membership—Qualifications. 
A.  All prospective Commissioners shall believe in and support the goal of nuclear disarmament as embodied in the resolutions passed by the City Council. 
B.  Commissioners must be residents of the City at the time of appointment. 
(Ord. 987 (part), 1982: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 39 (part))  
2.90.040 - Election of Chairperson—Adoption of bylaws. 
The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members, and shall adopt bylaws for the Commission. 
(Ord. 987 (part), 1982: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 39 (part))  
2.90.050 - Function and purpose. 
It shall be the function of the Commission to: 
A.  Support the actions taken by the City Council to protect the citizens of Cambridge and lessen the danger of nuclear destruction to the City; 
B.  Work to implement the November 4, 1981, mandate of Cambridge voters to "contact the Massachusetts Congressional Delegation to place a freeze on the further development of nuclear weapons in the City of Cambridge"; 
C.  Work with the City government and its departments, educational institutions, private and public agencies, and other interested organizations toward bilateral nuclear disarmament and a peaceful world through public dissemination of relevant information and through educational outreach to the schools and citizens of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 987 (part), 1982: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 39 (part))  
2.90.060 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Commission shall include the following: 
A.  To design and disseminate material, and establish a resource library for disarmament education, including a speakers bureau, and to assist citizens in the use of this material; 
B.  To assist the Cambridge Public Schools and the parochial and private schools in the City in developing nuclear disarmament curricula on: 
1.  The causes of war, 
2.  Technology in the nuclear age, 
3.  The history of disarmament, 
4.  Conflict resolution; 
C.  To support and assist teachers initiating such nuclear disarmament curriculum; 
D.  To hold, and assist in the conduct of, educational and advocacy meetings or hearings on nuclear disarmament by public agencies, organizations, institutions or private persons in the City. This shall include an effort to reach out to those most affected by the diversion of funds from the City: Organized labor, the poor, the unemployed, minorities and women; 
E.  To initiate public exhibits and events in City Hall, City libraries, public schools and in other locations within the City, consistent with the stated purposes of this chapter; 
F.  To cooperate with public agencies and private groups in other cities and towns of the Commonwealth in programs for disarmament education; 
G.  To promote mutual understanding with people in other nations consistent with the purposes of this chapter, such as the City Council's proposal for a "twin" city in the USSR, and the receptions held by the City for peace visitors from Europe and Japan; 
H.  To develop and recommend policy regarding the prevention of nuclear destruction to the City and the safety of Cambridge citizens to all departments, divisions and agencies of the City, including the City Manager and the City Council; 
I.  To advance the enactment of legislation which promotes nuclear disarmament at City, State and federal levels, and to monitor the implementation of such legislation; 
J.  To assist the Civil Defense Department of the City in its duties, consistent with the purposes of this chapter; 
K.  To determine the extent of nuclear weapons-related industry within the City, and to study, advocate and assist in the conversion of such industries to non-nuclear weapon-related activities, including the retraining of workers employed in those nuclear-related industries; 
L.  To make public statements and act on matters related to nuclear disarmament; 
M.  To raise funds for the use of the Commission and to accept money, gifts and services for its exclusive use and expend or use the same, and subject to appropriation or to receipt of such money, gifts and services, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants; and to be consulted by and make recommendations to the City Manager with regard to the employment of the Executive Director. 
(Ord. 987 (part), 1982: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 39 (part))  
Chapter 2.92 - CAMBRIDGE CONSUMER ADVISORY COMMISSION 
 
2.92.010 - Established—Statutory authority. 
Under the authority conferred by Chapter 40, Section 8F of the Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 153 of the Acts of 1970, and pursuant to the governmental powers possessed by cities and towns in accordance with Article LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth, Section 6, there be and is created, in the City a Consumer Advisory Commission. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 1)  
2.92.020 - Membership—Term. 
The Commission shall consist of seven members. The Sealer of Weights and Measures and the Chairperson of the License Commission of the City of Cambridge shall serve as ex-officio members. Five members shall be residents of the City of Cambridge and appointed by the City Manager. 
The five members appointed from the public-at-large shall serve for a term of two years each. Any member so appointed may be removed at the discretion of the City Manager. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(Ord. 1041, 1986; Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 2)  
2.92.030 - Powers and duties. 
The Commission shall exercise and perform the following powers and duties: 
A.  The Commission shall conduct investigations, studies and research into matters affecting consumer interest and education and shall advise and report the results of such investigations, studies and research to the general public as well as to local governmental authorities and law enforcement agencies. The Commission may also undertake or recommend programs, as it deems in the best interest of the City, to correct, improve or coordinate the protection of consumers in the City. The Commission shall also have the duty to study and report all matters referred to it by any City official or department; 
B.  The Commission shall have the power to hold a public hearing on any matter it deems important and necessary and may call upon any municipal official or department, or any resident of the City, for testimony in connection therewith. The Commission shall establish rules of procedure governing the conduct of its hearings which shall be available to each witness prior to his testimony; 
C.  The Commission shall have the power to call upon any other department of the City government for assistance or information in performing its duties; and it shall be the duty of such other departments to comply with a proper request of the Commission. Any question as to what constitutes a proper request for assistance or information shall be decided by the City Solicitor. The Commission shall also seek the cooperation and assistance of the Chamber of Commerce, the office of the District Attorney, the Department of the Attorney General, the Consumers' Council and other agencies which regularly deal with consumer related matters; 
D.  The Commission may appear, through its members or staff, for and in behalf of the people of the City before boards, commissions, commissioners, departments or agencies of the City, County or Commonwealth, in any hearing affecting the rights of the City's consuming public or in any proceeding seeking a change or curtailment of public transportation services, or an increase of rates or costs of services or commodities, and shall be deemed an aggrieved party for the purpose of judicial or administrative review of any decision or ruling in any such proceedings in which it has so appeared, any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding; 
E.  The Commission shall have the power to provide for a complaint referral service. The Commission may receive, refer, act upon or otherwise handle consumer complaints as it best determines, and shall keep a record of such complaints and their disposition. The Commission may call upon any City official or department for assistance in resolving such complaints, and it shall be the duty of such other officials or departments to act as expeditiously as possible on such requests; 
F.  The Commission shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations to protect consumers from practices which it determines to be unfair and deceptive or otherwise detrimental to the consuming public. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of ordinance and shall be subject to judicial or administrative review. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 5)  
2.92.040 - Officers—Election. 
A.  The Commission shall from time to time designate a Chairman. The Chairman, or a person designated by him, shall preside at Commission meetings, and the Chairman or a majority of the members shall have the power to call emergency meetings. 
B.  The Commission shall elect such officers, committees and task forces from among its members as they may from time to time deem necessary. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 4)  
2.92.050 - Staff—Appointment. 
The Commission may appoint, by and with the approval of the City Manager, an executive director and such assistants, investigators, consultants, attorneys and experts on either a full or part-time basis, as it deems necessary to carry out its functions and duties. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 6)  
2.92.060 - Offices. 
The Commission shall be provided with offices in City Hall or elsewhere within the City. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 7)  
2.92.070 - Meetings. 
A.  The Commission shall hold regular monthly meetings and shall designate the time and place thereof. Notice of such meetings shall be forwarded to the City Clerk. 
B.  The Commission shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, and shall keep a record of its proceedings. A simple majority shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy shall occur when any member shall fail to be present at three consecutive meetings or fifty percent of twelve such meetings in any calendar year, unless such absence shall be excused by the Commission and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 3)  
2.92.080 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Commission shall submit an annual report of its activities which shall include an evaluation of its effectiveness, and shall send a copy thereof to the Consumers' Council of the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. 961 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 32 § 8)  
Chapter 2.94 - ENERGY COMMISSION 
 
2.94.010 - Findings. 
A.  Cambridge voters at the November 6, 1979 City election overwhelmingly approved, by a four to one vote, Question 3, which in part advised the City Council "actively to encourage building insulation, energy conservation and the use of solar power and other safe renewable energy sources in the City, thereby saving Cambridge residents money and creating new jobs." 
B.  A national energy crisis exists which threatens the well-being of our country and of its citizens, and this energy crisis is particularly acute in New England. 
C.  Many measures to conserve energy and to encourage the use of energy from safe, renewable sources can best be taken at the municipal level. 
D.  The development of a comprehensive energy plan for the City is an important step in this direction. 
E.  On June 11, 1979, Councillor Alfred Vellucci placed an order before the City Council calling for the establishment of an Energy Control Commission. 
F.  Citizen involvement is crucial to the development and implementation of a comprehensive energy plan. 
(Ord. 954 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 33 § 1)  
2.94.020 - Established—Membership—Appointment. 
A Cambridge Energy Commission of fifteen members is established, its members to be appointed by the City Manager in such a manner as to be representative of the City's population. 
(Ord. 954 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 33 § 2)  
2.94.030 - Powers and duties. 
The Commission is charged with: 
A.  Assessing current energy use levels and projecting future energy use levels in Cambridge in the areas of industry, commerce, institutions, residential dwellings, transportation and municipal dwellings; 
B.  Investigating means to increase the overall use efficiency in the City, to decrease the use of energy from nonrenewable sources and to encourage the use of energy from renewable sources in the areas set out in subsection A of this section; 
C.  Evaluating current land use policies for their effectiveness in promoting energy conservation and stimulating the use of alternative forms of energy, being attentive to the relationship between transportation and land use, built areas and open space, as well as to the configuration of buildings and street plantings; 
D.  Developing and recommending to the City Manager and the City Council, on or before July 1, 1981, a comprehensive plan for the City; 
E.  Drafting, for consideration by the City Council, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies and programs necessary for the implementation of the comprehensive energy plan. 
(Ord. 954 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 33 § 3)  
2.94.040 - Comprehensive energy plan development principles. 
The Commission, in developing a comprehensive energy plan, should be mindful of the following principles: 
A.  All actions must enhance Cambridge's attractiveness as a place to live and do business; 
B.  The social and economic differences among both people and firms must be recognized and accommodated; 
C.  All sectors of the City's economy must be dealt with equitably; 
D.  Conservation measures must be cost-effective; 
E.  The success of a comprehensive energy plan depends on the members of the community, both individually, taking part in its development and implementation, and upon a shared sense of responsibility for the goal of energy conservation. 
(Ord. 954 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 33 § 4)  
2.94.050 - Public involvement encouraged. 
A.  The Commission should involve the public at large in its deliberations to the greatest extent possible. 
B.  The Commission may, in pursuit of its task, invoke the participation of other interested persons by creating such task forces as it sees fit. 
(Ord. 954 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 33 § 5)  
2.94.060 - Staff support. 
The City Manager shall provide the Commission with the necessary staff support. 
(Ord. 954 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 33 § 6)  
Chapter 2.96 - CAMBRIDGE COMMISSION ON THE HANDICAPPED 
 
2.96.010 - Established. 
There shall be a Cambridge Commission on the Handicapped. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 1)  
2.96.020 - Person with handicap defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "a person with a handicap" means and includes any person who: 
A.  Has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities; 
B.  Has a record of such an impairment; or 
C.  Is regarded as having such impairments. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 3)  
2.96.030 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Commission shall consist of eleven members, all of whom shall be appointed initially by the City Manager. There shall be one representative appointed from the Department of Public Works for a period of three years and one representative appointed from the Department of Human Services to serve for a period of three years and other representatives to be appointed from time to time to assist the Commission in the carrying out of its activities. Of the remaining nine members, at least five shall be persons with a handicap as defined in Section 2.96.020 of this chapter and represent as many cross-disabilities from the handicapped community as possible. The remaining members shall be parents, friends or other interested persons of the handicapped. These nine members shall initially serve for the following terms: 
1.  Three members shall serve for a one year term; 
2.  Three members shall serve for a two-year term; 
3.  Three members shall serve for a three-year term. 
After the initial terms all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
B.  One month prior to making such appointments the City Manager shall solicit nominations from as many organizations representing the handicapped as possible, and insure appointees represent a broad cross section of the City's citizens interests and are residents of the City themselves. 
C.  If any member misses three unexcused meetings of the Commission during the calendar year, that position of the Commission shall be automatically vacated upon certification to the City Manager by the Commission. The City Manager shall then proceed to immediately fill such vacancy. 
D.  The Commission shall at all times be concerned about the needs and expectations of all persons with handicaps. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 5)  
2.96.040 - Election of Chairperson—Adoption of bylaws. 
The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members, and shall adopt bylaws for the Commission. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 6)  
2.96.050 - Executive Director—Appointment—Term. 
A.  There shall be an Executive Director of the Commission on the Handicapped whose selection and length of employment shall be determined by the City Manager with the advice of the Commission. 
B.  The Executive Director shall have demonstrated administrative ability, be knowledgeable about the City's organizational structure and be willing to learn about the special needs of the handicapped, and the ability to work cooperatively with people of various socio-economic backgrounds of races, creeds, national origin and age. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 7)  
2.96.060 - Function and purpose. 
It shall be the function of the Commission to: 
A.  Act as a centralizing force in the City and the community which will deal with all handicapped issues: providing information, referral, guidance, coordination, offering and providing technical assistance to other public agencies and private persons, organizations and institutions engaged in activities and programs intended to eliminate prejudice and discrimination against person(s) with handicap(s) because of their status as a person with a handicap or as a minority person with a handicap; 
B.  Take such action as the Commission considers appropriate to insure the equal status of person(s) with handicaps of every race, creed, color, national origin, age and sexual preference; 
C.  Assure that no otherwise qualified individual with a handicap in the City shall, solely by reason of his or her handicap, be excluded from participation, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity within the City. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 2)  
2.96.070 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the Commission shall include the following: 
A.  To insure the equal status of the handicapped in education, employment, economic, political, health, legal and social spheres; 
B.  To design and implement programs that promote equality for all handicapped in the City; 
C.  To review recommendations and policies of all departments, divisions and agencies of the City, including, but not limited to, the City Manager, the Purchasing Agent and the City Council; 
D.  To initiate, coordinate and monitor the enactment of legislation which promotes equal status of the handicapped on the City, State and federal levels, and to insure that appropriate regulations are adopted and enforced pursuant to such legislation, including but not limited to implementation of Section 504; 
E.  To assist in the planning and coordination of activities of all departments and divisions; 
F.  To participate in an advisory capacity in the hearing of complaints brought alleging discrimination against the handicapped including but not limited to the Office of Affirmative Action; 
G.  To obtain from City departments, divisions and agencies any and all information necessary to carry out the functions, purposes, programs and activities of the Commission; 
H.  To assist in public awareness of the handicapped through participation in public and media events sponsored by the administrative and/or legislative bodies of the City including but not limited to city sponsored recreational, educational and development activities; 
I.  To raise funds for the use of the Commission in accordance with established procedures and statutes and to accept money, gifts and services for its exclusive use and expend or use the same, and subject to the appropriation or to receipt of such money, gifts and services, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants; and to be consulted by and make recommendations to the City Manager with regard to the designation of the Executive Director; 
J.  To be an active and participating member of appropriate organizations dealing with issues effecting the handicapped; 
K.  To recruit and recommend prospective members to the Commission subsequent to appointment by the City Manager; 
L.  To serve on the Commission without compensation with the understanding that they will be reimbursed for any expense which may reasonably be incurred through service as a member of the Commission; 
M.  To acquire, analyze, use and store handicapped related statistics and related materials in conjunction with the Cambridge Public Library for program planning and evaluation purposes; 
N.  To hold at least ten regular meetings throughout the year and to conduct additional meetings as necessary; 
O.  Such other powers and duties as may be agreed on by the City Manager and the Commission. 
(Ord. 927 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 31 § 4)  
Chapter 2.98 - COMMISSION FOR HUMAN SERVICE PROGRAMS 
 
2.98.010 - Established—Function. 
There shall be a commission consisting of nine members, called in this chapter "the Commission for Human Service Programs," and appointed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 (part))  
2.98.020 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Commission shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be appointed by the City Manager. In making appointments to the Commission, the City Manager shall at all times endeavor to achieve a reasonable balance among the racial, ethnic, socio-economic, neighborhood and age group interests in the City. All members shall be bona fide residents of the City. There shall be one designee from the office of the Superintendent of Schools; two with experience and knowledge of human services in the City's private sector; and six community representatives with experience and knowledge of the City's human services. 
B.  The initial appointees shall serve for the following terms: two community representatives and one private sector representative for three years; one community representative and one private sector representative for two years; and three community representatives for one year; the School Department appointee shall serve at the discretion of the Superintendent. 
C.  After the initial terms, all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years, with a limit of two consecutive terms for each member. The School Department appointment shall be at the discretion of the Superintendent. At least four of the members shall have served on a Neighborhood Council within six months prior to appointment. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 § 1(1) — (3))  
2.98.030 - Officers. 
The Commission shall elect, annually, a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 § 1(4))  
2.98.040 - Purpose and function. 
It shall be the function of the Commission to advise the City Manager on all policy issues and major problem areas pertaining to human service matters and to promote activities that enhance the quality of life for all the citizens of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 (part))  
2.98.050 - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Commission to: 
A.  Prepare, every three years and update annually, a planning document which shall set forth priority areas for human services and indicate the resources available to the City which can be utilized to support those efforts. This planning document shall also include, as an attachment, the complete set of recommendations received by the Commission from the Neighborhood Council in each human service area, as well as all recommendations received from the Council on Aging. The first planning document shall be submitted to the City Manager no later than December 1, 1981. Subsequent documents shall be submitted no later than December 1st of every third year thereafter; 
B.  Convene an annual convention of all Neighborhood Councils. All members of the City Council, as well as the general public, shall be invited to participate. Staff shall be present to give assistance and information. The purpose of the meeting is to generate discussion on human service concerns in the neighborhoods; 
C.  Adopt such other duties and responsibilities as may be agreed upon by the Assistant City Manager and the Commission; 
D.  Hold regular Commission meetings, at least ten each year. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 § 2)  
2.98.060 - Neighborhood Council membership prohibited. 
No Commission member shall serve as a Neighborhood Council member during his or her term on the Commission. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 § 1(7))  
2.98.070 - Meetings—Regular attendance required. 
If a Commission member shall fail to attend, in any calendar year, at least one quarter of the regular meetings of the Commission, without adequate explanation, the City Manager shall appoint a replacement for such member. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 § 1(6))  
2.98.080 - Vacancies. 
The City Manager shall, by public notice, solicit nominations from the citizens of Cambridge for vacancies on the Commission for Human Service Programs. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 35 § 1(5))  
Chapter 2.100 - COUNCIL ON AGING 
 
2.100.010 - Membership—Appointment—Term—Officers. 
A.  The Council shall consist of eleven members who shall be appointed by the City Manager, seven over the age of sixty years who shall serve terms of three years each and be representative of Cambridge elderly geographical, economic and ethnic factors, and four who shall serve terms of two years each and be representative of other community segments servicing or concerned with the well being of the elderly population of the City. Names of candidates to fill vacancies will be submitted by the Council to the City Manager. 
B.  The Council shall elect from among its members, annually in October, a Chairperson who shall preside at meetings of the Council and who shall serve not more than two consecutive terms, and a Vice-Chairperson who shall serve in the absence of the Chairperson. A meeting shall be held at least once a month. 
(Ord. 850 (part), 1975: prior code § 2-169)  
2.100.020 - Function. 
It shall be the function of the Council to: 
A.  Evaluate, coordinate, promote and encourage new and existing services and activities intended to enhance or improve the quality of life of older persons in the City; 
B.  Survey resources available to Cambridge elderly and act as an information and referral source regarding services, benefits, activities and programs available to them; 
C.  Act in an advisory capacity to the City Manager on all matters pertaining to the welfare of elderly Cambridge citizens; 
D.  Be the primary public advocate for elderly Cambridge residents. 
(Ord. 850 (part), 1975: prior code § 2-170)  
2.100.030 - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Council to: 
A.  Identify the total needs of the City's elderly population, collecting facts and statistics and conducting special studies as necessary in order to accomplish this end; 
B.  Evaluate and coordinate all public and private programs and services for the elderly in Cambridge; 
C.  Participate in the planning and development of all services and programs funded by federal and State grants and moneys, and in the determination of the recipients of such funds; 
D.  Develop services and programs as required in order to meet needs not being addressed or to encourage their development; 
E.  Advise the City Manager, other City officials and the public agencies of the City on matters affecting the elderly, particularly through regularly scheduled meetings and conferences; 
F.  Educate the community and enlist its support to meet the needs of the elderly; 
G.  Be aware to State and federal legislation concerning the elderly, particularly that pertaining to available funds and programs, and to take such actions as are indicated to assure beneficial results to Cambridge elderly; 
H.  Be consulted by and make recommendations to the City Manager with regard to the employment of the Executive Director; 
I.  Submit an annual report to the City Manager and to the State Department of Elderly Affairs on its activities of the prior year, including a record of attendance and remaining length of term of each member; 
J.  Cooperate with the State Department of Elderly Affairs and Area Agency on Aging; 
K.  Perform any other function prescribed under law. 
(Ord. 850 (part), 1975: prior code § 2-171)  
Chapter 2.102 - NEIGHBORHOOD COUNCILS 
 
2.102.010 - Established—Officers—Adoption of bylaws. 
A.  The City Manager shall establish human service program areas in the City, with the consent of the City Council. The areas shall be coterminous with the elementary school districts, as established on April 1, 1980. 
B.  Each human service program area shall have a Neighborhood Council, which shall be representative of that area democratically chosen and open to membership by all residents of the area. 
C.  Each Council shall elect from among its members, annually, a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. Each Council shall adopt bylaws that, at a minimum, are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or with any other provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 36 § 1)  
2.102.020 - Function and purpose. 
It shall be the function of each Neighborhood Council to promote, encourage and coordinate new and existing services to enhance the quality of life for the citizens it represents. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 36 § 2)  
2.102.030 - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of each Neighborhood Council to: 
A.  Identify the community needs and resources in the area and recommend appropriate program and policy priorities; 
B.  Prepare, every three years and update annually, a set of recommendations regarding human service priorities within its area for submission to the Commission for Human Service Programs for inclusion in its triennial planning document by October 1, 1981, and by October 1st of every third year thereafter; 
C.  Develop, every year, the budget designated for support of programs in the area to be submitted to the Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs. The Neighborhood Council shall use the budget development process as an opportunity to monitor and revise, as necessary its triennial plan; 
D.  Screen applicants and prepare a listing of qualified candidates for the position designated by the Assistant City Manager as the senior staff position in the area; 
E.  The Neighborhood Council may submit names for consideration for appointment to the Commission for Human Service Programs. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 36 § 3)  
2.102.040 - Implementation. 
A.  During a one-year period subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the duties of the Neighborhood Councils shall be performed by the respective community schools councils. The Assistant City Manager shall provide support for the community schools councils to broaden their memberships and to increase their scope of services during the transition phase. 
B.  Upon completion of this period, the Assistant City Manager for Human Service Programs and the Commission for Human Service Programs shall recommend to the City Council an amendment to the ordinance codified in this chapter which details a plan for final merger of those duties and the establishment of permanent Neighborhood Councils. 
(Ord. 935 (part), 1980: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 36 § 4)  
Chapter 2.104 - SCHOOL COMMITTEE 
 
2.104.010 - Member compensation—Frequency. 
Under the authority of Chapter 296 of the Acts of 1982 the elected members of the School Committee shall, effective July 2000, receive for their annual compensation the amount of twenty-five thousand nine hundred dollars to be paid monthly or weekly. The Mayor, serving as the Chair Ex Officio of the School Committee, shall not receive any compensation pursuant to this section. Effective July 1, 2001 and subsequently annually on July 1st, an additional increase equivalent to that of the Greater Boston Consumer Price Index for the preceding calendar year. 
(Ord. 1177, June 10, 1996; Amended on 11/06/95 by Ord. # 1173 and during 9/91 Supplement, Order 10, 6/20/88; Ord. 991, 1983: prior code Ch. 2 Div. 4 § 2-222) 
(Ord. 1239, Amended, 06/05/2000; Ord. 1177, Amended, 06/10/1997)  
Chapter 2.106 - COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC PLANTING 
 
2.106.010 - Establishment 
There shall be and hereby is established a Committee on Public Planting under the auspices of the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. 1208, Repealed & Replaced, 09/28/1998)  
2.106.020 - Function and Purpose. 
It shall be the purpose of the committee to promote and improve the quality and diversity of public plantings throughout all areas of Cambridge. Specific functions of the committee, in keeping with this purpose, shall consist of the following: 
A.  To advise the City Council, City Manager, Public Works Commissioner and other appropriate department heads concerning public planting issues, including the effective maintenance of public plantings already in place; 
B.  To serve as a resource within the City for programs and ideas consistent with the purposes of the committee; 
C.  To review planting plans of all proposals for new public work in the City, primarily to appraise the appropriateness of plants, their placement, and the type of maintenance needed and provided; 
D.  To support the role of the City Arborist or Tree Warden within the City; 
E.  To encourage interest in public planting in all neighborhoods of the City; and 
F.  To conduct such other activities as are considered appropriate for achieving the basic purpose of the committee. 
(Ord. 1208, Repealed & Replaced, 09/28/1998)  
2.106.030 - Membership-Appointment-Term. 
The membership of the committee shall consist of between eleven (11) and twenty-one (21) persons to be appointed by he City Manager after consultation with the committee in place when vacancies occur. The membership shall include: 
A.  The City Arborist or, if there is no arborist, a representative from the Public Works Department who shall be recommended by the Public Works Commissioner; 
B.  One representative from the Community Development Department, who shall be recommended by the Assistant City Manager for Community Development; 
C.  When possible, one representative from the City's Open Space Committee, who shall be recommended by the chair of the committee; 
D.  The other members shall be appointed from the public at large and shall be Cambridge residents. Preferably they shall be qualified in horticulture by training and/or practical experience. If not, they shall have a demonstrated interest in urban forestry and landscape issues. They shall be representative of as many of the various neighborhoods of the city as possible. The City Manager will advertise publicly for members of the committee. In addition, names of candidates to fill vacancies may be submitted by the committee to the City Manager. Members shall serve for a term of three years, or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified, and they may be reappointed by the City Manager. 
Members of the Committee on Public Planting may serve on other committees concerned with public plantings. 
The Arts Council, the Conservation Commission and the Historical Commission shall be invited to provide assistance and advice to the committee, and notices of committee meetings shall be sent to them. The committee may also call on other city departments for assistance and advise on projects which fall within the jurisdiction of those departments. 
(Ord. 1208, Repealed & Replaced, 09/28/1998)  
2.106.040 - Officers. 
The officers shall be a chair, co-chair and secretary. The officers shall be elected by the members at the annual meeting for a term of two years, or until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The chair shall prepare the agenda and preside at the meetings. The co-chair shall serve as chair in the chair's absence. The secretary shall keep the minutes. 
(Ord. 1208, Repealed & Replaced, 09/28/1998)  
2.106.050 - Sub-Committees. 
The Sub-Committees serving and appointed by the Committee on Public Planting shall be as follows: 
A.  Nominating Sub-Committee. 
This Sub-Committee shall consist of three members: a chair appointed by the outgoing chair of the committee and two members elected by the committee. The Nominating Sub-Committee shall prepare a slate of officers for the committee to vote on at its annual meeting. The Nominating Committee shall also nominate new members to be recommended to the City Manager for appointment to the committee. 
B.  Other Sub-Committees may be established by the Committee from time to time for specific purposes. 
(Ord. 1208, Repealed & Replaced, 09/28/1998)  
2.106.060 - Meetings. 
The committee shall meet monthly unless written notice is provided to the City-Clerk that a monthly meeting has been canceled. In accordance with State Law all meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of each meeting shall be posted forty-eight (48) hours before the meeting. 
Quorum and Action at Meetings. Seven members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. At any meeting at which a quorum is present and voting, the vote of a majority of those present shall decide a matter. 
Annual Meeting. An annual meeting of the members shall be held in January of each year. The meeting may be held at a later time if the members are given at least thirty (30) days notice. 
(Ord. 1208, Repealed & Replaced, 09/28/1998)  
Chapter 2.108 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
2.108.010 - Established. 
There is established the Department of Civil Defense. The Department may also be referred to as the "Emergency Management Agency." 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-1)  
2.108.020 - Purpose and function. 
It shall be the function of the Department to carry out the duties prescribed by Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, and any acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto and such other functions and duties as may be set forth in this chapter or established by ordinance from time to time not inconsistent with the laws of the Commonwealth, namely, to prepare for and carry out all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces other than the National Guard are primarily responsible, for the purpose of minimizing and repairing injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by attack, sabotage or other hostile action or by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes; such functions shall include specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing fire fighting and police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering and air raid warning services, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons of defense, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions. 
(Prior code § 8-4)  
2.108.030 - Director—Authority. 
The Department shall be under the supervision of the Director of Emergency Management. The Director shall have the direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Department subject to the general control of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-2)  
2.108.040 - Director—Appointment—Compensation. 
The Director shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Director shall receive such salary as shall be from time to time established by ordinance. 
(Prior code § 8-3)  
2.108.050 - Appointment of personnel. 
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter the City Manager, or if so delegated by him, the Director of Emergency Management, may, within the limits of amounts appropriated therefor, appoint and employ such experts, clerks and other employees as the work of the Department may require and may remove them and in general may make such expenditures within the limits of appropriations and as may be necessary to execute effectively the purposes of Acts of 1950, Chapter 639 and of this chapter and any acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto. The Department shall be provided with suitable office space, equipment and supplies. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-5)  
2.108.060 - Emergency powers—Authority. 
In the event of a disaster, as more particularly defined in Section 1 of Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, the City, acting through the Director of Emergency Management shall have the power to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster to protect the health and safety of persons and property and to provide emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. Further, in the event of such disaster, the Director is authorized to exercise all the powers set forth in Chapter 639 pertaining to the performance of public work, making of contracts, incurring obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental of equipment and purchasing of supplies. Such action taken in time of disaster shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-6)  
2.108.070 - Emergency Management Advisory Council—Appointment. 
There is created an unpaid Emergency Management Advisory Council, the members of which shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Defense Council shall consist of experts on all matters affecting emergency management, and the Director of Emergency Management. The City Manager shall appoint the Chairman of the Defense Council to serve at his pleasure. The Defense Council shall be in the executive branch of the government and shall serve under the City Manager and shall be subject to his supervision and control. The Defense Council shall advise the City Manager and Director on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-8)  
2.108.080 - Executive orders, directives and regulations—Issuance. 
Upon the promulgation of executive orders or of general regulations by the Governor of the Commonwealth, or upon a directive by the Governor to the City Manager or to the Director of Emergency Management or other municipal department officers or employees of the City to carry out the provisions of any such executive order, regulation or directive, the Director of Emergency Management is authorized and directed to take all necessary steps to carry out such executive order, regulation or directive in spite of any municipal ordinance or procedure which may in whole or in part conflict with such executive order, regulation or directive. All such actions shall be taken and such executive orders or regulations shall be carried out for the purpose of meeting conditions arising from emergency or disasters without delay caused by observance of ordinances or procedures customary in periods of normal life. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-10)  
2.108.090 - Executive orders, directives and regulations—Filing. 
Upon the receipt of any executive order, general regulation or directive from the Governor under the powers conferred upon him by Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, the Director of Emergency Management or the officer or employee of the City receiving such order, regulation or directive shall cause copies thereof with all due diligence to be filed with the City Clerk, the City Manager, the City Auditor, the City Solicitor, the Director of Emergency Management and the department affected thereby. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-11)  
2.108.100 - Cooperation with other governmental bodies. 
In carrying out the purposes of emergency management the City shall use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of the departments, officers and agents of the Commonwealth and of the political subdivisions of the Commonwealth to the maximum extent practicable and all officers, departments, agents and employees of the City shall to the fullest extent practicable cooperate and extend their services to the Commonwealth and other civil defense organizations of the Commonwealth upon request to the end that so far as municipal action by the City is concerned the spirit and purposes of Chapter 639 shall be carried out to the fullest extent. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-12)  
2.108.110 - Assistance during riot and violence. 
The Chief of Police with the approval of the Director of Emergency Management and of the City Manager is authorized to send to the aid of any other city or town in the event of disaster such equipment and personnel of his department as in the judgment of the Chief of Police shall be advisable for the suppression of riot or other form of violence in such other city or town in the event of a request therefor from the Mayor or City Manager of such city or selectmen of such town. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-7)  
2.108.120 - Acceptance of gifts, equipment or services. 
In accordance with the authority referred to in Section 15 of Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, the City shall accept gifts, grants, loans of services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds for the purposes of emergency management from the federal government or any agency or officer thereof or from any person. The acceptance of such gifts, grants or loans on behalf of the City shall be made by the Director of Emergency Management subject to the approval of the City Manager. Appropriate records shall be kept by the Director of Emergency Management of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans. 
(Ord. 1010 (part), 1984; prior code § 8-9)  
2.108.130 - Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
This chapter shall become of no effect when Acts of 1950, Chapter 639 shall by action of the Legislature, become inoperative or upon the expiration of any time limit for the operation of Chapter 639 now or hereafter imposed by the Legislature. Any part of this chapter shall become inoperative when any section or provision of Chapter 639 upon which such part depends for its validity shall become inoperative by act of the Legislature or by the expiration of any time limit now or hereafter imposed by the Legislature. 
(Prior code § 8-13)  
Chapter 2.110 - CITY-OWNED LAND AND BUILDINGS 
 
2.110.010 - Disposition of city property. 
This chapter shall apply to the sale, transfer, lease or rental, or exchange of any city-owned property or property rights or interest such as a public easement on private property, collectively called "Disposition of City Property."20This chapter shall not apply to the transfer of real estate, or any interest therein, to the Affordable Housing Trust for the purposes of construction of low- and moderate-income housing pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, s. 15A. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the citizens of Cambridge and to achieve land uses that best serve the City's public purpose. 
In addition, when the public purpose is found to be best served by a disposition of City property for a private purpose, the City's objective will be to receive the fair market value for such property, to protect real estate values, and to dispose of each property without favoritism. 
No disposition of City property shall be completed unless the above criteria have been satisfied, all requirements of applicable State law have been met, and the following process has taken place: 
A.  The City Manager shall be responsible for engaging in a process that will result in a fair analysis of how the greatest public benefit can be obtained from the City property in question. 
B.  The City Manager shall prepare a report. The report shall be based on careful consideration of the issues enumerated below. In the course of preparing the report, at least one community meeting shall be held to discuss the issues and community concerns and they shall be addressed in the report. Advance notice of such meetings shall be given to potentially affected persons describing the proposals under consideration. The report shall include the following information: 
1.  A description and analysis of the alternative uses for the City property, including an analysis of public benefits and drawbacks and the financial impact of each alternative; 
2.  The use of the City property at the time of the recommended disposition and any actual or projected annual revenues or costs associated with such property; 
3.  The existing zoning status of the property and other City, State, and federal laws, codes, ordinances and regulations that apply to it at the time of the recommended disposition and that would apply to the various alternative uses analyzed; 
4.  Any attempts to rezone the property or to change existing laws, codes, ordinances or regulations or uses with regard to the property that have taken place within the previous five years; 
5.  The development potential of the property; 
6.  A full description of development plans proposed for the site, including traffic and parking studies and other appropriate analyses of the impact on the neighboring area and the City as a whole; 
7.  A review of the financial arrangements being recommended, including two independently prepared impartial appraisals of such property's worth that contain an independent, good faith estimate of such property's worth to the prospective buyer, transferee, or lessee. 
C.  The City Manager shall submit the report to the Planning Board and to the City Council and City Clerk for public dissemination. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing not sooner than two weeks after receipt of the report, and after study, shall submit its recommendation to the City Manager for submission to the City Council. 
D.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing within six weeks of receipt of the City Manager's recommendation and the Planning Board report. 
E.  At least fourteen days prior to the public hearings by the Planning Board and the City Council, the City Clerk shall post notice of the hearings at various conspicuous locations upon the City property, giving the purpose of the hearing in detail, and shall send this written notice to the owners of property and renters, listed on the annual street list or on the assessor's records, within three hundred feet of the City property. 
The City Clerk shall notify civic groups and neighborhood associations who may be affected by or interested in such disposition of City property and shall publish notice of said hearings in newspapers of general circulation within Cambridge at least fourteen days prior to the date of each said hearing. 
F.  The disposition of City property shall require a 2/3 vote of the City Council. 
G.  For the disposition of city property that is of such little significance that the above described process would be unduly burdensome, the City Manager may request of the City Council a diminution of this process. Approval of such a request shall require a 2/3 vote of the City Council. 
(Ord. 1105, 1990)  
Chapter 2.112 - CITY CONTRACTS 
 
2.112.010 - Bonds required when. 
Any contract exceeding ten thousand dollars for any work to be done for the City may be required to be accompanied by a bond with sureties satisfactory to the Purchasing Agent by a deposit of certified check or other security for the faithful performance thereof approved by the Purchasing Agent. No proposal shall be accepted from or offered to any person who has breached a contract with the City during the three years preceding. All written contracts shall be executed in quadruplicate, and one of the copies shall be deposited with the Auditor. 
(Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: Ord. 920, 1979: prior code § 2-181)  
2.112.020 - Proposals and bids—Acceptance and award procedure. 
A.  No proposal or bid shall be received from any person offering to contract for supplies or services unless it is enclosed in a sealed envelope or wrapper. Such proposal or bid shall be at once placed in a sealed box in the Purchasing Department. All proposals and bids shall be publicly opened and read at the hour and place designated in the advertisement in the presence of the Purchasing Agent or such person as he may designate, and thereafter recorded. 
B.  The contract shall be awarded to the lowest bidder complying with the terms, subject to the other provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that if any such proposals or bids shall be offered by persons who in the judgment of the board or officer issuing the advertisement shall be incompetent in respect to their means of faithfully executing the same, such proposals or bids may be rejected, notwithstanding the same to be at a lower rate than other proposals or bids offered for the same work, and the next lowest bidder shall be substituted. All proposals and bids shall be preserved by the Purchasing Department and shall be open to public inspection after the contract has been awarded and accepted by the bidder. 
(Ord. 111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-182)  
2.112.030 - Contracts—Form. 
In all cases where the amount of any contract shall exceed the sum of ten thousand dollars, the contract shall be in writing and, after being signed by the parties, shall not be altered, in any particular way, without the consent of the contractor and of the board or officer making the contract, endorsed thereon. All payments for extra services or supplies, which extra services or supplies shall be approved in advance by the department head, the Purchasing Agent and the City Auditor, shall be made at the time of the final payment on such contract. 
(Ord. 1249 amended 03/19/2001; Ord. 1111 (part), 1990: prior code § 2-183)  
2.112.040 - Contracts—Alteration. 
Every contract shall provide that, in case of any alteration, so much of such contract as is not necessarily affected by the change shall remain in force. It shall also provide that no payment for work done under such alterations shall be made until the completion of the whole contract, and also that the adjustment and payment of the bill when rendered for such work shall release and discharge the City from any and all claims or liability on account of any work performed under such contract or any alteration thereof. 
(Prior code § 2-184)  
2.112.050 - Retention of funds to reimburse laborers and mechanics. 
In every contract entered into on behalf of the City and involving the employment of mechanics or laborers by the contractor, a provision shall be inserted to the effect that the board, or other authority making such contract, may, if it deems expedient, withhold from such contractor any amounts sufficient to cover any unpaid claims of mechanics or laborers for work or labor performed under such contract for thirty-five days after the completion of the work under the contract. 
(Prior code § 2-185)  
2.112.060 - CORI Screening By Vendors of the City of Cambridge  
2.112.061 - Purpose 
These sections are intended to ensure that the persons and businesses supplying goods and/or services to the City of Cambridge deploy fair policies relating to the screening and identification of persons with criminal backgrounds through the CORI system. 
(Ord. 1312, Added, 01/28/2008)  
2.112.062 - Definitions 
Unless specifically indicated otherwise, these definitions shall apply and control. 
Awarding Authority means the City of Cambridge Purchasing Agent or designee. 
Vendor means any vendor, contractor, or supplier of goods and/or services to the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1312, Added, 01/28/2008)  
2.112.063 - CORI-Related Standards of the City of Cambridge 
The City of Cambridge employs CORI-related policies, practices and standards that are fair to all persons involved and seeks to do business with vendors that have substantially similar policies, practices and standards. The City of Cambridge will do business only with vendors who, when required by law to perform CORI checks, employ CORI-related policies, practices, and standards that are consistent with policies, practices and standards employed by the City of Cambridge. The awarding authority shall consider any vendor's deviation from policies, practices and standards employed by the City of Cambridge as grounds to rejection, rescission, revocation, or any other termination of the contract. 
(Ord. 1312, Added, 01/28/2008)  
2.112.064 - Waiver 
The City Manager may grant a waiver to anyone who or which has submitted a request for waiver if it is objectively reasonable; and the City Manager, or a delegate, shall report promptly in writing to the City Council all action taken with respect to every request for a waiver and the reasons for the decision. 
(Ord. 1312, Added, 01/28/2008)  
2.112.065 - Applicability 
If any provision of these sections imposes greater restrictions or obligations than those imposed by any other general law, special law, regulation, rule, ordinance, order, or policy then the provisions of these sections shall control. 
(Ord. 1312, Added, 01/28/2008)  
Chapter 2.113 - PRIVATIZATION OF CITY SERVICES 
 
2.113.010 - Findings 
The City Council recognizes that the use of private contractors to providepublic services formerly provided by City employees does not always promote the public interest. To ensure that the citizens of the City of Cambridge receive high quality public services at low cost, with due regard for the taxpayers of the City of Cambridge and the needs of public and private workers, the City Council finds it necessary to regulate such privatization contracts in accordance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. 1201, Added, 04/27/1998)  
2.113.020 - Definitions 
As used in this ordinance, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
"City" or "Agency" - an executive office, department, division, board, commission or other office or officer in the executive branch of the government of the City of Cambridge. 
"Privatization contract" - an agreement or combination or series of agreements by which a non-governmental person or entity agrees with he City toprovide services, valued at $5,000 or more, which are substantially similar to and in lieu of services theretofore provided, in whole or in part, by regular employees of the City. Any subsequent agreement, including any agreement resulting from a rebidding of previously privatized service, or any agreement renewing or extending a privatization contract, shall not be considered a privatization contract. An agreement solely to provide legal, management, consulting, planning, engineering, or design services shall not be considered a privatization contract. 
(Ord. 1201, Added, 04/27/1998)  
2.113.030 - Procedures and requirements for entering into privatization contracts 
The City shall not make any privatization contract and no such privatization contract shall be valid unless the City complies with each of the following requirements: 
A.  The City Manager shall prepare a specific written statement of the services proposed to be the subject of the privatization contract, including the specific quantity and standard of quality of the subject services. The City shall solicit competitive sealed bids for the privatization contracts based upon this tatement. The day designated by the City upon which it will accept the sealed bids shall be the same day or any and all parties. The statement shall be of public record, shall be filed in the City Manager's office and with the City Council, and shall be transmitted to a subcommittee of the City Council, established and appointed by the Mayor for this purpose. the term of any privatization contract shall not exceed three years. No amendment to a privatization contract shall be valid if it has the purpose or effect of avoiding any requirement of this section. 
B.  For each position in which the bidder will employ any person pursuant to the privatization contract and for which the duties are substantially similar to th duties performed by a regular City employee or employees, the statement required by subsection A of this section shall include a statement of the minimum wage rate to be paid for said position, which rate shall be the lesser of Step One (1) of the grade or classification under which the comparable or regular City employee is paid, or the average private sector rate for said position as determined by the Executive Office for Administration and Finance of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts from data collected by the Department of Employment and Training and the division of Purchased Services of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Every bid for a privatization contract and every privatization contract shall include provisions specifically establishing the wage rates for each such position, which shall not be less than the said minimum rate as defined above. Every such bid and contract shall also include provisions for the contractor to pay not less than a percentage, comparable to the percentage paid by the City for City employees, of the cost of health insurance plans for every employee employed for not less than twenty (20) hours per week pursuant to such contract. Such health insurance plan shall be substantially equivalent to the health insurance plans provided by the City of Cambridge for its employees covered by collective bargaining agreements. Each contractor shall submit quarterly payroll records to the City and to the City Council subcommittee established by the Mayor for this purpose listing the name, address, social security number, hours worked and the hourly wage paid for each employee in the previous quarter. Any interested party, including any labor rganization, who represents employes in the City of Cambridge, may bring a civil action for equitable relief in the superior court to enforce this provision or to prevent or remedy the dismissal, demotion or other action rejudicing any employee as a result of a report of violation of this paragraph. 
C.  Every privatization contract shall contain provisions requiring the contractor to offer available employee positions pursuant to the contract to qualified regular employees of the City whose employment is terminated because of the privatization contract and who satisfies the hiring criteria of the contractor. Every such contract shall also contain provisions requiring the contractor to comply with a policy of nondiscrimination and equal opportunity for all persons protected by chapter one hundred and fifty-one B of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and to take affirmative steps to provide such equal opportunity for all such persons. 
D.  The City Manager shall prepare a comprehensive written estimate of the costs of regular City employees' providing the subject services in the most cost efficient manner. The estimate shall include all direct and indirect costs of regular City employees providing the subject services, including, but not limited to, pension, insurance and other employee benefit costs. For the purpose of this estimate, any employee organization may, at any time before the final day for the City to receive sealed bids pursuant to subjection A of this section and after notice and opportunity, propose amendments to any relevant collective bargaining agreement to which it is a party. Any such amendments shall take effect only if necessary to reduce the cost estimate pursuant to this paragraph below the contract cost pursuant to subsection F of this section. Such estimate shall remain confidential until after the final day for the City to receive sealed bids for the privatization contract pursuant to subsection A of this section at which time the estimate shall become a public record, shall be filed in the City Manager's office and shall be transmitted to the City Auditor and subcommittee of the City Council for review. 
E.  After consulting any relevant employee organization, the City shall provide adequate resources for the purpose of encouraging and assisting present City employees to organize and submit a bid to provide the subject services. In determining what resources are adequate for this purpose, the City shall refer to an existing collective bargaining agreement of a similar employee organization whose members perform the subject services, if available, which agreement provides similar resources in Cambridge or elsewhere in Massachusetts; provided, however, that if no such collective bargaining agreement exists, the City shall refer to any existing collective bargaining agreements providing such resources, and shall provide such resources at the minimum level of assistance provided in said agreements. The City shall consider any such employee bid on the same basis as all other bids. An employee bid amy be made as a joint venture with other persons. 
F.  After soliciting and receiving bids, the City shall publicly designate the bidder to which it proposes to award the contract. The city Manager shall prepare a comprehensive written analysis of the contract cost based upon the designated bid, specifically including the costs of transition from public to private operation, of additional retirement or other benefits, if any, and of monitoring and otherwise administering contract performance. 
G.  The City Manager shall certify in writing to the city Auditor and City Council that: 
l.  he has complied with all provisions of this ordinance and of any other applicable laws; 
2.  the quality of the services to be provided by the designated bidder is likely to satisfy the quality requirements of the statement prepared pursuant to subjection A of this section, and to equal or exceed the quality of services which could be provided by regular City employees pursuant to subsection D of this section; 
3.  the contract cost pursuant to subsection F of this section will be less than the estimated cost pursuant to subsection D of this section, taking into account all comparable types of costs; 
4.  the designated bidder and its supervisory employees, while in the employ of said designated bidder, have no adjudicated record of substantial or repeated willful noncompliance with any relevant federal or state regulatory statute including, but not limited to, statutes concerning labor relations, occupational safety and health, nondiscrimination and affirmative action, environmental protection and conflicts of interest; and 
5.  the proposed privatization contract is otherwise in the public interest. 
A copy of the proposed privatization contract shall accompany the certificate transmitted to the City Auditor and City Council. 
(Ord. 1201, Added, 04/27/1998)  
2.113.040 - Certification to City Auditor and City Council 
A.  The City shall not make any privatization contract and no such contract shall be valid if, within thirty days after receiving the certificate required by section 2.113.030(G) of this chapter, the City Auditor or City Council notify the City Manager of their objection. Such objection shall be in writing and shall state specifically that the City Manager has failed to comply with one or more requirements of this chapter, including that the City auditor finds incorrect, based on independent review of all the relevant facts, any of the findings required by section 2.113.030(G) of this chapter. 
B.  For the purpose of reviewing the City's compliance and certificate pursuant to said section 2.113.030(G), the City Auditor or the City Council may require by summons the attendance and testimony under oath of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other records relating to such review. All provisions of law relative to summonses in civil cases including the manner of service, the scope and relevance to such review, and the compensation of witnesses who are not City employees, shall apply to such summonses. 
(Ord. 1201, added, 04/27/1998, none; 1201, Added, 04/27/1998)  
Chapter 2.114 - PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT ARTS PROJECTS 
 
2.114.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Public Development Arts Ordinance of 1979." 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 1(A))  
2.114.020 - Findings. 
The City Council finds that: 
A.  The City recognizes that it has a responsibility to make the advantages of the arts available to its residents; that construction projects financed with public funds normally include expenditures for finishing and adornment which, if effectively planned and executed will help the City to fulfill this responsibility; 
B.  The City wishes to increase the benefits which its citizens will derive from the creative efforts of artists; 
C.  The City should expand the access of its residents to the benefits of the arts by designating a portion of appropriations for capital expenditures for the acquisition, creation, design and/or development of art which shall be utilized in and about City buildings and public facilities. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 1(B))  
2.114.030 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are: 
A.  To promote the enjoyment of the arts by the residents of the City by increasing the quantity and quality of such arts available in public buildings, facilities and spaces; 
B.  To improve and expand the value and use of public buildings and facilities through the placement in such buildings and facilities of distinguished works and creations of artistic endeavor; and 
C.  To create a funding program which, without substantially increasing the total cost of construction projects as defined in this chapter, will ensure that arts are acquired, created, developed and otherwise made available for the enjoyment of the residents of the City. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 1(C))  
2.114.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and descriptions shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Cambridge Arts Council" means the Council established in 1974 by order of the City Council. 
B.  "Construction project" means any capital project paid for in full or in part by the City, through its own eligible funds or with eligible funds appropriated to it by other governmental units, to construct or remodel any building, decorative or commemorative structure, park, street, sidewalk, parking facility or utility or any portion thereof within the corporate limits of the City and with respect to the construction of which bidding is required under State law. 
C.  "Eligible funds" means a source of funding for construction projects from which arts are not excluded as an appropriate purpose for expenditure. 
D.  "Public Development Arts Fund" means the fund set aside by this chapter in the City treasury for the purpose of allocating moneys for the development and creation of arts in and upon public construction projects in the City. 
E.  "Public development arts project or projects" means art to be funded from the public development arts fund; such projects may be an integral part of a building, attached to a building, placed within or outside of a building, or in the case of performing arts performed in a public building or space; said art may include but shall not be limited to, paintings, sculpture, engravings, carvings, frescoes, mobiles, murals, collages, mosaics, bas-reliefs, tapestries, photographs, drawings, drama, instrumental or vocal music, dance and landscape items, including the artistic placement of natural materials or manmade fountains or objects or other functional art objects. 
F.  "Supplemental funds" means those funds appropriated by the City Council or contributed by individuals or other sources, and placed in the Public Development Arts Fund in addition to those funds made available from eligible funds, which shall be used for implementing the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 2)  
2.114.050 - Cambridge Arts Council—Powers and duties. 
To carry out its responsibilities under this chapter, the Cambridge Arts Council shall: 
A.  Establish annually, after meetings held regularly with relevant City agencies, private, nonprofit organizations, neighborhood organizations and interested Cambridge citizens and artists, and after holding a public hearing publicized for a full calendar week in at least two newspapers of local general circulations a plan for the development and creation of arts in public buildings and spaces in the various neighborhoods and sections of the City; such plan shall include an itemization of the City's priorities for choosing, creating and placing works of art in public buildings within the neighborhoods of the City; preferences for the types of works to be financed and developed during the fiscal year, and guidelines for the selection of artists and locations for public development arts projects; 
B.  Select public development arts projects, following consultation with such of the parties referred to in subsection A of this section, and, as a usual practice, with the assistance of a professional arts jury appointed by the Cambridge Arts Council, as may be appropriate; 
C.  Determine the geographic location of such works of art and architecture, and the location within individual sites and buildings where such works shall be placed or created; provided, that to the maximum feasible extent each such public development arts project shall be placed, created or performed in and about the construction project from which funds were derived for payment of that public development arts project; 
D.  Establish budgets for all commissioned projects, including budgets for materials, fees, operating and maintenance expenses, and other reasonably contemplated items of expense in the acquisition, development, creation, implementation, and, where applicable, ongoing maintenance of such projects; 
E.  Establish procedures to be followed by other departments for the maintenance and preservation of such works of art; 
F.  Establish rules and regulations, with the approval of the City Manager, to provide for the proper administration and implementation of its responsibilities, including necessary administrative budget and such rules and regulations as may be required for the selection of artists and art works; commissioning and contracting with such artists; criteria for the allocation of works of art among the various neighborhoods of the City; criteria for choosing among various artists and recommending acquisition of various works of art or art projects, and such other rules as may be appropriate or necessary for the implementation of this chapter; 
G.  Make an annual report to the City Council describing its program for meeting its responsibilities under this chapter. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 3)  
2.114.060 - Public Development Arts Fund—Allocation and designation. 
All requests by City departments for appropriations or other authorizations for construction projects from eligible funds shall include and set aside an amount equal to no less than one percent of the total estimated costs of such projects for art; copies of such requests, authorization, application, proposals or appropriations shall be delivered by the City department or agency responsible for obtaining the eligible funds to the Cambridge Arts Council as early as possible in the planning stages of the projects. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 4(A))  
2.114.070 - Public Development Arts Fund—Created—Purpose. 
There is created a Public Development Arts Fund in the City Treasury, into which money collected by appropriations under Section 2.114.060 of this chapter and supplemental funds shall be placed. The fund shall be used by the Cambridge Arts Council exclusively to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 4(B))  
2.114.080 - Public Development Arts Fund—Expenditure time limitations. 
Any moneys appropriated to the Public Development Arts Fund which have not been spent within three years of such appropriation, or, upon special approval by the City Council, within five years, shall be transferred to the City's general fund for the purposes of the general art needs of the City; provided, that funds derived from revenue or general obligation bond issues authorized by the City Council or from utility revenues or other special purpose or dedicated funds shall revert to the funds from which they derive at the expiration of the three or five-year period, whichever applies. 
(Ord. 923 (part), 1979: prior code Ch. 2 Art. 29 § 4(C))  
Chapter 2.116 - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
 
2.116.010 - Sealer—Authority—Annual reporting requirements. 
A.  The Weights and Measures Department shall be under the charge of the Sealer of Weights and Measures. The Department shall consist of a sealer and three Deputy Sealers. 
B.  The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall have general control and supervision of all the public scales in the City and, in case of his absence or inability to perform his duties from any cause, a deputy designated by the Sealer of Weights and Measures shall exercise such duties. 
C.  In the month of July the Sealer shall make a full report to the City Manager of all matters pertaining to the Department with an inventory of all property of the City under his charge. 
(Amended during 1987 codification; prior code § 20-1)  
2.116.020 - Establishment of scales—Appointment of personnel. 
A.  The City Council shall, from time to time, establish as many scales for the weighing of hay and other articles as the public good may require, and cause the same to be erected. 
B.  The City Manager shall appoint suitable persons to weigh hay and other articles thereon according to law. 
(Prior code § 20-2)  
2.116.030 - Weighers—Oath required. 
The weighers shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties. 
(Prior code § 20-3)  
2.116.040 - Weighers—Duties—Recordkeeping. 
Every weigher shall be at or near the scales of which he has charge at all reasonable times, ready to weigh all articles offered for that purpose. He shall deliver to the driver or owner of every load weighed a certificate under his hand, specifying the name of the driver or owner, his place or residence, the name of the article weighed, the weight thereof, and the tare, the date and the fees charged. He shall keep a true account of all articles weighed by him, and record the same in a book kept for the purpose, which shall at all times be open for public inspection. The record shall contain the same particulars that are required to be stated in the certificate described in this section. 
(Prior code § 20-4)  
2.116.050 - Fees—Basic—Exemptions. 
The fees for weighing to be received by weighers, shall be as follows: A sum not to exceed one dollar for each weighing. No fees shall be taken for weighing done on account of the City. 
(Prior code § 20-5)  
2.116.060 - Fees—Sealing. 
Effective June 1, 2009, the Sealer of Weights and Measures shall receive the following fees for sealing the following weighing or measuring devices: 
  
Balances and Scales 	Fee 
Over 10,000 pounds 	$150.00 
5,000 to 10,000 pounds 	100.00 
1,000 to 5,000 pounds 	85.00 
100 to 1,000 pounds 	65.00 
0 to 100 pounds 	30.00 
 
Weights 	Fee 
Avoirdupois (each) 	$5.00 
Metric (each) 	5.00 
Apothecary (each) 	5.00 
Troy (each) 	5.00 
 
Capacity Measures 	Fee 
Vehicle tanks 	
  Each indicator 	$15.00 
  Each 100 gallons or fraction thereof 	8.00 
 
Liquid 	Fee 
One gallon or less 	$2.00 
More than one gallon 	4.00 
 
Liquid Measuring Meters 	Fee 
Inlet ½" or less: 	
  Oil, grease 	$12.00 
Inlet between ½" and 1": 	
  Gasoline 	40.00 
Inlet more than 1": 	
  Vehicle tank pump 	75.00 
  Vehicle tank gravity 	60.00 
Bulk storage 	100.00 
Company supplies prover 	50.00 
 
Pumps 	Fee 
Each stop on pump 	$8.00 
 
Other Devices 	Fee 
Reverse vending (fee machine) 	$20.00 
Taxi meters 	30.00 
Odometer, hubodometer 	20.00 
Leather meas.: 	
  (Semi-ann.) 	15.00 
Fabric measuring 	15.00 
Wire, rope, cordage 	15.00 
 
Linear Measurement 	Fee 
Yard sticks 	$2.00 
Tapes 	2.00 
 
Miscellaneous 	Fee 
Milk jars (per gross) 	$20.00 
Dry measures 	2.00 
 
(Ord. 1323, 5/18/2009; Ord. 1243, Amended, 07/31/2000; Ord. 978 (part), 1982: prior code § 20-6)  
2.116.070 - Scales—Snow, ice and other obstructions prohibited. 
It shall be the duty of the weighers to keep the scales under their care clear of snow and ice, so that they shall be in good condition for use at all times, and the Sealer of Weights and Measures shall have the general control and supervision of all such scales. 
(Ord. 978 (part), 1982; prior code § 20-7)  
Chapter 2.117 - CODE OF CONDUCT FOR CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
2.117.010 - Introduction. 
This chapter establishes standards of conduct for officials and employees of the City of Cambridge, in addition to those established by Chapter 268A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Agency" means the City Council, any committee or other subdivision thereof, any City department or other administrative unit, commission, board, or other division of the government of the City. 
B.  "City" means the City of Cambridge. 
C.  "City contractor" means any person (including its agents or employees acting within the scope of their employment) who is paid from the City treasury or pursuant to City Ordinance, for goods or services provided to any City agency, regardless of the nature of the relationship of such person to the City for purposes other than this chapter. 
D.  "Contract management authority" means supervisory responsibility for the formulation, execution or performance of a City contract, including without limitation the preparation of specifications, evaluation of bids or proposals, negotiation of contract terms or supervision of performance. 
E.  "Economic interest" means a financial interest, whether vested or contingent, legal or beneficial, with a present fair market value greater than two hundred fifty dollars which is distinguishable from that of the public generally. 
F.  "Employee" means an individual, other than a municipal official, who is employed by the City or any City agency, whether part-time or full-time. 
G.  "Gift" means a delivery of goods, payment, entertainment, subscription, advance, services or anything of value, unless consideration of equal or greater value is received. If items are furnished or services are rendered for less than the fair market value, the difference between the fair market value and the price shall be treated as a gift. "Gift" shall not include a political contribution reported as required by law, a commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business, anything of value received by inheritance, or a gift received from a relative of the recipient municipal official or employee within the third degree of consanguinity of the reporting person or of the reporting person's spouse or from the spouse of any such relative. 
H.  "Municipal official" means: 
1.  Any individual holding any one of the following positions in the government of the City of Cambridge, whether by election or appointment: Mayor, Councilor; City Manager; Deputy City Manager; Assistant City Manager; City Clerk; Auditor; City Solicitor; School Committee Member; School Superintendent; Police Commissioner; Chief of Police; Chief of Fire Department; 
2.  The members of boards and commissions, and the executive or administrative head or heads of such boards or commissions, whether elected or appointed, compensated or uncompensated, of a municipal body or bodies with executive, regulatory, or permitting authority; or 
3.  Any Category I — IV employee as defined by Section 2.62.010 of the Cambridge Code. 
I.  "Person" means a business, individual, corporation, union, association, firm, partnership, committee, or other organization or group of persons. 
J.  "Relative" means a person who is related to a municipal official or employee as spouse, as a descendent of any grandparent of such official or employee whether by the whole- or half-blood or by adoption, or as spouse of any of the foregoing. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.030 - Fiduciary duty. 
Municipal officials shall at all times in the performance of, and within the scope of, their public duties owe a fiduciary duty to the City. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.040 - Improper influence. 
No municipal official or employee shall make, participate in making or in any way attempt to use such municipal official's or such employee's position, influence or power to influence or effect any City governmental decision or action in which such municipal official or employee knows or has reason to know that such official or employee has any economic interest. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted so as to preclude the Members of the City Council from voting on City Council Salary appropriations. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.050 - City-owned property. 
No municipal official, employee or City contractor shall permit the City-owned property under their control to be used in any manner that is inconsistent with any written policy governing the use of such property. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.060 - Use of disclosure of confidential information. 
No current or former municipal official or employee shall use or disclose, other than in the performance of his official duties and responsibilities, or as may be required by law, confidential information gained in the course of or by reason of his position or employment. For purposes of this section, "confidential information" means any information that is not generally available to the general public or could not be obtained from public records pursuant to the Massachusetts Public Records Act, as amended. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.070 - Employment of relatives. 
A.  No municipal official or employee shall, after November 4, 1991, the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, hire or advocate for employment, in any City agency in which said official or employee serves or over which he exercises authority, supervision, or control, any person: 
1.  Who is a relative of said municipal official or employee; or 
2.  In exchange for or in consideration of the employment of any said municipal official's or employee's relatives by any other official or employee. 
B.  No municipal official or employee shall use or permit the use of his position to assist any relative in securing employment or contracts with persons over whom the employee or municipal official exercises contract management authority. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.080 - Prohibited acts by City Councilors. 
City Councilors shall not make loans, gifts of value equal to or exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, offers of employment (except when consistent with the discharge of their official duty as Councilor), offers of future employment, or of business or investment opportunities to the City Manager, to Assistant City Managers, to heads of City departments or agencies, to the City Solicitor and Assistant Solicitors, or to members of boards or commissions involved in the granting of variances, permits, licenses or other such discretionary or adjudicatory functions. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.090 - Prohibited acts by School Committee members. 
School Committee members shall not make loans, gifts of value equal to or exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, offers of employment or future employment (except within the discharge of their official capacity as a School Committee member), or of business or investment opportunities to the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendents, the Executive Director of Management Services, the executive Director of Human Resources or Personnel Director, the Affirmative Action Officer, the Headmaster of Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, and elementary school principals. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.100 - Advisory opinions. 
A.  Any employee or municipal official shall be entitled to the opinion of the City Solicitor upon any question arising under this chapter relating to the duties, responsibilities and interests of such person. All requests for such opinions by a subordinate municipal employee shall be made in confidence directly to the City Manager who shall in turn request in confidence such opinion of the City Solicitor on behalf of such person, and all members of boards or commissions and chief officers or heads of municipal agencies may make direct confidential requests for such opinions of their own account. The City Solicitor shall file such opinion in writing with the City Clerk and such opinion shall be a matter of public record; however, no opinion will be rendered by the City Solicitor except upon the submission of detailed existing facts which raise a question of actual or prospective violation of any provision of this chapter. 
B.  Any person who acts in reliance on an opinion of the City Solicitor shall be exempt from the penalties provided herein if that person has made a good-faith disclosure of all material facts related to the opinion. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.110 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any employee or municipal official who violates this chapter shall be subject to appropriate discipline, including suspension, termination or censure, consistent with any requirements of the State Civil Service Law and the City Charter, as well as to civil or criminal prosecution under any other applicable State laws. 
B.  A knowing violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars per offense. 
C.  All City contracts shall include therein a clause for allowing for termination in the event of a violation of this chapter in connection with the awarding, administration or performance of the contract. 
D.  A violation of this chapter in connection with the issuance of any permit, license, ruling determination, or other official action shall be grounds for revocation thereof subject to and in accordance with applicable State and federal laws. 
E.  Ten taxpayers of the City ("the Taxpayers") shall have legal standing to institute a civil action to recover damages on behalf of the City or to implement any other remedy provided for in this chapter only in accordance with the following: 
1.  The Taxpayers shall first submit to the City Solicitor a written notice of the intention of the Taxpayers to bring such action with a statement of the grounds therefor; 
2.  Within sixty days of the receipt thereof the City Solicitor shall submit to the Taxpayers a written response thereto; 
3.  Thereafter the Taxpayers may institute such civil action unless: 
a.  In his response, the City Solicitor has stated that in his opinion there are no grounds for the institution of such action, with a statement of the reasons for such opinion, or 
b.  In his response, the City Solicitor has stated that the City itself intends to institute the proposed action and the City does in fact institute such action within one hundred twenty days of the issuance of the City Solicitor's written response to the Taxpayers. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.130 - Other remedies. 
The City or any City agency may maintain an action for injunctive relief to enforce any provision of this chapter, and for an accounting for any economic benefit received by any person in violation of this chapter or other law, any may recover damages for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
2.117.140 - Relationship with other laws. 
If this chapter and any State law apply to the same subject, the provision of broadest or most strict coverage shall control. 
(Ord. 1128 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 2.118 - STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL INTERESTS BY CERTAIN CITY OFFICIALS AND PERSONS CONDUCTING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY 
 
2.118.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
A.  "Amount" means a category of value, rather than an exact dollar figure, as follows: greater than one thousand dollars but not more than two thousand five hundred dollars; greater than two thousand five hundred dollars but not more than five thousand dollars; greater than five thousand dollars but not more than ten thousand dollars; greater than ten thousand dollars but not more than twenty-five thousand dollars; greater than twenty-five thousand dollars but not more than fifty thousand dollars; greater than fifty thousand dollars but not more than one hundred thousand dollars; greater than one hundred thousand dollars. 
B.  "Business" means any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm, franchise, association, organization, holding company, receivership, business or real estate trust, or any other legal entity organized for profit, nonprofit or charitable purposes. 
C.  "Business with which a person is associated" means any business in which the reporting person or a family member is an employee, a general partner, limited partner, proprietor, officer, director, trustee or serves in any managerial capacity; and any business more than one percent of any class of outstanding equity of which is beneficially owned in the aggregate by the reporting person and/or family members. 
D.  "Candidate" means any individual who seeks nomination or election to the office of City Councilor or School Committee member. For the purposes of this chapter, an individual shall be deemed to be seeking nomination or election to an office if such individual has: 
1.  Received a political contribution or made an expenditure, or has given such individual's consent for any person or committee to receive a political contribution or make an expenditure, for the purpose of influencing such individual's nomination or election to such office, whether or not the specific municipal office for which such individual will seek nomination or election is known at the time the political contribution is received or the expenditure is made; or 
2.  Taken action necessary under the law to qualify such individual for nomination or election to such office. 
E.  "Doing business" is the purchase, lease or sale of goods or services in any transaction with the City or any department, agency, commission or other part thereof. 
F.  "Election Commission" means the Election Commission of the City. 
G.  "Equity" means any stock, interests in capital or profits and losses, or similar ownership interest in a business. 
H.  "Family member" means a spouse, any dependent children residing in the reporting person's household, or a sibling. 
I.  "Gift" means a delivery of goods, payment, entertainment, subscription, advance, services, or anything of value, unless consideration of equal or greater value is received. If items are furnished or services are rendered for less than the fair market value, the difference between the fair market value and the price shall be treated as a gift. "Gift" shall not include a political contribution reported as required by law, a commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business, anything of value received by inheritance, or a gift received from a family member of from a relative within the third degree of consanguinity of the reporting person or the reporting person's spouse or from the spouse of any such relative. 
J.  "Legislative agent" means any person who for compensation or reward does any act to promote, oppose or influence legislation or any other matter before the City Council or School Committee, or to influence the decision of any member of the City administration where such decision concerns legislation or the adoption, defeat or postponement of a standard rate, rule or regulation pursuant thereto. The term shall include persons who, as any part of their usual employment and not simply incidental thereto, attempt to promote, oppose or influence such matters, whether or not any compensation in addition to the salary for such employment is received for such services. 
K.  "Municipal body" means any agency, authority, board, bureau, commission, committee, council, department, division, school department, or other legal entity within the government of the City. 
L.  "Municipal official" means: 
1.  Any individual holding any one of the following positions in the government of the City, whether by election or appointment: Mayor, Councilor; City Manager; Deputy City Manager; Assistant City Manager; City Clerk; Auditor; City Solicitor; School Committee Member; School Superintendent; Assistant Superintendent and Principals; Police Commissioner; Chief of Police; Chief of Fire Department; 
2.  The members of board and commissions, and the executive or administrative head or heads of such boards or commissions, whether elected or appointed, compensated or uncompensated, of a municipal body or bodies with executive, regulatory or permitting authority; or 
3.  Any Category I — IV employee as defined by Section 2.62.010 of the Cambridge Code. 
M.  "Person" means a business, individual, corporation, union, association, firm, partnership, committee, or other organization or group of persons; 
N.  "Political contribution" means a contribution of money or anything of value to an individual, candidate or political committee, or person acting on behalf of any individual, candidate or political committee, for the purpose of influencing the nomination or election of such individual or candidate, or for the purpose of promoting or opposing a Charter change, referendum question, or other question submitted to the voters, and shall include any of the following: 
1.  Gift, subscription, loan, advance, deposit of money, or thing of value, except a loan of money to a candidate by a national or State bank made in accordance with the applicable banking laws and regulations and in the ordinary course of business; 
2.  Transfer of money or anything of value between political committees; 
3.  Payment, by any person other than a candidate or political committee, of compensation for the personal services of another person which are rendered to such candidate or committee; 
4.  Purchase from an individual, candidate or political committee, whether through the device of tickets, advertisements or otherwise, for fund-raising activities, including testimonials, held on behalf of such individual, candidate or political committee, to the extent that the purchase price exceeds the actual cost of the goods sold or services rendered; 
5.  Discount or rebate not available to other candidates for the same office and the general public; and 
6.  The forgiveness of indebtedness or payment of indebtedness by another person, but shall not include the rendering of services by speakers, editors, writers, poll watchers, poll checkers or others, nor the payment by those rendering such services of such personal expenses as may be incidental thereto, nor the exercise of ordinary hospitality; 
O.  "Reporting person" means any person required to file a statement of interests pursuant to Section 2.118.030. 
(Ord. 1129 (part), 1991)  
2.118.020 - Administration. 
The Election Commission shall: 
A.  On or before March 1st of each year, request from the City Manager a list of the names and positions of all municipal officials, certified as to correctness and completeness, and the City Manager shall furnish such a list within sixty days of receipt of such request; 
B.  Upon receipt of a statement of interests filed pursuant to this chapter, issue to the person filing such statement a receipt verifying the fact that a statement of interests has been filed and a receipted copy of such statement; 
C.  Make the list of municipal officials and statements of interests filed with the Election Commission pursuant to this chapter available upon written request of any individual for public inspection and copying during regular office hours and make photocopying facilities available at a charge not to exceed the actual cost; the Election Commission shall forward a copy of the request to the individual whose statement has been examined; provided, however, that such requests from the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the District Attorney of Middlesex County, or the State Ethics Commission shall be confidential; 
D.  Compile and maintain an alphabetical index of all filed statements of interests to facilitate public access to the statements; 
E.  Inspect all filed statements of interests to ascertain whether any reporting person has failed to file a statement as required by law or has filed a statement which is deficient on its face. After inspection, the Election Commission shall list all reporting persons who have failed to file a statement of interests and all reporting persons who have filed a statement of interests which is deficient on its face; 
F.  Notify each delinquent reporting person that a statement of interests has not been filed or that such a statement which has been filed is deficient. Such notice shall be in writing and shall state in detail each deficiency and the penalties for failure to file a correct statement of interests pursuant to this chapter; 
G.  Preserve all statements filed with it for six years from the date of receipt. 
(Ord. 1129 (part), 1991)  
2.118.030 - Statement of interests—Filing and information required. 
A.  Every candidate shall file a statement of interests for the preceding calendar year with the Election Commission on or before the date on which nomination papers for such candidate must be submitted to the Election Commission unless the candidate neither files nominating papers nor conducts a sticker or write-in campaign. In the event that the candidate does not file valid nomination papers with the Election Commission on or before the date required by law but subsequently conducts a sticker or write-in campaign, such candidate shall file the required statement of interests with the Election Commission no later than fifteen days prior to the date of the election at which he is to be a candidate. 
B.  Every municipal official shall file a statement of interests for the preceding year with the Election Commission: 
1.  On or before June 1st of each year that such person is a municipal official or within thirty days of becoming a municipal official, whichever is later; and 
2.  On or before June 1st of the year after such person ceases to be a municipal official; provided, however, that no former municipal official shall be required to file a statement of interests for any year in which such former municipal official was a municipal official for less than thirty days. 
C.  Every statement of interests shall be filed on the form prescribed hereby and shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the reporting person. 
D.  Every reporting person shall disclose, to the best of such reporting person's knowledge, the following information for such reporting person and every family member for the preceding calendar year: 
1.  The name and address of and the nature of association with any business from which income in excess of one thousand dollars is received if that business does any business with, has matters pending before or is subject to regulation, supervision or oversight by the agency, department, board, Election Commission or other part of the City which employs the reporting person, or over which he or she has administrative or legislative control; 
2.  The name of all businesses transacting business in Cambridge as to which more than one percent of the beneficial ownership of which is held directly or indirectly by a family member; 
3.  The name and address of each creditor, located within or doing business with the City, to which more than one thousand dollars was owed on December 31st of the reporting year, and the original amount, the amount outstanding, the terms of repayment, and the general nature of the security pledged for each obligation; provided, however, that mortgages on the person's primary residence, obligations arising out of retail installment transactions, educational loans, medical and dental expenses, debt incurred in the ordinary course of an active ongoing business, and any obligation to make alimony or support payments shall not be reported; provided, further, that such information need not be reported if the creditor is a relative within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity; 
4.  The name and address of the source, and the cash value of any reimbursement for expense aggregating more than one hundred dollars in the calendar year if the recipient is a member of a municipal body and the source of such reimbursement is a person having an interest that is distinguishable from the public generally in legislation, legislative action, administrative action, or a matter before that municipal body; 
5.  The name and address of the donor, and the fair market value, as best determinable, of any gifts aggregating more than one hundred dollars in the reporting year, if the recipient is a member of a municipal body and the source of such gift(s) is a person having a direct interest in legislation, legislative action, or a matter before that municipal body; 
6.  The description, as appearing on the most recent tax bill of all real property in which direct or indirect financial interest was held, which has an assessed value greater than one thousand dollars; and, if the property was transferred during the year, the name and address of the person furnishing consideration to the reporting person or receiving it from him in respect to such transfer; 
7.  The name and address of the source, and the fair market value, of any honoraria aggregating more than one hundred dollars, if the source of such honoraria is a legislative agent; or if the recipient is a member of a municipal body and the source of such honoraria is a person having a direct interest in legislation, legislative action, or a matter before that municipal body; 
8.  The name and address of any creditor who has voluntarily forgiven an indebtedness of over one thousand dollars, and the amount forgiven; provided, however, that no such information need be reported if the creditor is a relative within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity of the reporting person, or the spouse of such a relative; 
9.  The name and address of any business from which the reporting person is taking a leave of absence; 
10.  The identity of any equity in a business to which the reporting person is associated which has been transferred to a member of the reporting person's family; provided, however, that a family member who transfers equity to the reporting person need not report such an intrafamily transfer; 
11.  The date, nature, amount or value of any commercial or business transaction equal to or exceeding two hundred fifty dollars with any municipal official and the official. 
E.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the disclosure of information which is privileged by the law. 
F.  Failure of a reporting person to file a statement of interests within ten days after receiving notice as provided in subsection A of Section 2.118.040 of this chapter or the filing of an incomplete statement of interests after receipt of such a notice, is a violation of this chapter and the Commission may initiate appropriate proceedings pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.118.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1129 (part), 1991)  
2.118.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  The Election Commission shall determine whether any reporting person has failed to file a statement of interests or has filed a deficient statement. If the Election Commission determines that reporting person has failed to file a statement of interest, or that any such statement filed with the Election Commission does not conform with the requirements of subsection D of Section 2.118.030, then the Election Commission shall notify the delinquent in writing. Such notice shall state in detail each deficiency and the penalties for failure to file a correct statement of interests pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  If within ten days of the sending of a notice a prescribed by subsection A of this section a statement complying with the requirements of this chapter is not received, after further notice affording the delinquent to be heard, if the election Commission determines that the delinquent has violated the provisions of this chapter, the Election Commission may assess a fine of not more than three hundred dollars for each day after said ten days that such violation has continued. The City may commence a civil action in the Superior Court to collect any such fine. The Election Commission shall also report the failure to file to the Attorney General and the District Attorney for Middlesex County. 
C.  Every person who filed a false statement of interests under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars for each offense. Every failure to disclose truthfully any matter required to be disclosed hereunder shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.  In addition to the penalties provided hereunder, any municipal official who violates this chapter shall be subject to appropriate discipline, including suspension, termination or censure, consistent with any requirements of the State Civil Service Law and City Charter and ordinances. 
(Ord. 1129 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 2.119 - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS 
 
2.119.010 - Recognition and scope. 
A.  The City Council recognizes the diverse composition of its citizenry and values its people. The City Council acknowledges that the people's lives have evolved from when laws governing family relationships were enacted. Perpetuation of the traditional definitions of "family" excludes a significant segment of the Cambridge population, deprives them of recognition and validation, and denies certain rights that should be afforded to persons who share their homes, their hearts and their lives. The City, recognizing its commitment to nondiscrimination and fair treatment of its citizens and employees, adopts this chapter acknowledging domestic partnerships. 
B.  The chapter allows persons in committed relationships who meet the criteria established by the City as constituting domestic partnerships to register at the office of the City Clerk and obtain a certificate attesting to their status. The chapter recognizes certain right of access for domestic partners. This chapter, in conformance with the Human Rights Ordinance, which bars discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, marital status and family status, also equalizes the treatment of City employees. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Competent to contract" means eighteen years of age or older, and mentally competent to contract. 
B.  "Dependent" means a minor who lives within the household of a domestic partnership and is: 
1.  A biological child or adopted child, or foster child of a domestic partner, if the child is not provided with medical insurance coverage by the Commonwealth; 
2.  A dependent as defined under IRS regulations; or 
3.  A ward of a domestic partner as determined in a guardianship proceeding. 
C.  "Domestic partner" means a person who meets the criteria set out in subsection D of this section or who is registered as such in another jurisdiction. 
D.  "Domestic partnership" means the entity formed by two persons who meet the following criteria and jointly file a registration statement proclaiming that: 
1.  They are in a relationship of mutual support, caring and commitment and intend to remain in such a relationship; and 
2.  They reside together; and 
3.  They are not married; and 
4.  They are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts; and 
5.  They are each other's sole domestic partner; and 
6.  They are competent to contract; and 
7.  They consider themselves to be a family. 
E.  Subsequent to the filing of a registration form, the existence of a "family" relationship may be shown by evidence relevant to the following factors: 
1.  The manner in which the people live their daily lives; 
2.  How they hold their relationship out to the world; 
3.  Their emotional and financial commitment; 
4.  Their reliance on each other for daily family services; 
5.  The longevity and exclusivity of their relationship; and 
6.  Any other factors which may be relevant. 
F.  "Mutual support" means that the domestic partners each contributed in some fashion, not necessarily equally or financially, to the maintenance and support of the domestic partnership. 
G.  "Reside together" means living together in a common household. A partner may be temporarily absent from the common household, so long as she or he has the intent to return. A partner may own or maintain an additional residence. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.030 - Registration and termination. 
A.  Persons who meet the criteria set out in subsection D of Section 2.119.020 may make an official record of their domestic partnership by filing a domestic partnership registration form with the City Clerk. The domestic partnership registration shall include the name and date of birth of each of the domestic partners, the address of their common household, and the name and dates of birth of any dependents of the domestic partnership, and shall be signed, under the pains and penalties of perjury, by both domestic partners. 
B.  Domestic partners may amend the domestic partnership registration to add or delete dependents or change the household address. Amendments to the domestic partnership registration shall be signed, under the pains and penalties of perjury, by both domestic partners. 
C.  A domestic partnership is terminated by the death of a domestic partner or by the filing of a termination statement by a domestic partner. 
1.  The death of a domestic partner automatically terminates a domestic partnership. 
2.  A domestic partnership may be terminated by a domestic partner who files with the City Clerk, by hand or by certified mail, a termination statement. The person filing the termination statement must declare under pains and penalties of perjury that the domestic partnership is terminated and that a copy of the termination statement has been mailed by certified mail to the other domestic partner at his or her last known address. The person filing the termination statement must include on such statement the address to which the copy was mailed. The fee for a domestic partnership termination shall be $5.00. 
D.  The termination of a domestic partnership shall be effective immediately upon the death of a domestic partner. The voluntary termination of a domestic partnership by a partner shall be effective seven days after the receipt of a termination statement by the City Clerk. Prior to becoming effective, the person who filed the termination statement may withdraw the termination statement in person at the office of the City Clerk. If the termination statement is withdrawn, the domestic partner shall give notice of the withdrawal, by certified mail, to the other domestic partner. 
E.  If a domestic partnership is terminated by the death of a domestic partner, there shall be no required waiting period prior to filing another domestic partnership. If a domestic partnership is terminated by one or both domestic partners, neither domestic partner may file another domestic partnership until six months have elapsed from termination. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992) 
(Ord.1294, Amended, 05/22/2006)  
2.119.040 - City Clerk—Fees. 
A.  The City Clerk shall collect a reasonable fee for filing a domestic partnership registration. The initial amount for this fee shall be fifteen dollars and it shall be adjusted as necessary to remain consistent with the fee for an application for a marriage license. 
B.  The City Clerk shall collect the same fee charged for marriage certificates for certified copies of domestic partnership documents, other than the copy of the certificate of domestic partnership issued by the City Clerk to the domestic partners, as provided for in Section 2.119.050. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992) 
(1280, Amended, 09/27/2004, Section B)  
2.119.050 - City Clerk—Records. 
A.  Upon receipt of a domestic partnership registration and filing fee, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate of domestic partnership and shall mail to the household of the domestic partnership one certified copy of the certificate and two wallet-sized cards indicating the existence of the domestic partnership, the names of the domestic partners and the names of the dependents of the domestic partnership, if any. 
B.  The City Clerk shall maintain records of domestic partnerships registered in the City, including forms filed and certificates issued. The City Clerk shall provide forms to persons requesting them in accordance with Section 2.119.120. 
C.  The City Clerk shall allow public access to domestic partnership records to the same extent and in the same manner as marriage licenses. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.060 - Rights of domestic partners. 
Persons who have registered their domestic partnership at the office of the City Clerk pursuant to Section 2.119.030 are entitled to the following rights: 
A.  1.  A domestic partner shall have the same visitation rights as a spouse or parent of a patient at the Cambridge City Hospital and all other health care facilities in the City. A dependent shall have the same visitation rights as a patient's child. 
2.  The term "health care facilities" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, convalescent facilities, mental health care facilities, and other short- and long-term care facilities under the City's jurisdiction. 
B.  1.  A domestic partner shall have the same visitation rights at all correctional facilities in Cambridge as a spouse or parent of a person in custody. A dependent shall have the same visitation rights afforded to the child of a person in custody. 
2.  The term "correctional facilities" includes, but is not limited to, holding cells, jails and juvenile correction centers under the City's jurisdiction. 
C.  1.  A domestic partner, who is also the parent or legal guardian of a child, may file a form at or send a letter to the child's school to indicate that the parent's domestic partner shall have access to the child's records, access to school personnel in matters concerning the child, and access to the child, including the right to remove such child from the school for sickness or family emergency. The school shall afford such person access as directed by the child's parent. 
2.  When a domestic partnership is terminated pursuant to Section 2.119.030, it is the responsibility of the parent or guardian to notify the school, in writing, of the termination of rights of the former domestic partner. 
3.  The term "school" includes, but is not limited to, high schools, vocational schools, junior high and middle schools, elementary schools, preschool programs, after-school programs and day care programs. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.070 - Employment benefits. 
A.  The City and School Department shall provide the same health and other employment fringe benefits to employees with domestic partners as to employees with spouses. As used in this chapter, "employees" refers to active and retired employees of the City and the Cambridge School Department eligible for benefits pursuant to state or municipal law, employment policies or collective bargaining agreements. 
B.  Employees must file a declaration of domestic partnership, signed under the pains and penalties of perjury, with their department administrator or Department of Personnel of the City or School Department, as appropriate, in order to obtain benefits under this chapter. On such declaration, employees shall agree to promptly notify the City or School Department, as appropriate, of any change in the status or their domestic partnership. There shall be no fee for such declaration. Employees shall not be obligated to file a domestic partnership registration form with the City Clerk. 
C.  The City and School Department shall provide medical insurance coverage to an employee's domestic partner as it does to an employee's spouse, and to the dependent(s) of an employees's domestic partnership as it does to an employee's child(ren). An employee may opt to decline medical insurance coverage for her or his domestic partner, without foregoing the right to obtain medical insurance coverage for her or his domestic partner at a later date. 
D.  Upon termination of a domestic partnership by an employee, the domestic partner shall be covered by medical insurance for a period of sixty days following the termination of the domestic partnership. If the employee leaves employment with the City or School Department prior to the expiration of the sixty days, the medical insurance shall lapse on the date that the former employee's insurance lapses. 
E.  Upon termination of a domestic partnership by the death of an employee, the surviving domestic partner's medical insurance coverage shall lapse as it would for the spouse of a married employee, upon the death of such employee. 
F.  Employees shall be granted a leave of absence, with pay, for the death of a domestic partner or family member of a domestic partner to the same extent as for a spouse or family member of a spouse. Use of the term "in-law" in employee handbooks shall include the relatives of a domestic partner. 
G.  Employees shall be granted sick leave to care for a domestic partner to the same extent permitted to care for a spouse, and to care for a dependent of a domestic partnership to the same extent permitted to care for a child. 
H.  Employees shall be entitled to take parental leave to take care of a child born to their domestic partner or a newly adopted child to the same extent as a married person. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.080 - Limitation of liabilities. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to contravene the general laws of the commonwealth. 
B.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impose liability upon a domestic partner for the health or medical expenses of his or her domestic partner, with the sole exception of the medical insurance contributions assumed by a City or School Department employee who is a member of a domestic partnership. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create additional legal liabilities greater than those already existing under law or to create new private causes of action. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.090 - Reciprocity. 
All rights, privileges and benefits extended to domestic partnerships registered pursuant to this chapter shall also be extended to domestic partnerships registered pursuant to similar laws in other jurisdictions. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.100 - Retaliation. 
No person shall discriminate or retaliate against a person who seeks the benefit of this chapter, registers or makes a declaration pursuant to its provisions, or assists another person in obtaining the benefits of this chapter. Any person who so discriminates or retaliates shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of the Cambridge Human Rights Ordinance, Cambridge Code Chapter 2.76. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.110 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any of its provisions are held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.120 - Forms. 
A.  The City Clerk shall distribute copies of the following forms to those persons who request them: 
1.  Domestic partnership registration; 
2.  Domestic partnership information sheet; 
3.  Termination of domestic partnership; 
4.  School authorization form. 
B.  The Department of Personnel shall distribute copies of the following forms to those persons who request them: 
1.  Declaration of domestic partnership; 
2.  Amendment to declaration of domestic partnership. 
C.  The School Department shall distribute copies of the following forms to persons who request them: 
1.  School authorization form; 
2.  Revocation of school authorization form. 
D.  The City Clerk, the Department of Personnel, School Department and all other affected City agencies, offices and departments shall provide and distribute any other relevant forms that are or become necessary. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
2.119.130 - Effect on other sections of code. 
When the term "spouse" is used in other City ordinances, it shall be interpreted to include a domestic partner. When the term "family" is used in other City ordinances, it shall be interpreted to include domestic partnerships. 
(Ord. 1144 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 2.120 - Cambridge First-Hiring and Residency Requirement 
Section 1. 
[Repealing 2.120 (Repealed by Ordinance 1185)]  
Chapter 2.121 - LIVING WAGE ORDINANCE 
 
2.121.010 - Title and Purpose. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Cambridge Living Wage Ordinance." The purpose of this Chapter is to assure that employees of the City of Cambridge and employees of City contractors, subcontractors and beneficiaries of tax abatements, loans, grants, subsidies and other assistance provided by the City earn an hourly wage that is needed to support a family of four. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the term: 
(a)  "Applicable Department" means the Personnel Department for employees of the City of Cambridge, the Purchasing Department, with the advice and assistance of the appropriate department which receives the services, for Covered Employers who contract or subcontract with the City of Cambridge, the School Department for employees, contractors and subcontractors of the School Department, and the City Manager's Office for any other Person who is a Beneficiary of assistance other than a contract or subcontract. 
(b)  "Assistance" means: 
(1)  Any grant, loan, tax incentive, bond financing, subsidy, or other form of assistance valued at least ten thousand dollars that an employer receives by or through the authority or approval of the City of Cambridge, including, but not limited to, c. 121A tax abatements, industrial development bonds, Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) loans and grants, Enterprise Zone designations awarded after the effective date of this chapter, and the lease of City owned land or buildings below market value; and 
(2)  Any service contract, as defined herein, of at least ten thousand dollars with the City of Cambridge that is made with an employer to provide services pursuant to G.L.C. 30B or other public procurement laws, awarded, renegotiated or renewed after the effective date of this chapter. 
(3)  Any service subcontract, as defined herein, of at least ten thousand dollars. 
(c)  "Beneficiary" means: 
(1)  Any person who is a recipient of assistance; 
(2)  Any company or person that is a tenant or sub-tenant, leaseholder or sub-leaseholder of a recipient of assistance, provided that said company or person employs at least twenty-five persons and occupies property or uses equipment or property that is improved or developed as a result of assistance, after the effective date of this chapter; and 
(d)  "Covered Employer" means the City of Cambridge or a Beneficiary of Assistance, but does not include a Covered Building Services Employer. 
(e)  "Covered Employee" means: 
(1)  A person employed by the City of Cambridge except for persons in those positions listed in Section 2.121.040(j) of this Chapter; and 
(2)  A person, other than a Covered Building Service Employee, employed by a Covered Employer, or a person employed by an independent contractor doing business with a Covered Employer, who would directly expend any of his or her time on the activities funded by the contract or the activities for which the Beneficiary received the Assistance, except for persons in those positions listed in Section 2.121.040(j) of this Chapter. 
(f)  "Living Wage" has the meaning stated in Section 2.121.030. 
(g)  "Person" means one or more of the following or their agents, employees, servants, representatives, and legal representatives: individuals, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, associations, labor organizations, educational institutions, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and all other entities recognized at law by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
(h)  "Service Contract" means a contract let to a contractor by the City of Cambridge for the furnishing of services, to or for the City, except contracts where services are incidental to the delivery of products, equipment or commodities. A contract for the purchase or lease of goods, products, equipment, supplies or other property is not a "service contract" for the purposes of this definition. 
(i)  "Service Subcontract" means a subcontract primarily for the furnishing of services, to or for a recipient of assistance, except where services are incidental to the delivery of products, equipment or commodities. A contract for the purchase or lease of goods, products, equipment, supplies or other property is not a "service subcontract" for the purposes of this definition. 
(j)  "Covered Building Service Employee" means any person performing building service work for a Covered Building Service Employer, either directly or through a contract or subcontract. 
(k)  "Building Services" or "Building Service Work" means work performed in connection with the cleaning of buildings and security guard services. 
(l)  "Covered Building Service Contract" means a contract or subcontract to provide Building Services to the City of Cambridge or any of its departments or subdivisions. 
(m)  "Covered Building Service Contractor" or "Covered Building Service Employer" means an entity providing Building Services on a Covered Building Service Contract or subcontract with the City or any of its departments or subdivisions. 
(n)  "Standard Compensation" has the meaning stated in Section 2.121.040. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.030 - Living Wage. 
(a)  Applicability. Covered Employers shall pay no less than the living wage to their employees. 
(b)  Amount of wage. The living wage shall be calculated on an hourly basis and shall be no less than ten dollars, subject to adjustment as provided herein. The living wage shall be upwardly adjusted each year no later than March 1 in proportion to the increase at the immediately preceding December 31 over the year earlier level of the Annual Average Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) Boston-Lawrence-Salem, MA - NH, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor applied to ten dollars. 
(c)  No reduction in collective bargaining wage rates. Nothing in this Chapter shall be read to require or authorize any beneficiary to reduce wages set by a collective bargaining agreement. 
(d)  Cuts in non-wage benefits prohibited. No Beneficiary will fund wage increases required by this Chapter, or otherwise respond to the provisions of this Chapter, by reducing the health, insurance, pension, vacation, or other non-wage benefits of any of its employees. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.040 - Standard Compensation. 
(a)  Applicability. Covered Building Services Employers shall pay no less than the standard compensation to covered building service employees. 
(b)  Standard Compensation shall include the standard hourly rate of pay for the relevant classification. 
(c)  Amount. 
(i)  The "Standard Hourly Rate of Pay" for Covered Building Service Employees other than for security guards shall be the greatest of the following: 
(1)  The Living Wage rate as defined in 2.121.030; or 
(2)  The prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 27H of chapter 149 of the General Laws of Massachusetts; 
(ii)  The "Standard Hourly Rate of Pay for security guards" shall be the greatest of the following: 
(1)  The Living Wage rate as defined in 2.121.030; or 
(2)  The prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 3 of chapter 195 of the Massachusetts Acts of 2014; or 
(3)  The hourly rate paid to workers in the relevant classification under a preceding building service contract. 
(iii)  The Standard Hourly Rate of Pay for Covered Building Service Employees other than for security guards shall be annually adjusted to be no less than the greatest of the following: 
(1)  The previous hourly rate of pay increased by the annual percentage difference between the current Boston-Lawrence-Salem, MA - NH Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all items for All Urban Consumers and the same CPI for the same month of the previous year, or 
(2)  The current prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 27H of chapter 149 of the General Laws of Massachusetts. 
(iv)  The Standard Hourly Rate of Pay for security guards shall be annually adjusted to be no less than the greatest of the following: 
(1)  The previous hourly rate of pay increased by the annual percentage difference between the current Boston-Lawrence-Salem, MA - NH Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all items for All Urban Consumers and the same CPI for the same month of the previous year, or 
(2)  The current prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 3 of chapter 195 of the Massachusetts Acts of 2014. 
(v)  "Standard Benefits" for Covered Building Service Employees other than for security guards shall be an hourly supplement furnished by a Covered Building Service Employer to a Covered Building Service Employee in one of the following ways: (1) in the form of health and other benefits (not including paid leave) that cost the Covered Building Service Employer the entire required hourly supplemental amount; (2) by providing a portion of the required hourly supplement in the form of health and other benefits (not including paid leave) and the balance in cash; or (3) by providing the entire supplement in cash. The required hourly supplemental rate shall be equal to the greatest of the following: (1) the monetary value of the health and other benefits (not including paid leave) provided under the prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 27H of chapter 149 of the General Laws of Massachusetts; or (2) twenty percent of the standard hourly rate of pay. 
(vii)  "Standard Benefits for security guards" shall be an hourly supplement furnished by a Covered Building Service Employer to a Covered Building Service Employee in one of the following ways: (1) in the form of health and other benefits (not including paid leave) that cost the Covered Building Service Employer the entire required hourly supplemental amount; (2) by providing a portion of the required hourly supplement in the form of health and other benefits (not including paid leave) and the balance in cash; or (3) by providing the entire supplement in cash. The required hourly supplemental rate shall be equal to the greatest of the following: the monetary value of the health and other benefits (not including paid leave) provided under the prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 3 of chapter 195 of the Massachusetts Acts of 2014; or (2) twenty percent of the standard hourly rate of pay. 
(viii)  For the purposes of this section, "benefits" shall not include workers compensation or other legally mandated insurance, nor shall it include the value of any benefit for which the Covered Building Service Employee is eligible, but for which no payment is actually made by a Covered Building Service Employer to the Covered Building Service Employee or to any other party on the Covered Building Service Employee's behalf, because the Covered Building Service Employee either does not actually utilize or does not elect to receive the benefit for any reason. 
(ix)  Standard benefits for Covered Building Service Employees other than for security guards shall be adjusted annually to be no less that equal to the value of the greatest of the following: (1) the value of the previous standard benefits increased by the annual percentage difference between the current Boston-Lawrence-Salem, MA - NH Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all items for All Urban Consumers and the same CPI for the same month of the previous year, or (2) the current monetary value of the health and other benefits (not including paid leave) provided under the prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 27H of chapter 149 of the General Laws of Massachusetts. 
(x)  Standard benefits for security guards shall be adjusted annually to be no less that equal to the value of the greatest of the following: (1) the value of the previous standard benefits increased by the annual percentage difference between the current Boston-Lawrence-Salem, MA - NH Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all items for All Urban Consumers and the same CPI for the same month of the previous year, or (2) the current monetary value of the health and other benefits (not including paid leave) provided under the prescribed rate of wages as determined by the director of the department of labor standards pursuant to section 3 of chapter 195 of the Massachusetts Acts of 2014. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.050 - Waivers and Exceptions. 
(a)  Waivers. A Covered Employer may request that the City Manager grant a partial or whole waiver to the requirements of this Chapter. There shall be no waivers or exceptions made with respect to the Standard Compensation for Covered Building Service Employees. 
(b)  General Waivers. Waivers may be granted where application of this Chapter to a particular form of Assistance is found by the City Solicitor to violate a specific state or federal statutory, regulatory or constitutional provision or provisions, and the City Manager approves the waiver on that basis. 
(c)  Hardship Waivers for certain not-for-profit employers. An employer, who has a contract with the City of Cambridge which is not subject to the provisions of G.L. c. 30B, may apply to the City Manager for a specific waiver where payment of the Living Wage by a not-for-profit Covered Employer would cause a substantial hardship to the Covered Employer. 
(d)  Chapter 30B contract waivers. Prior to issuing an invitation for bids for a procurement contract subject to the provisions of G.L. c. 30B, any Applicable Department may apply to the City Manager for a waiver of the application of the Living Wage to the contract where payment of the Living Wage by a Covered Employer would make it inordinately expensive for the City to contract for the services or would result in a significant loss of services, because the contracted work cannot be segregated from the other work of the Covered Employer. 
(e)  General Waiver Request Contents. All General Waiver requests shall include the following: 
(1)  The nature of the Assistance to which this Chapter applies; 
(2)  The specific or official name of the Assistance and Assistance program, the statutory or regulatory authority for the granting of the Assistance, and a copy of that authority; 
(3)  The conflicting statutory, regulatory, or constitutional provision or provisions that makes compliance with this Chapter unlawful, and a copy of each such provision; and 
(4)  A factual explication and legal analysis of how compliance with this Chapter would violate the cited provision or provisions, and the legal consequences that would attach if the violation were to occur. 
(f)  Hardship Waiver Request Contents. All Hardship Waiver requests shall include the following: 
(1)  The nature of the Assistance to which this Chapter applies; 
(2)  A detailed explanation of why payment of the Living Wage would cause a substantial hardship to the Covered Employer; and 
(3)  A statement of proposed wages below the Living Wage. 
(g)  Chapter 30B Contract Waiver Request Contents. A Chapter 30B contract waiver request shall include the following: 
(1)  The nature of the Assistance to which this Chapter applies; 
(2)  A detailed explanation of why the contracted work cannot be segregated from the other work of the bidding Covered Employers thereby making the cost of the contract with the payment of the living wage inordinately expensive or would result in a significant loss of services. 
(h)  Community Advisory Board review and recommendation regarding waiver requests. The Community Advisory Board, as described in Section 2.121.070 of this Chapter shall consider waiver requests along with their supporting documentation and analysis, and may hold a public hearing to consider the views of the public before making a recommendation to the City Manager regarding the waiver request. For a hardship waiver, the Community Advisory Board shall offer an opportunity to be heard to employees of the Covered Employer. After reviewing the recommendation of the Community Advisory Board, the City Manager may approve and grant or deny all or part of a request. The City Manager may in his or her discretion grant a temporary hardship waiver pending the hearing before the Community Advisory Board. For chapter 30B contract waivers, the Community Advisory Board shall make its recommendation to the City Manager no more than thirty days after it is notified of the request for a chapter 30B contract waiver. 
(i)  Terms of exceptions. If an employer is subject to this Chapter as a result of its receipt of more than one kind of Assistance covered by this Chapter, and if the City Manager grants a waiver with respect to one form of Assistance, the City Manager need not find that this Chapter is inapplicable to the employer with respect to another form of assistance received by the employer. 
(j)  Exceptions. The following positions will be excepted from the requirement of the payment of the Living Wage upon certification in an affidavit in a form approved by the Applicable Department and signed by a principal officer of the Covered Employer that the positions are as follows: 
(1)  Youth hired pursuant to a city, state, or federally funded program which employs youth as defined by city, state, or federal guidelines, during the summer, or as part of a school to work program, or in other related seasonal or part-time program; 
(2)  Work-study or cooperative educational programs; 
(3)  Trainees who are given a stipend or wage as part of a job training program that provides the trainees with additional services, which may include, but are not limited to, room and board, case management, or job readiness services. 
(4)  Persons working in a recognized supported employment program that provides workers with additional services, which may include, but are not limited to, room and board, case management, counseling, or job coaching: 
(5)  Positions where housing is provided by the employer; 
(6)  Employees who are exempt from federal or state minimum wage requirements; and 
(7)  Individuals employed by the City of Cambridge where the employment of such individuals is intended primarily to provide a benefit or subsidy to such individuals, although the City is compensating them for work performed. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.060 - Notification Requirements. 
All Applicable Departments shall provide in writing an explanation of the requirements of this Chapter in all requests for bids for service contracts and to all persons applying for Assistance as defined by this Chapter. All persons who have signed a service contract with the City of Cambridge or a contract for Assistance shall forward a copy of such requirements to any person submitting a bid for a subcontract on the Assistance contract. 
All Covered Building Service Contracts and all solicitations for Building Services issued by the City of Cambridge or any of its departments or subdivisions, shall contain a provision indicating the number of hours or work required and stating the Standard Compensation for the relevant classification that is applicable to the Covered Building Service Employees and shall contain a stipulation that the Covered Building Service employees shall be paid not less than the Standard Compensation for the relevant classifications. 
All requests for proposals or other solicitations and all specifications for building service work, shall include specific reference to this chapter, shall state the required number of hours, and shall require prospective building service contractors to submit pricing on a standard worksheet furnished by the City that specifies the components of hourly pricing for the duration of the contract. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.070 - Duties of Covered Employers. 
(a)  Notification Requirements. Covered employers and Covered Building Service Employers shall provide each Covered Employee with a fact sheet about this Chapter and shall post a notice about the Chapter in a conspicuous location visible to all employees. The fact sheet and poster shall be provided to the Covered Employer by the Applicable Department and shall include: 
(1)  Notice of the Living Wage amount and notice of the Standard Compensation amount; 
(2)  A summary of the provisions of this Chapter; 
(3)  A description of the enforcement provisions of the Chapter; 
(4)  The name, address, and phone number of a person designated by the Applicable Department to whom complaints of noncompliance with this Chapter should be directed. 
(b)  Contract for Assistance. At the time of signing a contract for assistance with the City or with a beneficiary, or a Covered Building Service Contract, the contract must include the following: 
(1)  The name of the program or project under which the contract or subcontract is being awarded; 
(2)  A local contact name, address, and phone number for the Beneficiary; 
(3)  A written commitment by the Beneficiary to pay all Covered Employees not less than the Living Wage or Standard Wage if applicable, as subject to adjustment under this Chapter and to comply with the provisions of this Chapter; 
(4)  A list of Covered Employees and Covered Building Service Employees under the contract with the employees' job titles; 
(5)  A list of all subcontracts either awarded or that will be awarded to Beneficiaries with funds from the Assistance. Upon signing any subcontracts, the Covered Employer shall forward a copy of the subcontract to the Applicable Department. 
(c)  Maintenance of payroll records. Each Covered Employer shall maintain payrolls for all Covered Employees and basic records relating thereto and shall preserve them for a period of three years. The records shall contain the name and address of each employee, the job title and classification, the number of hours worked each day, the gross wages, deductions made, actual wages paid, and copies of social security wage and withholding reports, and evidence of payment thereof and such other data as may be required by the Applicable Department from time to time. 
(d)  Applicable Department duties. The Applicable Department shall cause investigations to be made as may be necessary to determine whether there has been compliance with this Chapter. The Applicable Department shall report the findings of all such investigations to the Community Advisory Board. 
(e)  Covered Employer to cooperate. The Covered Employer shall submit payroll records on request to the Applicable Department. The Covered Employer shall permit City representatives to observe work being performed upon the work site, to interview employees and to examine the books and records relating to the payrolls being investigated to determine payment of wages. 
(f)  City Assistance Reports. Each Applicable Department shall file a City Assistance Report with the City Manager and the Community Advisory Board by July 31 of each year. The report shall include, for each Assistance Package or contract approved during the preceding fiscal year: 
(1)  The name of the Applicable Department (awarding agency), the name of the specific program under which the Assistance was awarded, and the origin of funds for Assistance; 
(2)  A description of the purpose or project for which the Assistance was awarded; 
(3)  The name, address, and phone number of a local contact person for the Covered Employer; 
(4)  The total cost to the City of Assistance provided to each Beneficiary, including both face-value of assistance, as well as revenue not collected as a result of the assistance. 
(g)  Payroll reporting. Every six months, a Covered Building Service Employer, shall file with the City a complete certified payroll showing the Covered Building Service Employer's payroll records for each Covered Building Service Employee. Upon request, the Covered Building Service Employer shall produce for inspection and copying the payroll records for any or all applicable Covered Building Service Employees for the prior three-year period. 
(h)  Transitional Employment Period. The City shall give advance notice to a Covered Building Service Contractor and any collective bargaining representative of the Covered Building Service Contractor that a Covered Building Service Contract will be terminated, and the City shall also provide the name, address, and telephone number of the successor Covered Building Service Contractor or contractors where known. The terminated Covered Building Service Contractor shall, within five days after receipt of such notice, provide to the successor Covered Building Service Contractor, the name, address, date of hire, and employment occupation classification of each employee employed at the site or sites covered by the building service contract at the time of receiving said notice. If a successor Covered Building Service Contractor has not been identified by the City be the end of the five-day pay period, the terminated Covered Building Service Contractor shall provide the information to the City, at the same time that the terminated contractor shall provide each affected employee with notice of his/her right to obtain employment with the successor Covered Building Service Contractor. 
A successor Covered Building Service Contractor or subcontractor where applicable shall retain for a ninety-day transitional employment period all employees who were employed by the terminated Covered Building Service Contractor and its subcontractors at the building(s) covered by the terminated contract. This requirement shall not apply in the event the City chooses to employ building service employees directly. If at any time the successor Covered Building Service Contractor determines that fewer employees are required to perform the new service contract than had been performing such services under the terminated contract, the successor Covered Building Service Contractor shall retain the employees by seniority within job classification. Except for such layoffs, during the ninety-day transition period, the successor Covered Building Service Contractor shall not discharge without cause an employee. During the ninety-day transition period, the successor Covered Building Service Contractor shall maintain a preferential hiring list of those employees not retained from which the successor contractor or its subcontractors shall hire additional employees. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.080 - Community Advisory Board. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Community Advisory Board shall be to review the effectiveness of this Chapter at creating and retaining Living Wage jobs, to make recommendations to the City Manager regarding the granting of Waivers to Covered Employers, to review the implementation and enforcement of this Chapter, and to make recommendations from time to time in connection therewith. 
(b)  Composition. The Community Advisory Board shall be composed of nine members and shall include representatives of labor unions, community organizations and the business community. All members will be appointed by the City Manager. Members of the Board shall serve a three-year term. Whenever a vacancy shall occur the City Manager shall appoint a replacement within thirty days of said vacancy. 
(c)  Meetings. The Community Advisory Board shall meet quarterly and in special session as required. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and will allow for public testimony on the uses of the City Assistance generally, and on specific instances of assistance or proposed assistance as received or sought by individual enterprises. 
(d)  Conflict of Interest. No member of the Community Advisory Board shall participate in any proceeding concerning a Beneficiary, a Covered Employer or a Covered Employee, or applicant for waiver or exemption, if the member or any member of his or her immediate family has a direct or indirect financial interest in the outcome of said proceeding. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.090 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement powers. In order to enforce this Chapter, the Applicable Department may, with the approval and assistance of the City Solicitor, issue subpoenas, compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and production of books, papers, records, and documents relating to payroll records necessary for hearing, investigations, and proceedings. In case of failure to comply with a subpoena, the City may apply to a court of appropriate jurisdiction for an order requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the productions of books, papers, records, and documents. Said court, in the case of a refusal to comply with any such subpoena, after notice to the person subpoenaed, and upon finding that the attendance or testimony of such witnesses or the production of such books, papers, records, and documents, as the case may be, is relevant or necessary for such hearings, investigation, or proceedings, may issue an order requiring the attendance or testimony of such witnesses or the production of such documents and any violation of the court's order may be punishable by the court as contempt thereof. 
(b)  Complaint procedures. An employee who believes that he or she is a Covered Employee or an applicant for a position to be filled by a Covered Employee who believes that his or her employer is not complying with requirements of this Chapter applicable to the employer may file a complaint with the Applicable Department or with the Community Advisory Board. Complaints of alleged violations may also be filed by concerned citizens or by the City Council. Complaints of alleged violations may be made at any time, but in no event more than three years after the last date of alleged violation, and shall be investigated promptly by the Applicable Department. Statements written or oral, made by an employee, shall be treated as confidential and shall not be disclosed to the Covered Employer without the consent of the employee. 
(c)  Investigations and hearings. The Applicable Department shall investigate the complaint, and may, in conjunction with the City Solicitor, and in accordance with the powers herein granted, require the production by the employer of such evidence as required to determine compliance. Prior to ordering any penalty the applicable Department shall give notice to the employer and conduct a hearing. If at any time during these proceedings, the employer voluntarily makes restitution of the wages not paid to the employee making the complaint and to any similarly situated employees, by paying all back wages owed plus interest at the average prior year Massachusetts passbook savings bank rate, or otherwise remedies the violation alleged if the violation involves matters other than wages, then the Applicable Department shall thereafter dismiss the complaint against the employer. 
(d)  Remedies. In the event that the Applicable Department, after notice and hearing, determines that any Covered Employer has failed to pay the Living Wage rate or has otherwise violated the provisions of this Chapter, the Applicable Department may order any or all of the following penalties and relief: 
(1)  Fines up to the amount of three hundred dollars for each Covered Employee for each day that the Covered Employer is in violation of this Chapter, except if the violation was not knowing and willful, then the total fine shall not exceed the amount of back wages plus interest owed; 
(2)  Suspension of ongoing contract and subcontract payments; 
(3)  Ineligibility for future City Assistance for up to three years beginning when all penalties and restitution have been paid in full. In addition, all Covered Employers having any principal officers who were principal officers of a barred beneficiary shall be ineligible under this section; and 
(4)  Any other action deemed appropriate and within the discretion and authority of the city. Remedies in this section shall also apply to the party or parties aiding and abetting in any violation of this Chapter. 
(e)  Private right of action. Any Covered Employee, or any person who was formerly employed by a Beneficiary, may bring an action to enforce the provisions of this Chapter to recover back pay and benefits, attorney's fees and costs, by filing suit against a Beneficiary in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Remedies herein non-exclusive. No remedy set forth in this Chapter is intended to be exclusive or a prerequisite for asserting a claim for relief to enforce the right granted under this Chapter in a court of law. This Chapter shall not be construed to limit an employee's right to bring a common law cause of action for wrongful termination. 
(g)  Retaliation and discrimination barred. A Covered Employer shall not discharge, reduce the compensation or otherwise retaliate against any employee for making a complaint to the City, otherwise asserting his or her rights under this Chapter, participating in any of its proceedings or using any civil remedies to enforce his or her rights under the Chapter. The City shall investigate allegations of retaliation or discrimination and shall, if found to be true, after notice and a hearing, order appropriate relief as set out in paragraphs (c) and (d) herein. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.100 - Severability. 
In the event any provision of this Chapter shall be held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or render unenforceable any other provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
2.121.110 - Effective Date. 
This law shall be effective sixty days after final passage. 
(Ord. 1376, 12/21/2015)  
Chapter 2.122 - Community Preservation Committee 
 
2.122.010 - Established 
There is hereby established in Cambridge a Community Preservation Committee (the Committee). 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
2.122.020 - Function and purpose 
The Committee is responsible for evaluating the community preservation needs of the City, and making recommendations for expenditures from the Community Preservation Fund that will be created by acceptance of the Community Preservation Act, M.G.L. c. 44B. Community preservation needs shall include the acquisition, creation, and preservation of open space, the acquisition, creation and preservation of historic structures and landscapes, and the acquisition, creation and preservation of affordable housing. "Open space" shall include, but not be limited to, land to protect existing and future well fields, aquifers and recharge areas, watershed land, agricultural land, grasslands, fields, forest land, fresh and salt water marshes, and other wetlands, ocean, river, stream, lake, and pond frontage, beaches, dunes, and other coastal lands, lands to protect scenic vistas, land for wildlife or nature preserve, and land for recreational use. "Historic structures and landscapes" shall include a building, structure, vessel, or real property that is listed or eligible for listing on the state register of historic places or has been determined by the Historical Commission to be significant in the history, archeology, architecture, or culture of the City. "Affordable housing" shall include low and moderate income housing for individuals and families, including low and moderate income senior housing. "Low income housing" shall mean housing for those persons and families whose annual income is less than 80 per cent of the areawide median income. "Moderate income housing" shall mean housing for those persons and families whose annual income is less than 100 per cent of the areawide median income. "Low or moderate income housing for seniors" shall mean housing for those persons having reached the age of 60 or over who would qualify for low or moderate income housing. "Areawide median income" shall be the areawide median income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. "Recreational use" shall mean active or passive recreational use including but not limited to, the use of land for community gardens, trails, and noncommercial youth and adult sports, and the use of land as a park, playground, or athletic field, but shall not include horse or dog racing or the use of land for a stadium, gymnasium, or similar structure. 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
2.122.030 - Membership—Appointment-Term 
A.  The committee shall consist of nine members. The Committee shall be appointed by the City Manager. Five of the members shall be appointed as required by the Community Preservation Act, M.G.L. c. 44B, §5, along with four additional members. 
B.  The members shall be appointed for terms of five years. 
C.  If any appointed Committee Member misses half of the scheduled meetings of the Committee during any calendar year, the absences of the Committee Member shall be reviewed by the Chair and the Chair shall recommend appropriate action to the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
2.122.040 - Officers-Quorum—Rules and Regulations—Committees 
A.  The Committee shall elect one of its members as Chair. In the event a Chair is unavailable, the most senior member of the Committee shall chair the Committee. 
B.  Five members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose convening a meeting and of conducting the business of the Committee. The Committee shall approve its actions by majority vote. 
C.  All records of the Committee shall be public except as provided by State law. 
D.  Committee Members shall serve without compensation but reasonable per diem and necessary expense reimbursement shall be paid out of the budget of the Committee. 
E.  Committee Members shall be classified as special municipal employees for the purpose of Chapter 268A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
2.122.050 - Powers and duties 
The Committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the City regarding community preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing municipal boards, including the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, the Planning Board, and the Housing Authority, in conducting such studies. As part of its study, the Committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the City regarding community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
The Committee shall make recommendations to the City Manager for transmittal to the City Council for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space, for the acquisition and preservation of historic resources, for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use, for the acquisition, creation, preservation and support of affordable housing, and for rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic resources, land for recreational use, and affordable housing that is acquired or created in accordance with the provisions of the Community Preservation Act. With respect to affordable housing, the Committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites. 
The Committee may include in its recommendations a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community preservation. 
Recommendations shall include their anticipated costs. 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
2.122.060 - Effective Date 
Following City Council approval, this Chapter shall take effect immediately upon acceptance by the voters of §§3 through 7 of Chapter 44B of the General Laws, known as the Community Preservation Act. 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
2.122.070 - Applicability 
The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted and applied at all times consistently with the provisions of Chapter 44B of the General Laws and all provisions of any relevant general or special act. 
(Ord. 1254, Added, 11/19/2001)  
Chapter 2.123 - CAMBRIDGE COMMISSION ON IMMIGRANT RIGHTS AND CITIZENSHIP 
 
2.123.010 - Established 
A.  There shall be a Cambridge Commission on Immigrant Rights and Citizenship. 
B.  The Commission shall be considered a department of the City, with all the rights and responsibilities thereof. The Executive Director of the Commission shall be considered the Department Head. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
2.123.020 - Membership - Appointment - Term 
A.  The Commission shall consist of eleven members, all of whom shall be appointed initially by the City Manager to serve the following terms: 
1.  Three members shall serve for a one year term; 
2.  Four members shall serve for a two-year term; 
3.  Four members shall serve for three-year term. 
After the initial terms, all Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. 
B.  If any Commissioner misses three unexcused meetings of the Commission during a calendar year, that Commissioner's position may be declared vacant by the city Manager upon the Commission's certification of such absences to the City Manager. 
C.  After the initial appointments, subsequent members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Manager from recommendations provided by the Commission. The Commission shall consult with recognized groups working for immigrant rights and citizenship to obtain names of qualified candidates. These groups may include but are not limited to Asian American Citizens Association, Centro Presente, Concilio Hispano, Massachusetts Alliance of Portuguese Speakers, The Haitian Coalition, and Massachusetts Immigrant and Refugee Advocacy Coalition. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled as soon as practicable. If a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term, an appointment of a qualified candidate shall be made for the remainder of the term as soon as practicable. 
D.  The Commission, to the extent practicable, shall be representative of all socio-economic and racial/ethnic segments of the City. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
2.123.030 - Membership - Qualifications 
A.  All prospective Commissioners shall be knowledgeable about immigrant rights and citizenship. 
B.  Commissioners must be residents of the City of Cambridge at the time of appointment. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
2.123.040 - Election of Chairperson - Adoption of bylaws 
The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members. The Commission may adopt rules of procedure for the Commission, which shall be reviewed and approved by the City Solicitor prior to adoption. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
2.123.050 - Executive Director - Appointment - Term 
A.  There shall be an Executive Director of the Commission on Immigrant Rights and Citizenship whose selection and length of employment shall be determined by the City Manager with the advice of the Commission. 
B.  The prospective Executive Director of the Commission shall have demonstrated administrative expertise, a background of direct participation in immigrant rights and citizenship, and the ability to work cooperatively with persons of various socio-economic backgrounds and of every national origin, race, sex, age and sexual preference. 
C.  The Executive Director shall have adequate staff assistance. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
2.123.060 - Function and Purpose 
It shall be the function of the Commission to: 
A.  Act as a centralizing force in the City which will deal with immigrant rights and citizenship issues providing information, referral, guidance, coordination, offering and providing technical assistance to other public agencies and private persons, organizations and institutions engaged in activities and programs intended to support immigrant rights and citizenship and eliminate prejudice and discrimination against immigrants because of their status as immigrants and non citizens. 
B.  Take such action as the Commission considers appropriate to ensure the equal status of immigrants of every national origin, race, sex, age and sexual preference. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
2.123.070 - Powers and Duties 
The powers and duties of the commission shall include the following: 
A.  To inform the City Manager and the City Council on issues affecting the equal status of immigrants in education, employment, healthcare, housing, political, social and legal spheres; 
B.  To design and implement programs that promote the equality of all immigrants in the City: 
C.  To design and implement programs to encourage and maintain the cultural diversity immigrants bring to the City 
D.  To develop recommendations and recommend policy to the City Manager and the City Council to promote and ensure immigrant rights and citizenship. 
E.  To coordinate activities and education within the City on issues affecting immigrants. 
F.  To monitor the enactment of city, state and federal legislation which promotes immigrant rights and citizenship and make recommendations to the City Manager and the City Council regarding the implementation and enforcement of any such legislation if enacted. 
G.  To monitor enactment of state and federal legislation which would restrict immigrant rights and citizenship and advise on same to the City Manager and the City Council and recommend appropriate courses of action in connection therewith. 
H.  Such other powers and duties as may be agreed on by the City Manager and the Commission. 
(Ord. 1295, Added, 06/12/2006)  
Chapter 2.125 - CAMBRIDGE LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, TRANSGENDER, QUEER, PLUS (LGBTQ+) COMMISSION 
 
2.125.010 - Established. 
The Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Commission was created as a result of a City Council Order that was adopted on February 22, 2004 and became operational with regularly scheduled meetings in 2005. The name of the Ordinance is hereby changed to the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Plus Commission and shall also be known as the "LGBTQ+" Commission. 
( Ord. 1388 , 2/13/2017; 1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
2.125.020 - Function and Purpose. 
It shall be the function of the Commission to: 
A.  Advocate for a culture of respect and monitor progress toward equality of all persons with regard to sexual orientation and gender identity and expression. 
B.  Promote policies and practices that have a positive effect on the health, welfare, and safety of all persons who live, visit or work in the City with respect to sexual orientation and gender identity and expression. 
( Ord. 1388 , 2/13/2017; 1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
2.125.030 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Commission shall consist of not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) members, each of whom shall be appointed by the City Manager. 
B.  The term for each Commissioner shall be three (3) years. Commissioners may be reappointed for additional three-year terms. 
C.  Upon the enactment of this ordinance the currently serving Commissioners shall have the length of their remaining respective terms determined as set forth below: 
1.  one-third of the Commissioners shall have one (1) year remaining on their term; 
2.  one-third of the Commissioners shall have two (2) years remaining on their term; 
3.  one-third of the Commissioners terms shall expire. 
D.  If any Commissioner is absent without excuse from three (3) meetings of the Commission during a calendar year, the City Manager shall have authority to declare that position vacant and appoint a replacement. 
E.  After the initial appointments, subsequent members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Manager, recruited by way of any and all means available to the City Manager, including recommendations provided by the Commission. The Commission shall consult with recognized groups working for the equal status and protection of the rights and well-being of LGBTQ+ individuals to obtain names of qualified candidates. Best efforts shall be made to fill vacancies on the Commission not later than sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs, and to make appointments if a vacancy occurs prior to the expiration of the member's term for the remainder of the term. 
F.  The Commission, to the extent practicable, shall be representative of all socio-economic, age, racial, ability and gender-identifying segments of the City as well as different neighborhoods. 
G.  A quorum is a majority of the number of members serving on the Commission. 
( Ord. 1388 , 2/13/2017; Ord. 1346, 2/13/2012; 1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
2.125.040 - Membership—Qualifications. 
A.  All prospective Commissioners shall be knowledgeable about the rights of LGBTQ+ individuals. 
B.  Commissioners shall be either residents or individuals whose place of work is in the City at the time of appointment. If a Commissioner ceases to be a resident of the City or ceases to work in the City during his or her term, the Commissioner may remain on the Commission until the City Manager appoints a suitable candidate to fill the position. 
C.  Elected officials in Municipal, State, or Federal government shall not be eligible to be Commissioners. 
( Ord. 1388 , 2/13/2017; 1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
2.125.050 - Executive Director—Appointment—Term. 
A.  There shall be an Executive Director of the LGBTQ+ Commission whose selection and conditions of employment shall be determined by the City Manager with advice of the Commission, subject to appropriation. The Executive Director shall be responsible for the daily administration of the Commission. 
B.  The prospective Executive Director of the Commission shall have demonstrated administrative expertise, a background of direct participation in the advancement of LGBTQ+ interests as well as the promotion of issues of social justice, and the ability to work with LGBTQ+ individuals of various socioeconomic backgrounds, races, national origins, gender identities, ages and abilities. 
C.  The Executive Director shall have adequate and appropriate staff assistance, subject to appropriation. 
D.  The Executive Director shall attend Commission meetings. The Executive Director shall not serve as a voting member of the Commission's regularly scheduled meetings. 
( Ord. 1388 , 2/13/2017; 1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
2.125.060 - Election of Chairperson(s)—Adoption of By-laws. 
The Commission shall elect two (2) Co-Chairpersons from among its members. Elected Co-Chairpersons shall each serve for a term of one (1) year. The Commission may adopt operational rules of procedure for the Commission, which shall be reviewed and approved by the City Solicitor prior to adoption. 
(1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
2.125.070 - Powers and Duties. 
The Powers and duties of the Commission shall include the following: 
A.  To hold at least six (6) regular meetings throughout the calendar year and to conduct additional meetings as necessary; 
B.  To cooperate with City departments, divisions and agencies to obtain necessary information to carry out the functions, purposes, programs and activities of the Commission; 
C.  To ensure the equal status and protection of the rights and well-being of all LGBTQ+ individuals residing or working in the City; 
D.  To design and implement programs that promote and sustain equality for all LGBTQ+ individuals residing or working in the City; 
E.  To assist in public awareness of LGBTQ+ issues and concerns through participation in public and media events including City-sponsored recreational, education and development activities; 
F.  To develop policy recommendations to the City Manager and the City Council to promote and ensure the rights of LGBTQ+ individuals; 
G.  To initiate, coordinate and monitor legislation which promotes the equal status and protection of rights and well-being of all LGBTQ+ individuals and make recommendations to the City Manager and the City Council regarding the implementation and enforcement of any such legislation if enacted; 
H.  Such other tasks that may be agreed upon by the City Manager and the Commission. 
( Ord. 1388 , 2/13/2017; 1309, Added, 10/29/2007)  
Chapter 2.126 - DATA ORDINANCE 
 
2.126.010 - Title and Purpose. 
A.  This chapter shall be known as the "Open Data Ordinance." The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure that, in an increasingly technological age, the City of Cambridge (the "City") is committed to providing the public with a high level of transparency, engagement and collaboration in City government. 
B.  The City shall make reasonable efforts to make the open data available, on a schedule determined by the City Manager. 
C.  The City anticipates that making government data open in easy to find and usable formats will create effective and meaningful opportunities for the City and members of the public to work collaboratively to generate new ideas to solve complex challenges. An open data initiative will allow a more diverse body of expertise to develop new analyses, insights and findings that will allow the City to provide more efficient and effective government services. 
D.  This initiative must be balanced with the City's obligation to protect private and confidential information and to ensure public safety and security, and the need to conduct City operations in an efficient and effective manner. 
(Ord. 1370, 9/21/2015)  
2.126.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "API" shall mean an application programming interface that specifies how software components should interact with each other. 
B.  "Data" or "data sets" shall mean a collection of final versions of relevant statistical, factual, geographical, or other information: 
1.  Collected in an alphanumeric form reflected in a list, table, graph, chart, or similar form that can be digitally transmitted or processed; 
2.  Regularly created or maintained by or on behalf of and owned by the City that records a measurement, transaction, or determination related to the business of the City; 
3.  Includes metadata, if available, consistent with core metadata standards at a level of granularity recommended by the Open Data Review Board (defined below) and a description of the methods used in creating the data or data set, including a comprehensive list of sources; 
4.  Maintained in a manner that is machine readable. 
Data or data sets shall not include protected data (defined below) or information provided to the City by other governmental entities. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the City from voluntarily disclosing information not otherwise defined in this section as "data" or "data sets," including, when appropriate, narrative in machine readable text, as long it is not protected data. 
C.  "ITD" means the City's Information Technology Department. 
D.  "Machine readable" means in a format that is reasonably structured to allow automated processing. 
E.  "Massachusetts Public Records Law" shall mean M.G.L. c. 4, § 7(26), M.G.L. c. 66, § 10, and 950 CMR 32. 
F.  "Protected data" means any data or data set: 
1.  That is exempt from disclosure pursuant to Massachusetts Laws, including but not limited to the Massachusetts Public Records Law; or 
2.  That contains a significant amount of data and where the disclosure of such data would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; or 
3.  That reflects the internal deliberative or administrative process(es) of the City, including, but not limited to, data and data sets relating to negotiating positions, future procurements or pending or reasonably anticipated legal or administrative proceedings; or 
4.  That is subject to privacy laws, student records laws or subject to copyright, patent, trademark or trade secret protection, or to a confidentiality agreement, attorney/client privilege or that are otherwise protected by law or contract; or 
5.  That includes or constitutes proprietary applications, computer code, software, operating systems or similar materials; or 
6.  That includes or constitutes employment records, internal employee-related directories or lists, facilities data, information technology, or internal service-desk data of the City; or 
7.  Which, if disclosed by the City, might in the City's discretion, raise privacy, confidentiality or security concerns or jeopardize or have the potential to jeopardize public health, safety or welfare. 
G.  "Open Data Review Board" refers to a board established by the City Manager to develop, under the direction of the City Manager, rules and standards for implementation of an open data policy. 
H.  "Open data" shall mean all data or data Sets that the City makes accessible to the public pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 1370, 9/21/2015)  
2.126.030 - Data Accessibility. 
A.  For the purpose of identifying which data or data sets shall be made accessible as open data, the City shall consider whether the information in the data or data set: 
1.  Improves public knowledge of the operations of the City or furthers the goals of the City; or 
2.  Increases City accountability, efficiency, responsiveness or delivery of services; or 
3.  Makes available data frequently requested by the public or City departments; or 
4.  Adds to the public knowledge about the City. 
B.  Such efforts shall be consistent with the rules and standards established by the City Manager and with applicable laws, including Massachusetts Public Records Law and all applicable privacy, confidentiality, security, accessibility and student records laws and otherwise legally confidentially and/or privileged information. 
C.  The disclosure of protected data shall be prohibited. 
D.  Data or data sets shall be updated in a reasonable manner, using automated processes to update data when possible, including real-time data when appropriate, to preserve the integrity and usefulness of the data or data sets. 
(Ord. 1370, 9/21/2015)  
2.126.040 - Public Data Access. 
A.  The ITD shall provide and manage a website to make open data and data sets accessible to the public. The website will include information of all available open data and data sets. This information additionally shall be available in a machine readable format. 
B.  Open data and data sets will be accessible to external search capabilities. 
C.  Open data or data sets shall be free of charge. Open data or data sets will be accessible without the use of a user account or password. The open data review board shall recommend to the City Manager whether alternative methods of accessing the open data or data sets (such as API) should require authentication. 
(Ord. 1370, 9/21/2015)  
2.126.050 - Procurement. 
The City Manager will make best efforts to ensure that relevant new software purchased by the City includes capabilities that allow the City to comply with this chapter when fiscally and operationally attainable, as determined by the City Manager. The City shall stipulate in contracts and agreements with external vendors, where appropriate, provisions to ensure that the City retains ownership of all City data, and that all data, except protected data produced by vendors, meet the definition of open data. 
(Ord. 1370, 9/21/2015)  
2.126.060 - Open Data Review Board Established—Standards and Compliance. 
A.  An Open Data Review Board will be established by the City Manager within one hundred and twenty days from the effective date of this chapter, to recommend to the City Manager rules and standards for implementation of an open data policy, including a means by which to determine the data or data sets that are appropriate for public accessibility and a timeline for policy implementation. When reviewing which data or data sets are suitable for accessibility, the Open Data Review Board shall make recommendations to the City Manager about what data or data sets are appropriate to be made accessible. The Open Data Review Board will be comprised of no fewer than five members selected by the City Manager, including at least three members of the public selected by the City Manager for a two-year term and at least one representative from the ITD. The City Manager shall solicit nominations for members of the Review Board and shall make public member appointments from the public, private, academic, or nonprofit sectors. The Open Data Review Board shall meet regularly at such times as determined by the City Manager. 
B.  The City Manager will report periodically to the City Council and the public on the status of the implementation of this chapter. This report shall be made available in an open format.  
2.126.070 - Open Data Legal Policy. 
A.  Data or data sets made available on the website are provided for informational purposes only. The City does not warranty the completeness, accuracy, content or fitness for any particular purpose or use of any data or data set made accessible on the website, nor are any such warranties to be implied or inferred with respect to any such data or data sets. 
B.  The City shall not be liable for any deficiencies in the completeness, accuracy, content or fitness for any particular purpose or use of any data or data set, or application utilizing such data or data set provided by the City or any third party. 
C.  This chapter shall not create any private rights or any private right of action to enforce its provisions. Failure to comply with this chapter shall not result in any liability of the City or its employees. 
D.  Any user of open data or data set distributed by the City may modify, use and publish such open data or data set without charge. 
E.  No user shall have intellectual property rights or proprietary interests in the open data or data set, including without limitation any written materials, logos, trademarks, trade names, copyrights, patent applications, patents, know-how, trade secrets or moral rights. No use of this open data or data set shall be deemed to constitute a partnership or joint venture between the user and the City or between a third party and the City. 
(Ord. 1370, 9/21/2015)  
Chapter 2.127 - COMMUNITY BENEFITS ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
2.127.010 - Established. 
There is hereby established a Community Benefits Advisory Committee (the "Committee") to accomplish the purposes set forth herein. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the Committee is to identify community benefits needs of the residents of Cambridge based on the priorities established by the City Council and to solicit and evaluate applications for the provision of said services by qualified applicants in order to make recommendations to the City Manager for the allocation of Community Benefits Funds for the award of grant agreements or contracts for the provision of said services. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.030 - Definitions. 
"Applicant" shall mean a Community Based Organization applying to the City to provide Community Benefits subject to a grant agreement or contract. 
"Application" shall mean a proposal by an Applicant to enter into a grant agreement or contract to provide Community Benefits. 
"Community Based Organization" shall mean a non-profit entity registered pursuant to 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) that provides Community Benefits. 
"Community Benefits" shall mean the provision of programs or services that directly benefit Cambridge residents including but not limited to human services, the arts, cultural enrichment, sustainability measures, public health, housing, educational programs focused on science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics ("STEAM") and other areas of community enrichment provided by Community Based Organizations. 
"Community Benefits Advisory Committee" or "Committee" shall mean the Committee established by this Chapter and appointed by the City Manager. 
"Community Benefits Funds" or "Funds" shall mean any funds offered to and received by the City in connection with the enactment of an amendment to the City's Zoning Ordinance or other agreements entered into with the City which provide funds to the City and are held by the City to be expended for community benefits or other related purposes. 
"Community Benefits Stabilization Fund" or "Stabilization Fund" shall mean a stabilization fund established by the City to hold Community Benefits Funds. 
"Funding Priorities" shall mean funding goals declared by the City Council for the expenditure of Community Benefits Funds in Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.040 - City Council Goalsetting—Appropriations. 
The City Council shall periodically assess the City's Funding Priorities based in part on a needs assessment conducted every three to five years and submitted by the City Manager in order to identify Cambridge's most pressing community benefits needs. In his report, the City Manager shall make recommendations regarding the appropriation of funds to the Stabilization Fund. The City Council may make appropriations to the Stabilization Fund after it receives the City Manager's annual recommendation. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.050 - Powers and Duties of the Committee. 
To carry out its responsibilities under this Chapter, the Committee shall: 
A.  Make recommendations to the City Manager for the award of grant agreements or contracts for Community Benefits to be paid for from the Stabilization Fund consistent with the City Council's Funding Priorities. 
B.  Establish rules, regulations and guidelines to provide for the proper administration and implementation of the Committee's responsibilities in consultation with City staff and as approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.060 - Committee Process. 
The Committee shall conduct a public annual meeting and additional public meetings as needed to accomplish the following: 
A.  Prioritize needs, possibilities and resources regarding Community Benefits based on the City Council's Funding Priorities. Subject to and consistent with the City Council's Funding Priorities, the Committee shall consider the following guiding principles: 
1.  Fund programs or services that directly benefit Cambridge residents. 
2.  Emphasize funding priorities established by the City Council informed by the outcomes of the needs assessment. 
3.  Consider neighborhood(s) impacted by development projects. 
4.  Consider other public resources allocated to a neighborhood in order to better understand unmet needs. 
5.  Prioritize funding for nonprofit applicants that promote collaboration, partnership and collective impact. 
6.  Establish a transparent, inclusive, and collaborative process. 
7.  Provide support and technical assistance to nonprofits in the application process to ensure equal opportunity and access. 
8.  Provide opportunities for renewable grants to returning nonprofit providers that have an excellent performance evaluation record and programmatic success. 
B.  Develop requests for Applications to provide Community Benefits consistent with the City Council's Funding Priorities. 
C.  Evaluate Applications for the provision of Community Benefits. 
1.  The Committee shall not consider Applications requesting expenditures for an Applicant's capital or infrastructure projects or general operational expenses. 
D.  Develop or establish recommendations to the City Manager for the award of a grant agreement or contract for the provision of Community Benefits. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.070 - Membership—Appointment—Term. 
A.  The Committee shall consist of thirteen members appointed by the City Manager, including the City Manager or his or her designee who shall serve as the Chair. 
B.  The members shall be appointed for terms of three years. The term of the City Manager or that of his or her designee and any City staff designees shall not expire. 
C.  The Committee shall be comprised of the following representatives—three members shall be representatives of non-profit organizations that provide services to Cambridge residents; three members shall be City staff designees including the City Manager or his or her designee; four members shall be Cambridge residents, who shall be residents of the City at the time of appointment; one member shall be a representative of the Cambridge Community Foundation; one member shall be a representative of the City's business or property development community; and one member shall be a representative from one of the City's universities or colleges. At least two of the non-profit representatives shall be appointed from a list of at least four nominees provided by the Cambridge Nonprofit Coalition so long as that organization submits said list in a timely fashion. 
D.  If any appointed Committee member misses half of the scheduled meetings of the Committee during any calendar year, the absences of the Committee member shall be reviewed by the Chair and the Chair may recommend dismissal and replacement of such member to the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.080 - Officers—Quorum—Rules and Regulations—Committees. 
A.  The City Manager shall appoint a Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall chair a meeting or meetings in the Chair's absence. 
B.  Seven members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening a meeting and of conducting the business of the Committee. The Committee shall approve its actions by majority vote. 
C.  All records of the Committee shall be public except as provided by State law. 
D.  Committee members shall serve without compensation. 
E.  Committee members shall be classified as special municipal employees for the purpose of Chapter 268A of the Massachusetts General Laws. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
2.127.090 - Effective Date. 
This Chapter shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Ord. 1375, 12/21/2015)  
Chapter 2.128 - SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY ORDINANCE 
 
2.128.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation of Surveillance Technology acquisition or use by the City of Cambridge or the use of the Surveillance Data it provides, to safeguard the right of individuals to privacy, to balance the public's right to privacy with the need to promote and ensure safety and security, to provide protocols for use of Surveillance Technology or Surveillance Data that include specific steps to mitigate potential impacts on the civil rights and liberties of any individuals, communities or groups including communities of color or other marginalized communities in the City, to balance any decision to use Surveillance Technology with an assessment of the costs and protection of privacy, civil liberties and civil rights, to allow for informed public discussion before deploying Surveillance Technology, to provide for transparency, oversight, and accountability, and to minimize the risks posed by use of Surveillance Technology in the City. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.020 - Definitions 
The following definitions apply to this Chapter: 
(A)  "Annual Surveillance Report" means a written report submitted by the City Manager on an annual basis concerning specific Surveillance Technology used by any City department during the previous year and containing the information set forth in Section 2.128.060(B) of this Chapter. 
(B)  "Exigent Circumstances" means the Police Commissioner's or the Police Commissioner's designee's good faith belief that an emergency involving danger of death, physical injury, or significant property damage or loss requires use of the Surveillance Technology or the Surveillance Data it provides. The use of Surveillance Technology in Exigent Circumstances shall not infringe upon an individual's right to peacefully protest and exercise other lawful and protected Constitutional Rights. 
(C)  "Identifiable Individuals" means an individual whose identity can be revealed by data, including Surveillance Data, or revealed by data when it is analyzed and/or combined with any record. 
(D)  "Surveillance" means the act of observing or analyzing the movements, behavior, or actions of Identifiable Individuals. 
(E)  "Surveillance Data" means any electronic data collected, captured, recorded, retained, processed, intercepted, or analyzed by Surveillance Technology acquired by the City or operated at the direction of the City. 
(G)  "Surveillance Technology" means any electronic surveillance device, hardware, or software that is capable of collecting, capturing, recording, retaining, processing, intercepting, analyzing, monitoring, or sharing audio, visual, digital, location, thermal, biometric, or similar information specifically associated with, or capable of being associated with, any Identifiable Individual or group; or any system, device, or vehicle that is equipped with an electronic surveillance device, hardware, or software. 
(1)  "Surveillance Technology" includes, but is not limited to: 
(a)  International Mobile Subscriber Identity ("IMSI") catchers and other cell site simulators; 
(b)  Automatic license plate readers; 
(c)  Electronic toll readers; 
(d)  Closed-circuit television cameras except as otherwise provided herein; 
(e)  Biometric Surveillance Technology, including facial, voice, iris, and gait-recognition software and databases; 
(f)  Mobile DNA capture technology; 
(g)  Gunshot detection and location hardware and services; 
(h)  X-ray vans; 
(i)  Video and audio monitoring and/or recording technology, such as surveillance cameras and wearable body cameras; 
(j)  Surveillance enabled or capable lightbulbs or light fixtures; 
(k)  Tools, including software and hardware, used to gain unauthorized access to a computer, computer service, or computer network; 
(l)  Social media monitoring software; 
(m)  Through-the-wall radar or similar imaging technology; 
(n)  Passive scanners of radio networks; 
(o)  Long-range Bluetooth and other wireless-scanning devices; 
(p)  Radio-frequency identification (RFID) scanners; and 
(q)  Software designed to integrate or analyze data from Surveillance Technology, including surveillance target tracking and predictive policing software. 
(2)  For the purposes of this Chapter, "Surveillance Technology" does not include the following devices or hardware, unless they have been equipped with, or are modified to become or include, a Surveillance Technology as defined above: 
(a)  Routine office hardware, such as televisions, computers, and printers, that are in widespread public use and will not be used for any surveillance or surveillance-related functions; 
(b)  Parking Ticket Devices ("PTDs") and related databases; 
(c)  Manually-operated, non-wearable, handheld digital cameras, audio recorders, and video recorders that are not designed to be used surreptitiously and whose functionality is used for manually capturing and manually downloading video and/or audio recordings; 
(d)  Surveillance devices that cannot record or transmit audio or video or be remotely accessed, such as image stabilizing binoculars or night vision goggles; 
(e)  City databases that do not and will not contain any Surveillance Data or other information collected, captured, recorded, retained, processed, intercepted, or analyzed by Surveillance Technology; 
(f)  Manually-operated technological devices that are used primarily for internal City communications and are not designed to surreptitiously collect Surveillance Data, such as radios and email systems; 
(g)  Parking access and revenue control systems, including proximity card readers and transponder readers at City-owned or controlled parking garages; and 
(h)  Electronic card readers and key fobs used by City employees and other authorized persons for access to City-owned or controlled buildings and property. 
(H)  "Surveillance Technology Impact Report" means a written report submitted by the City Manager with a request for approval of acquisition or use of Surveillance Technology, and which includes, at a minimum, the requirements set forth in Section 2.128.030(C). 
(I)  "Surveillance Use Policy" means a policy for the City's use of Surveillance Technology, approved by the City Solicitor and the City Manager, and submitted by the City Manager to and approved by the City Council. The Surveillance Use Policy shall at a minimum satisfy the requirements set forth in Subsection 2.128.050(B). 
(J)  "Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy" means a policy governing the City's use of a specific Surveillance Technology not already covered under the City's Surveillance Use Policy, approved by the City Solicitor and the City Manager, and submitted by the City Manager to the City Council with a Surveillance Technology Impact Report under Section 2.128.030(A), 2.128.030(B), or 2.128.040 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.030 - Submission to the City Council of Surveillance Technology Impact Report and Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy. 
The City Manager must seek approval from the City Council as set forth in this Section prior to the City seeking funds for, acquiring, using or entering into an agreement to acquire, share or otherwise use, Surveillance Technology as defined in this Chapter. 
(A)  Acquisition of Surveillance Technology by City Departments Other than the Police Department. For any department other than the Police Department, for which approval under Section 2.128.030 of this Chapter is sought, the City Manager must submit to the City Council a Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy pertaining to the specific Surveillance Technology for which approval is sought and obtain City Council approval before doing any of the following: 
(1)  Seeking funds for Surveillance Technology, including but not limited to, applying for a grant, or accepting state or federal funds, or in-kind or other donations; 
(2)  Acquiring new Surveillance Technology, including but not limited to procuring that Surveillance Technology without the exchange of monies or other consideration; 
(3)  Using Surveillance Technology for a purpose, in a manner, or in a location not previously approved; or 
(4)  Entering into an agreement with a non-City entity to acquire, share, or otherwise use Surveillance Technology or the Surveillance Data it provides. 
(B)  Acquisition of Surveillance Technology by the Police Department. Other than with respect to Surveillance Technology limited to use in Exigent Circumstances in law enforcement investigations and prosecutions as specifically defined in Section 2.128.040 of this Chapter, the City Manager must submit a Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy pertaining to the specific Surveillance Technology for which approval is sought to the City Council and obtain City Council approval, before doing any of the following: 
(1)  Seeking funds for Surveillance Technology, including but not limited to, applying for a grant, or accepting state or federal funds, or in-kind or other donations; 
(2)  Acquiring new Surveillance Technology, including but not limited to procuring that technology without the exchange of monies or other consideration; 
(3)  Using Surveillance Technology for a purpose, in a manner, or in a location not previously approved; or 
(4)  Entering into an agreement with a non-City entity to acquire, share, or otherwise use Surveillance Technology. 
(C)  Contents of Surveillance Technology Impact Report. A Surveillance Technology Impact Report submitted pursuant to Subsections (A) or (B) above shall include all of the following: 
(1)  Information describing the Surveillance Technology and how it works; 
(2)  Information on the proposed purpose(s) for the Surveillance Technology; 
(3)  The location(s) it may be deployed and when; 
(4)  The potential impact(s) on privacy in the City; the potential impact on the civil rights and liberties of any individuals, communities or groups, including, but not limited to, communities of color or other marginalized communities in the City, and a description of whether there is a plan to address the impact(s); 
(5)  The fiscal costs for the Surveillance Technology, including initial purchase, personnel and other ongoing costs, and any current or potential sources of funding; and 
(6)  If necessary, a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy. 
(D)  Contents of Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy. A Technology Specific Surveillance Use Policy submitted under Subsections (A) or (B) above or Section 2.178.040 below shall not conflict with any provision of the City's Surveillance Use Policy. To the extent a conflict arises between the provisions of the City's Surveillance Use Policy and a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy, the City's Surveillance Use Policy shall govern. A Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy submitted under Subsections (A) or (B) above or Section 2.178.040 below shall include all of the following: 
(1)  Purpose: The specific purpose(s) for the Surveillance Technology; 
(2)  Authorized Use: The uses that are authorized, the rules and processes required before that use, and the uses that are prohibited; 
(3)  Data Collection: The Surveillance Data that can be collected by the Surveillance Technology; 
(4)  Data Access: The individuals who can access or use the collected Surveillance Data, and the rules and processes required before access or use of the information; 
(5)  Data Protection: The safeguards that protect information from unauthorized access, including, but not limited to, encryption, access-control, and access-oversight mechanisms; 
(6)  Data Retention: The time period, if any, for which information collected by the Surveillance Technology will be routinely retained, the reason that retention period is appropriate to further the purpose(s), the process by which the information is regularly deleted after that period has elapsed, and the conditions that must be met to retain information beyond that period; 
(7)  Public Access: If and how collected Surveillance Data can be accessed by members of the public, including criminal defendants; 
(8)  Third-Party Data-Sharing: If and how other City or non-City entities can access or use the Surveillance Data, including any required justification and legal standard necessary to do so, and any obligation(s) imposed on the recipient of the Surveillance Data; 
(9)  Training: The training, if any, required for any individual authorized to use the Surveillance Technology or to access information collected by the Surveillance Technology, including whether there are training materials; and 
(10)  Oversight: The mechanisms to ensure that the Surveillance Use Policy is followed, including, but not limited to, identifying personnel assigned to ensure compliance with the policy, internal record keeping of the use of the technology or access to information collected by the Surveillance Technology, technical measures to monitor for misuse, any independent person or entity with oversight authority, and the sanctions for violations of the policy. 
(E)  In approving, and/or disapproving any acquisition of Surveillance Technology, the City Council shall consider the safeguarding of individuals' right to privacy as well as the investigative and prosecutorial functions of the Police Department and promoting and ensuring the safety and security of the general public. 
(F)  Any Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy submitted to the City Council under Section 2.128.030(A) or 2.128.030(B) shall be made publicly available no fewer than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the Council meeting where it shall be discussed. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.040 - Temporary Acquisition and Use of Surveillance Technology in Exigent Circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, the Police Department may temporarily acquire or temporarily use Surveillance Technology in Exigent Circumstances for a period not to exceed 90 days without following the provisions of this Chapter before that acquisition or use. However, if the Police Department acquires or uses Surveillance Technology in Exigent Circumstances under this Section, the Police Commissioner must (1) report that acquisition or use to the City Council in writing within 90 days following the end of those Exigent Circumstances; (2) submit a Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy to the City Council regarding that Surveillance Technology within 90 days following the end of those Exigent Circumstances; and (3) include that Surveillance Technology in the Police Department's next Annual Surveillance Report to the City Council following the end of those Exigent Circumstances. If the Police Commissioner is unable to meet the 90-day timeline to submit a Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy to the City Council, the Police Commissioner may notify the City Council in writing requesting to extend this period. The City Council may grant extensions beyond the original 90-day timeline to submit a Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, a Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy. Any Surveillance Technology Impact Report, and, if necessary, Technology-Specific Surveillance Use Policy submitted to the City Council under this Section shall be made publicly available no fewer than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the Council meeting where it shall be discussed. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.050 - Submission to the City Council of Surveillance Use Policy. 
(A)  The City Manager shall submit to the City Council for its review and approval a proposed Surveillance Use Policy applicable to each City department that possesses or uses Surveillance Technology before the effective date of this Chapter or for future use and acquisition of Surveillance Technology, no later than one-hundred eighty (180) days following the effective date of this Chapter, for review and approval by the City Council. If the City Manager is unable to meet this 180-day timeline, the City Manager may notify the City Council in writing requesting to extend this period. The City Council may grant an extension to the City Manager to submit a proposed Surveillance Use Policy. Any Surveillance Use Policy submitted under Section 2.128.050 shall be made publicly available no fewer than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the Council meeting where it shall be discussed. 
(B)  A Surveillance Use Policy shall at a minimum specify the following: 
(1)  Purpose: The specific purpose(s) for the Surveillance Technology; 
(2)  Authorized Use: The uses that are authorized, the rules and processes required before that use, and the uses that are prohibited; 
(3)  Data Collection: The Surveillance Data that can be collected by the Surveillance Technology; 
(4)  Data Access: The individuals who can access or use the collected Surveillance Data, and the rules and processes required before access or use of the information; 
(5)  Data Protection: The safeguards that protect information from unauthorized access, including, but not limited to, encryption, access-control, and access-oversight mechanisms; 
(6)  Data Retention: The time period, if any, for which information collected by the Surveillance Technology will be routinely retained, the reason that retention period is appropriate to further the purpose(s), the process by which the information is regularly deleted after that period has elapsed, and the conditions that must be met to retain information beyond that period; 
(7)  Public Access: If and how collected Surveillance Data can be accessed by members of the public, including criminal defendants; 
(8)  Third-Party Data-Sharing: If and how other City or non-City entities can access or use the Surveillance Data, including any required justification and legal standard necessary to do so, and any obligation(s) imposed on the recipient of the Surveillance Data; 
(9)  Training: The training, if any, required for any individual authorized to use the Surveillance Technology or to access information collected by the Surveillance Technology, including whether there are training materials; and 
(10)  Oversight: The mechanisms to ensure that the Surveillance Use Policy is followed, including, but not limited to, identifying personnel assigned to ensure compliance with the policy, internal record keeping of the use of the technology or access to information collected by the Surveillance Technology, technical measures to monitor for misuse, any independent person or entity with oversight authority, and the sanctions for violations of the policy. 
(C)  In considering the Surveillance Use Policy, the City Council shall balance the safeguarding of individuals' right to privacy as well as the investigative and prosecutorial function of the Police Department and promoting and ensuring the safety and security of the general public. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.060 - Submission to the City Council of Annual Surveillance Report. 
(A)  Within twelve (12) months of City Council approval, and annually thereafter on or before March 1, the City Manager must submit an Annual Surveillance Report pertaining to each City department for which approval for the use of Surveillance Technology or Surveillance Data has been obtained under Section 2.128.030 or Section 2.128.040 of this Chapter. Any Annual Surveillance Report submitted under this section shall be made publicly available no fewer than seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the Council meeting where it shall be discussed. 
(B)  The Annual Surveillance Report submitted pursuant to this Section shall include all of the following: 
(1)  A description of how the Surveillance Technology has been used, including whether it captured images, sound, or information regarding members of the public who are not suspected of engaging in unlawful conduct; 
(2)  Whether and how often data acquired through the use of the Surveillance Technology was shared with outside entities, the name of any recipient entity, the type(s) of data disclosed, under what legal standard(s) the information was disclosed, and the justification for the disclosure; 
(3)  A summary of community complaints or concerns about the Surveillance Technology, if any; 
(4)  The results of any non-privileged internal audits, any information about violations of the Surveillance Use Policy, and any actions taken in response; 
(5)  Whether the Surveillance Technology has been effective at achieving its identified purpose; 
(6)  Statistics on public records requests received by the City seeking documents concerning Surveillance Technology approved during the previous year; 
(7)  Total annual costs for the Surveillance Technology, including personnel and other ongoing costs, and what source of funding will fund the technology in the coming year; and 
(8)  Whether the civil rights and liberties of any communities or groups, including communities of color or other marginalized communities in the City are disproportionately impacted by the deployment of the Surveillance Technology. 
(C)  Based upon information provided in the Annual Surveillance Report, the City Council shall determine whether the benefits to the impacted City department(s) and the community of the Surveillance Technology outweigh the financial and operational costs and whether reasonable safeguards exist to address reasonable concerns regarding privacy, civil liberties, and civil rights impacted by deployment of the Surveillance Technology. If the benefits or reasonably anticipated benefits do not outweigh the financial and/or operational costs or civil liberties or civil rights are not reasonably safeguarded, the City Council may (1) recommend modifications to the Surveillance Use Policy that are designed to address the City Council's concerns to the City Manager for his consideration; and/or (2) request a report back from the City Manager regarding steps taken to address the City Council's concerns; and/or (3) disapprove further use of the Surveillance Technology. 
(D)  No later than May 31 of each year, the City Council shall hold a meeting to discuss the City departments' Annual Surveillance Reports, and shall publicly release a report that includes a summary of all requests for approval of Surveillance Technology Impact Reports received by the City Council during the prior year pursuant to Section 2.128.030 or Section 2.128.040 of this Chapter, including whether the City Council approved, disapproved, or required modifications to the Surveillance Technology Impact Report. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.070 - Exemptions and Exceptions. 
(A)  Exemptions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following Surveillance Technology is exempt from the requirements of this Chapter: 
(1)  Surveillance Data acquired where the individual knowingly and voluntarily consented to provide the information, such as submitting personal information for the receipt of City services; 
(2)  Surveillance Data acquired where the individual was presented with a clear and conspicuous opportunity to opt out of providing the information; 
(3)  Cameras installed pursuant to state law authorization in or on any vehicle or along a public right-of-way solely to record traffic violations; 
(4)  Cameras installed on City property solely for security purposes, including closed circuit television cameras installed by the City to monitor entryways and outdoor areas of City-owned or controlled buildings and property for the purpose of controlling access, maintaining the safety of City employees and visitors to City buildings, and protecting City property; 
(5)  Security cameras including closed circuit television cameras installed by the City to monitor cashiers' windows and other cash-handling operations and to maintain the safety of City employees and visitors to such areas; 
(6)  Cameras installed solely to protect the physical integrity of City infrastructure; or 
(7)  Technology that monitors only City employees in response to complaints of wrongdoing or in order to prevent waste, fraud, or abuse of City resources. 
(B)  Exceptions. The following situations constitute Surveillance, but are exceptions to the requirements of this Chapter: 
(1)  Surveillance conducted pursuant to a warrant using previously approved Surveillance Technology. Surveillance conducted pursuant to a warrant using previously approved Surveillance Technology is excepted from the requirements of 2.128.030(B) and 2.128.060 where: i) the City is prohibited from publicly releasing information pertaining to the surveillance under federal or state law, or pursuant to a Court Order; or ii) the Police Commissioner has determined that the release of information pertaining to the surveillance would compromise public safety and security, provided that the information is released in the next Annual Surveillance Report following the Police Commissioner's determination that public safety and security concerns pertaining to the release of such information no longer exist. 
(2)  A City department head may, with the approval of the City Manager, apply a technical patch or upgrade that is necessary to mitigate threats to the City's environment. The department shall not use the new surveillance capabilities of the technology until the requirements of Section 2.128.030 are met, unless the City Manager determines that the use is unavoidable; in that case, the City Manager shall request City Council approval as soon as possible. The request shall include a report to the City Council of how the altered surveillance capabilities were used since the time of the upgrade. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.080 - Enforcement. 
(A)  Enforcement Officials. This Chapter shall be enforced by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
(B)  Violation. Any person injured by a violation of this Chapter may institute proceedings for injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or a court order in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Any action initiated under this Subsection (B) shall be brought against the City of Cambridge, but not against City employees. No monetary damages shall be allowed in any legal proceeding for any alleged injuries arising out of any alleged violation(s) of this Chapter. 
(C)  Whistleblower Protections. Subject to the limitations and requirements set forth in G. L. c. 149, § 185 (the "Massachusetts Whistleblower Statute" or "Section 185") as it may be amended from time to time, any City employee as defined in Section 185 who reports an alleged violation of this Ordinance, shall be afforded protections against retaliation if applicable pursuant to Section 185, as set forth in and subject to the limitations and requirements of Section 185. 
(D)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to limit or affect any individual's rights under state or federal laws. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.090 - Severability. 
The provisions in this Chapter are severable. If any part or provision of this Chapter, or the application of this Chapter to any person or circumstance, is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected by such holding and shall continue to have full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
2.128.100 - Effective Date. 
This Chapter shall take effect nine months after its adoption. 
(Ord. 1402, 12/10/2018)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - APPROPRIATIONS, EXPENDITURES AND ACCOUNTS 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Accounting of receipts. 
The several boards and City officers, who shall in their official capacity receive any money whether for payment of fees, services or otherwise, shall keep a detailed record of all money so received, and the purposes for which the money was paid, which book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Committee of Finance, and all boards and City officers shall pay to the Treasurer weekly all money so received. All such boards and City officers shall, before making such payment, make a true return to the Auditor, stating the account upon which such moneys were received. All other persons, who shall at any time have money in their possession belonging to the City, shall forthwith pay the same to the Treasurer. 
(Prior code § 2-178)  
3.04.020 - Expenditures—Appropriation required. 
No board or officer in charge of a department shall, unless specially authorized thereto by statute, make any expenditure or incure any liability on behalf of the City for any purpose until an appropriation sufficient to meet such expenditure or liability together with all other expenditures and liabilities which he or it proposes to make, and which are properly chargeable to the same appropriation, has been made therefor; nor shall he or it exceed any specific appropriation made for his department, nor shall any officer or member of a board, unless thereto authorized by the City Manager or City Council, apply for, object to, or advocate before the Legislature any special act relating to the City. 
(Prior code § 2-187)  
3.04.030 - Expenditures—Annual departmental estimates. 
Every board or officer in charge of a department shall, annually, during January, send to the City Manager an estimate in detail of the approprations which will be required to enable the department to perform its duties and works during the next financial year and also an estimate of all income to be received from any source by the department during the year. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-189)  
3.04.040 - Annual report of departmental expenses. 
All boards or officers in charge of departments, except the City Auditor, shall present to the City Manager annually, on or before July 10th, a departmental report showing in detail the expenses of the departments, the material and other property on hand, and an account of the work performed, and any other facts and recommendations which may be deemed advisable. The City Auditor shall present his annual report to the City Manager during the month of July. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 2-190)  
Chapter 3.08 - BRIDGE CHARITABLE FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Designated—Disposition of revenues. 
The fund given to the City by the late Levi Bridge shall be called the "Bridge Charitable Fund," and the income therefrom shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of his deed of trust. 
(Prior code § 2-207)  
3.08.020 - Trustees—Designated. 
The Mayor, the City Manager and the Director of Finance shall be Trustees of the Fund. 
(Prior code § 2-208)  
3.08.030 - Trustees—Investment policy. 
The Trustees shall have the care and management of the fund and shall keep the same invested in such manner as they deem expedient. 
(Prior code § 2-209)  
3.08.040 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Mayor shall be, ex officio, Chairman of the Board of Trustees. The Trustees shall keep a record of their activities and, at the close of each financial year, make a report thereto to the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2-210)  
Chapter 3.12 - SANDERS TEMPERANCE FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Designated. 
The ten thousand dollars given to the City by the will of the late Charles Sanders shall be called the "Sanders Temperance Fund." 
(Prior code § 2-211)  
3.12.020 - Trustees—Designated. 
The Mayor, the City Manager and the City Clerk shall be Trustees of the Fund. 
(Prior code § 2-212)  
3.12.030 - Trustees—Duties. 
The Trustees shall have the care and management of the fund and shall keep the same invested in notes of the City, with interest payable quarterly, at six percent. They shall appoint an agent to be employed in the manner provided in the will of the donor of the Fund, who shall receive his salary in equal quarterly payments from the Trustees, and shall hold his office at their pleasure. 
(Prior code § 2-213)  
3.12.040 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Mayor shall be, ex officio, Chairman of the Board of Trustees. The Trustees shall keep a record of their activities, and at the close of each financial year, make a report thereof to the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2-214)  
Chapter 3.16 - BULLOCK FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Designated. 
The fund given to the City by the late Charles Bullock of Arlington, Middlesex County, Massachusetts, shall be called the "Bullock Fund," and the income therefrom shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of his last will and testament. 
(Prior code § 2-215)  
3.16.020 - Board of Trustees—Appointment. 
The administration of such part of the income of the Bullock Fund as may be paid by the Trustees under the will of Charles Bullock shall be vested in a board of three Trustees. The City Manager shall, annually in the month of May, appoint one Trustee for the term of three years to begin June 1st. 
(Prior code § 2-216)  
3.16.030 - Administration and management. 
The Trustees shall have the care and management of the income of the Fund, and shall expend the same in accordance with the will of Charles Bullock and shall have full power to do all things which, in their judgment may be necessary to carry out the purpose and intention of the will establishing the Fund. 
(Prior code § 2-217)  
3.16.040 - Income—Receipt and expenditure. 
The Trustees shall have the authority for and in behalf of the City to receive the income and to expend the same as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-218)  
3.16.050 - Income—Payments. 
All payments of income from the Bullock Fund by the Trustees shall be made to the City Treasurer and shall be paid by him on warrants signed by a majority of the Trustees. 
(Prior code § 2-219)  
3.16.060 - Approval of bills by City Auditor. 
The City Auditor shall receive, verify and approve all bills of the Trustees and their employees. 
(Prior code § 2-220)  
3.16.070 - Annual reporting requirements. 
The Mayor shall be ex officio Chairman of the Board and shall keep a record of their activities and at the close of each financial year make a report thereof to the City Council. 
(Prior code § 2-221)  
Chapter 3.20 - PARKING FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Designated. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 844 of the Acts of 1970, there is established a fund to be designated the "Parking Fund," into which shall be deposited all fees and other revenues derived from or incident to the operation of parking facilities or parking systems or portions thereof, all receipts from fines for parking violations and any other sums which the City Council may appropriate to the Parking Fund. 
(Prior code § 22-1(a))  
3.20.020 - Expenditures. 
A.  Moneys in the Parking Fund shall be expended only for purposes as defined in Chapter 844 of the Acts of 1970, for: 
1.  Current expenses; 
2.  Payment of the interest on and principal of bonds or notes issued under this chapter; 
3.  The redemption price, including premium if any, of any bonds called for redemption pursuant to Section 8 of Chapter 844 of the Acts of 1970; 
4.  Administrative expenses incident to the purposes of this act; 
5.  The cost of construction of new parking facilities or parking system or portion thereof; or 
6.  Any other expenses incurred pursuant to or in connection with the exercise of any of the powers granted under Chapter 844 of the Acts of 1970. 
B.  Any expenditure from the Parking Fund shall be subject to prior appropriation by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 22-1(b), (c))  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Automatic amusement device" means any mechanism whereby, through the insertion of a coin or token, any apparatus is released or set in motion or is put in a position where it may be set in motion for the purpose of playing any game, involving, in whole or in part, the skill of the player, including, but not exclusively, such devices as are commonly known as pinball machines, including free play pinball machines. 
B.  Person. "Person" has the same meaning as set out in Section 1.04.030 of this code. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(a))  
5.04.020 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person having title to or responsibility for the maintenance or operation of any restaurant, public hall, store, place of amusement or any other place to which members of the public may resort, to maintain, operate or permit to be operated or maintained in such premises, any automatic amusement device without having first obtained a valid license from the License Commission, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(b))  
5.04.030 - Application—Form—Contents. 
Application for such license shall be made out in duplicate and submitted to the License Commission upon a form to be supplied by the License Commission for that purpose. The application for such license shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth. If such applicant is a corporation, partnership, association or other business entity, such application shall include certified documentation sufficient to provide the applicant's existence, principal business address, person or officer upon whom service of process may be served, and the names and addresses of all directors, partners or if an association, of all members of such association; 
B.  Prior criminal convictions, if any, of applicant or its directors, partners or members as specified in subsection A of this section; 
C.  Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place; 
D.  Description of machine or machines to be covered by the license, mechanical features, name of manufacturer(s), serial number(s); 
E.  A floor plan of the business premises intended to be used for the housing of automatic amusement devices for play by members of the public. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "business premises" means and includes the entire building or structure housing such automatic amusement devices, and open for public access. The floor plan shall clearly indicate the total square foot area of such business premises and shall indicate the intended position of such automatic amusement devices. The sale of such plan shall be established by regulation of the License Commission; 
F.  An approved Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Building Department for the business premises intended to be used for the housing of automatic amusement devices for play by members of the public; 
G.  A certificate of approval issued by the City Electrical Inspector, verifying that the electrical installation in such premises is adequate for the uses intended and is in conformance with the State Electrical Code (Form FPR-11), as amended; 
H.  The names and residential addresses of all persons as defined in Section 1.04.030 of this code who have any equitable interest in, or who have otherwise contributed valuable consideration to the applicant's business or to the applicant personally, insofar as such interest or consideration releates to the procurement, maintenance, operation or display of automatic amusement devices; 
I.  Documentation sufficient to prove that the automatic amusement devices sought to be licensed are lawfully in the possession of the applicant. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(d))  
5.04.040 - Age restrictions. 
A.  No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she shall be over eighteen years of age, and provide proof of United States citizenship or legal residence status as an alien. 
B.  This provision shall similarly apply to any applicant acting as the authorized agent of a corporation, partnership, association or other business entity. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(e))  
5.04.050 - Consideration of application—Grounds for denial. 
A.  The License Commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 39, Section 23B, within thirty days from the date of receipt by the License Commission of a properly completed application as set forth in Sections 5.04.030 and 5.04.040 of this chapter, to consider such application. 
B.  The License Commission shall grant a license under the provisions of this chapter unless it specifically finds and states in writing within thirty days from the date of such public hearing that: 
1.  The applicant is not a person of good moral character; or 
2.  That the granting of such license at the premises intended would lead to the creation of a nuisance or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, morals, order or general welfare by: 
a.  Unreasonably increasing pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area in which the premises are located, or 
b.  Increasing the incidence of illegal or disruptive conduct in the area in which the premises are located, or 
c.  Unreasonably increasing the level of noise in the area in which the premises are located, or 
d.  Otherwise significantly harming the legitimate protectable interests of the affected citizens of the City. 
C.  No application shall be denied if the anticipated harm is not significant or if the likelihood of its occurrence is remote. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(f))  
5.04.060 - License—Fee. 
Every applicant, before being granted a license shall pay one hundred dollars as the annual license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each automatic amusement device as defined in Section 5.04.010 of this chapter. Each license shall expire on December 31st of each year. A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license. 
(Ord. 984 (part), 1982: prior code § 12-12(g))  
5.04.070 - License—Display. 
A.  The license provided for in this chapter shall be posted permanently and conspicuously in the premises wherein such device or devices are to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
B.  Such license may be transferred from one device or devices to another similar device or devices upon application to the License Commission to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial numbers of the devices involved in the transfer and the filing of a two-dollar fee. 
C.  If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location within the City, the license may be transferred to such new location only upon reapplication to the License Commission in accordance with the provisions of Sections 5.04.030, 5.04.040 and 5.04.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(h))  
5.04.080 - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(c))  
5.04.090 - Commission—Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The License Commission shall issue rules and regulations for the use of such automatic amusement devices, but such rules and regulations may only relate to compliance with applicable laws or ordinances, or to public safety, health, order or welfare, or to steps required to be taken to guard against creation of a nuisance or to insure adequate safety and security for patrons or the affected public. The License Commission may also require from time to time the furnishing of reports concerning the ownership of such devices or other interest therein, receipt for the use of such devices and any other information which it may deem pertinent concerning such devices and their use and operation. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(l))  
5.04.100 - Unlawful acts designated. 
A.  No person holding a license under this chapter nor any employee or agent of such person shall permit persons under eighteen years of age to play or operate any automatic amusement device located in an establishment also holding a license under the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 138, Sections 12 through 14. The licensee shall post permanently and conspicuously at the loction of the device or devices so licensed in premises so licensed a sign warning persons under eighteen years of age of this prohibition. 
B.  All automatic amusement devices situated on business premises for play by members of the public shall be so installed as to afford an open and accessible space of eighteen inches between each device and any adjacent device, wall or partition. Each device shall be installed in such manner as to afford a direct and unobstructed means of entrance and exit from the business premises by means of a corridor or system of corridors of no less than thirty inches in width. 
C.  Any business establishment which utilizes more than a total of one hundred fifty square feet of open and accessible space between such devices and for use as corridors between or adjacent to such devices as detailed in the subsection B of this section, or any business establishment which displays on its premises a number of automatic amusement devices available for play by the public, which devices if played simultaneously could accommodate an aggregate of fifty or more players, shall be deemed a place of public assembly and shall be subject to all regulations of the State Building Code governing places of public assembly as set forth therein. 
D.  1.  It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any business establishment to erect and maintain for play by members of the public, more than one automatic amusement device for each five hundred square feet of gross floor area of such business establishment. 
2.  For the purposes of this subsection, "gross floor area" means the sum, in square feet, of the gross horizontal areas of all of the floors of a building, as measured from the exterior walls separating two buildings. "Gross floor area" includes: 
a.  Elevator shafts and stairwells on each floor; 
b.  Attic space, whether finished or unfinished, not excluded in subsection D3c of this section; 
c.  Interior balconies, mezzanines; and 
d.  Basement and cellar area not included in subsection D3b of this section. 
3.  "Gross floor area" shall not include: 
a.  Areas used for parking garages, accessory parking, or off-street loading purposes; 
b.  Basement and cellar areas devoted exclusively to the operations and maintenance of the building such as heating and cooling equipment, electrical and telephone facilities and fuel storage; 
c.  Attic space and other areas for elevator machinery or mechanical equipment necessary for the operation of the building. 
E.  It is unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to operate any establishment without an attendant on the premises; that is, at least one employee in attendance at all times. 
F.  It is unlawful for a licensee to allow any person under the age of seventeen years to play an automatic amusement device during the hours of eight-thirty a.m. to three p.m. when schools are in session. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(k))  
5.04.110 - Seizure and destruction of device—Authorized when. 
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement device or devices are used as gambling devices, he shall, upon a validly issued search and seizure warrant cause such device or devices to be seized and impounded and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing such device or devices to be used as a gambling devices, such exhibitor be found guilty; such device or devices shall be destroyed by the police, upon proper order by the court. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(j))  
5.04.120 - License—Revocation. 
Every license issued under this chapter is subject to the right, which is expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any automatic amusement device contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the City, or the laws of the Commonwealth. The license may be revoked by the License Commission after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may present and submit evidence of witnesses in this defense. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(i))  
5.04.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be liable to a fine or penalty of not less than fifty dollars nor more than two hundred dollars for each offense. Each day that the offense continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. 914 (part), 1979: prior code § 12-12(m))  
Chapter 5.08 - AUTOMATIC MUSIC MACHINES 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Automatic music machine defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, an "automatic music machine" means any instrument or device by which, through the insertion of a coin, any mechanism is placed in operation or is put in a position where it may be put in operation to play music in any manner or form. 
(Prior code § 12-11(a))  
5.08.020 - License—Required. 
No person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall maintain, operate or permit to be maintained or operated in any restaurant, public hall, store, place of amusement or any other place to which members of the public may resort, any automatic music machine, unless the maintenance or operation of such machine shall be in accordance with a license granted by the License Commission; provided, however, that the requirement of such license shall not apply to the maintenance or operation of automatic music machines by charitable, religious, benevolent or veterans' organizations. 
(Ord 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 12-11(b))  
5.08.030 - License—Annual fee. 
Licenses granted for the maintenance, possession and operation of such automatic music machines shall be issued annually to expire on December 31st of each year. The charge for such license shall be twenty-five dollars for each machine. Any machine arranged for operation of more than one outlet shall, for the purpose of such license fee, be regarded as one machine. 
(Ord. 879, 1977: prior code § 12-11(c))  
5.08.040 - Commission authority to adopt rules and regulations. 
The License Commission may issue rules and regulations for the use of such automatic music machines by the holders of licenses and it may require, from time to time, the furnishing of reports concerning ownership of such machines, or any interest therein, receipt for the use of such machines, and any other infromation which it may deem pertinent concerning such instruments, their use and operation. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 12-11(d))  
Chapter 5.12 - SUNDAY ENTERTAINMENT LICENSES 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - Sunday entertainment licenses. 
Applications for Sunday entertainment licenses required by Section 4 Chapter 136 of the Massachusetts General Laws shall be granted, denied, conditioned, modified, suspended and revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Section 183A of Chapter 140 of the Massachusetts General Laws. It is provided that the fee for a Sunday entertainment license shall be the maximum amount permitted under Section 4 of Chapter 136 of the Massachusetts General Laws unless the City Manager or his designee shall set such fee at a lesser amount. The City Manager or his designee is expressly authorized by this section to promulgate regulations for Sunday entertainment licenses. 
(Ord. 1048, 1987: prior code § 12-13)  
Chapter 5.20 - PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION 
Sections:  
Article I. - Hackney Carriages 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
Every vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of persons for hire from any point of origin within the City to any other location shall be deemed to be a "hackney carriage" within the meaning of this Article I, except a street railway car or a trackless trolley vehicle within the meaning of 5 A.L.M., c. 163, s. 2, or a jitney or special bus, licensed pursuant to Article II of this chapter, or a livery service licensed under Article III of this chapter. A "special stand" is defined as a location on private property where a vehicle required to be licensed as a hackney carriage is regularly allowed by the private property owner to await the arrival of either a passenger or of a message to pick up a passenger elsewhere. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-1)  
5.20.020 - License—Required. 
A.  No person shall drive or have charge of a hackney carriage, nor shall any person set up and use a hackney carriage unless licensed thereto by the License Commission. 
B.  No owner or person having the care or ordering of a hackney carriage shall suffer or allow any person other than a driver licensed by the License Commission to drive such carriage. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-2)  
5.20.030 - License—Application and renewal. 
New applications for hackney carriage licenses and for permits for special stands may be filed with the License Commission at any time, but applications for the renewal of such licenses and permits already in force shall be filed annually in April. They shall be made on official forms provided by the Commission and shall contain all the information therein required. All such licenses and permits shall become void on May 1st annually, except such as are granted in April as valid for the year beginning on the next succeeding May 1st. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-4)  
5.20.040 - Drivers to know English language. 
A.  No person shall be licensed to be a driver of a hackney carriage unless such driver can read, write and speak the English language, and unless the driver can understand spoken English sufficiently to discharge the duties of a hackney carriage driver. 
B.  No person shall be licensed to be an owner of a hackney carriage unless the owner can: 
1.  Either read written English or understand spoken English; and 
2.  Either speak or write in English sufficiently to discharge the duties of a hackney carriage owner. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-5)  
5.20.050 - License—Issuance conditions. 
A.  The License Commission may grant licenses to suitable persons who are owners of such vehicles, to set up and use them as hackney carriages, and all persons who are qualified as drivers, and in all other respects, to drive and have charge of hackney carriages. 
B.  Such licenses will be given subject to such terms, conditions and regulations and upon the payment of such fees as the Commissioners shall, from time to time, prescribe in general orders or otherwise. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-3)  
5.20.060 - License—Number limitations. 
The total number of hackney carriage licenses authorized shall be two hundred forty eight, until October 1, 1988. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-8)  
5.20.070 - Nonmotorized carriages. 
The License Commission may license a nonmotoized vehicle as a hackney carriage, subject to reasonable conditions imposed by the Commission upon such a license. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-10)  
5.20.080 - Funeral and wedding vehicles—Livery service licensing. 
Every motor vehicle used for funeral and wedding purposes only shall be licensed as a livery service and not as a hackney carriage. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-33)  
5.20.090 - Registration of vehicles. 
Hackney carriages shall be registered at the place at which they are kept. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-6)  
5.20.100 - License—Form. 
The form of the driver's license issued by the License Commission shall be prescribed by the Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-23)  
5.20.110 - License—Carried by driver. 
Every driver having charge of a hackney carriage shall at all times carry the license issued to such driver by the License Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-15)  
5.20.120 - License—Change of address. 
When a licensed owner changes home address or the place at which a hackney carriage licensed to such owner is kept, or when a licensed driver changes home address, place of employment or employer, such driver and such owner shall, within three days of such change, notify the License Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-9)  
5.20.130 - No assignment of licenses or permits. 
No license or permit provided for in this article shall be sold, assigned or transferred without the consent of the License Commission in writing. Any licensee who shall cease to be the owner or the driver of a hackney carriage shall at once surrender the license to the License Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-7)  
5.20.140 - Drivers—Found property responsibility. 
Every person having charge of a hackney carriage shall, immediately after delivering any passenger, search the carriage for any property which may have been left therein. Property found therein by any person having the care or ordering of any hackney carriage, and not restored to the owner thereof within twenty-four hours, shall be delivered by the finder thereof to the headquarters of the Cambridge Police Department. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-17)  
5.20.150 - Drivers—Obedience to enforcement authority. 
Licensed drivers will answer fully any questions put to them by police officers or other agents of the License Commission in the performance of their duty. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-11)  
5.20.160 - Motor hackney coach special requirements. 
The owners and drivers of hackney carriages which are also motor vehicles shall be subject to the following special provisions: 
A.  An applicant for a license as owner of a hackney carriage shall present for examination in the case of each car a valid certificate of registration issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, the date of which, together with the car number, shall be entered on the application and also on the license of the License Commission, if granted. 
B.  An applicant for a license to drive a motor hackney carriage shall present for examination a valid driver's license issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, and the date and the number thereof shall be entered on the application, and also on the license of the License Commission, if granted. 
C.  Notice in writing shall be given to the License Commission by licensed owners and drivers, as the case may be, immediately upon any change in residence or employment, or in the place in which a car is kept, or upon any change in the certificate of registration, the license to operate, or the car number as issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles. 
D.  Owners and drivers of motor hackney carriages shall be subject in their equipment and operation to all provisions of the statutes relating to automobiles now or thereafter in effect. 
E.  A vehicle providing transportation for persons who are ill or on a mobile stretcher or motorized chairs shall be licensed as a livery service and not as a hackney carriage, provided that no driver of a hackney carriage may refuse a passenger on a wheelchair which folds up. No extra charge may be made to transport the folded wheelchair. 
F.  Each owner of a motor hackney carriage shall install a protective partition dividing the driver's and the passenger's seats for the safety of the driver, which partition shall meet the following specifications: 
1.  It must be bullet-resistant, extending from the top of the seat to the ceiling; it must be made of one-half-inch plexiglas or its equal strength, and the side must be sufficiently sealed so as to prevent a hand from sliding past the partition. 
2.  It must have a change drawer set in the partition. 
3.  The partition must provide for a sliding door on the passenger side so that the driver may put his hand through to open the rear (passenger) door in case of emergency. Otherwise, it shall be secured at all times with the fastener located on the driver's side of the hackney carriage. 
4.  Power-door locks, so called, are permitted to secure the rear passenger door of the hackney carriage, provided the passengers are able to unlock such doors from their area of the hackney carriage. 
5.  This section shall not apply to hackney carriages presently equipped with protective partitions in accordance with any ordinance heretofore in effect, but shall apply to all automobiles hereafter utilized as hackney carriages not presently so equipped. 
6.  This section shall not apply where a hackney carriage is exclusively owner-operated, or where all of the nonowner drivers for a particular hackney carriage, in writing, waive their right to the protective partition described in this subsection. 
7.  All licensed hackney carriages must be in compliance with subsection F of this section no later than July 1, 1988. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-22)  
5.20.170 - Out-of-town hackney carriages. 
A.  No person not having a license therefor issued by the License Commission shall drive or have charge of a hackney carriage, nor shall any such person set up and use a hackney carriage; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting a driver of a taxicab licensed outside the City driving through the City, or from delivering in the City a passenger or passengers accepted outside the City, or from accepting within the City a passenger or passengers for hire, if licensed by the License Commission as a livery service and if summoned by or at the request of the passenger or passengers to do so by computer, by radio, by telephone, or by prearranged contract. 
B.  Whoever violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each violation. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-19)  
5.20.180 - Standing restrictions. 
Every person having charge of a hackney carriage shall obey the directions of any police officer or of an agent of the License Commission or of an agent of the Director of Traffic and Parking respecting the standing of such carriages while waiting for passengers and the route to be taken in going to or from the place of standing. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-20)  
5.20.190 - Soliciting passengers—Riding in front seat. 
No person having charge of a hackney carriage shall solicit passengers except by a motion of the hand, nor in any public way except when such carriage is rightfully standing upon a public stand; nor shall he suffer or allow any person to ride upon the driver's seat except as expressly authorized by the License Commission in writing. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-18)  
5.20.200 - Passenger priority rights. 
Unless otherwise authorized by the License Commission, no person having the charge, care or ordering of any hackney carriage shall take up or carry any passenger after the carriage has been occupied or engaged by any prior passenger until such prior passenger shall have discharged such carriage, without the consent of such prior passenger. In such case, any such prior passenger shall not be obliged or requested to pay any extra fare or fee for refusing such consent. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-16)  
5.20.210 - Rates—Designated—Meter required when. 
The price or rates of fares which drivers of motor taxicabs shall charge and demand for services rendered in conveying passengers are as follows: 
A.  The initial drop shall be one dollar, and shall cover the cost of the first one-eighth of a mile or fraction thereof, or the first two minutes of waiting time, or a combination of both. Each one-eighth of a mile thereafter, or fraction thereof, shall be at the rate of twenty-five cents. 
B.  Each hackney carriage shall be equipped with a meter which shall be of a size and design approved by the License Commission. 
C.  All owners of hackney cariages shall be allowed sixty days from the time a change in rates is mandated to change the taximeter to reflect the new rates. 
(Ord. 1115 (part), 1991)  
5.20.220 - Rates—Driver to carry—Overcharges 
Every driver having charge of a hackney carriage shall at all times carry a copy of the rates of fare established, and shall exhibit them to any passenger or police officer or agent of the License Commission on demand. The driver shall not demand from any passenger more than the established rate of fare. When in a public place, the driver shall not refuse, unless previously engaged, or unless the conditions are such as those described in Section 5.20.310, to carry any passenger lawfully entitled to be carried in a hackney carriage. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-13)  
5.20.230 - Rates—Special fares. 
A.  The License Commission may by regulation establish: 
1.  Group fares for two or more unassociated persons; 
2.  Flat rates to Logan Airport and outlying suburbs; 
3.  A surcharge when a station wagon is specifically requested; 
4.  A discounted fare when a Cambridge cab, by prearrangement or by telephone call, transports a passenger from Logan Airport to Cambridge; 
5.  A flat hourly rate above that set by Section 5.20.250 for a touring cab specifically certified as such by the License Commission. 
B.  Drivers of motor taxicabs and using taximeters shall charge and demand for services rendered in conveying passengers to Logan Airport or to any point requiring the use of Callahan and Sumner Tunnels a fee equal to the toll chargeable to the driver for the use of either or both of such tunnels. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-26)  
5.20.240 - Rate reduction plan. 
A.  The License Commission shall implement a program effecting a cab meter discount for any person sixty-five years of age or over and for handicapped persons, as follows: 
1.  A one dollar and twenty-five cent discount coupon shall be allowed for any such fare five dollars or under; 
2.  Two one dollar and twenty-five cent discount coupons shall be allowed for any such fare over five dollars. 
B.  The License Commission shall fund this discount program up to forty thousand dollars, and shall regulate the specific mechanism by which this program is implemented. 
(Ord. 1115 (part), 1991)  
5.20.250 - Waiting time. 
A.  Waiting time shall include all time during which the vehicle is not in motion, beginning five minutes after its arrival at the place to which it has been called. No charge shall be made for time between a premature arrival in response to a call and the times for which the vehicle was ordered, nor for time attributable to a breakdown of the vehicle. Waiting time charges shall be made for time lost through interruption of traffic, with the exception of such time lost through the operation of the opening and closing of drawbridges and the passage of railroad trains. 
B.  Waiting time shall be at the rate of nineteen dollars per hour. 
(Ord. 1115 (part), 1991)  
5.20.260 - Baggage. 
Hand baggage may be carried by passengers without charge. The carriage of trunks shall be optional with the person in charge of the vehicle, but, if carried, the charge shall be fifty cents for each trunk. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-28)  
5.20.270 - Hiring by hour or by trip. 
A.  When a motor taxicab is hired by the hour, the hourly rate shall be nineteen dollars per hour. When a motor taxicab is hired for a trip wholly or in part outside the limits of the City, and when the destination is not listed in the flat rate book issued by the Commission, the person in charge may suspend, with the consent of the passenger, the use of the taximeter as a means of determining the price to be paid. In such cases, the price shall be agreed upon between the persons in charge of the automobile and the passenger. 
B.  A vehicle licensed under this chapter for the transportation of those who are ill, or who are invalids or who are elderly, may be engaged by an arrangement between the person in charge of the vehicle and the passenger establishing a flat-rate price per hour, per mile or per trip for the use of the vehicle, and in such instance the use of the meter in the vehicle may be suspended. 
(Ord. 1115 (part), 1991)  
5.20.280 - Taximeter—Required. 
Every motor vehicle licensed as a hackney carriage by the City shall have affixed thereto a standard taximeter of a size and design approved by the License Commission. Every motor vehicle so licensed as a hackney carriage with a taximeter attached for measuring the distance traveled shall be known as a "taxicab," and no taxicab shall operate without a taximeter available. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-30)  
5.20.290 - Taximeter—Illumination at night. 
After sundown, the face of every taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable light so arranged as to throw a continuous steady light thereon. Where the fare is required to be determined by the taximeter, no fare for carriage of persons in such taxicab shall exceed the amount shown upon the fare of the taximeter thereon. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-32)  
5.20.300 - Taximeter—Inspection. 
No taxicab shall be licensed as a hackney carriage until the taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected by the proper authority and found to be accurate in accordance with the provisions of 1 G.L., c. 98, s 45, of the General Laws, concerning the sealing of taximeters on vehicles used for hire. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-31)  
5.20.310 - Restrictions on passengers—Disorderly passengers. 
A.  The License Commission will regard as unsuited to hold a license any driver who gives direction, information or service to a man or woman seeking a place or a person for immoral purposes, or any driver who offers such direction, information or service. It will regard as unsuited to hold a license any driver who continues to convey from place to place a person who is noisy or otherwise disorderly, or who conveys a person who is intoxicated, even though not disorderly, except directly to the place where the driver has reason to believe is the passenger's house, lodging, or other abiding place. This provision shall not apply to cases in which persons are conveyed by direction of a police officer or other agent of the License Commission. 
B.  When a passenger becomes noisy or otherwise disorderly while in a carriage and persists in such conduct, after warning, the driver may appeal to any police officer who shall assist in any lawful way and, if in possession of the necessary evidence, shall prosecute the offending passenger. 
C.  The police shall observe with particular care the matters to which this section relates and shall report thereon. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-14)  
5.20.320 - Conveying persons with contagious disease. 
No person having charge of any hackney carriage shall receive or permit to be placed therein, nor convey in or upon the same any person sick or infected with any contagious disease, or the body of any person deceased from such disease. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-21)  
5.20.330 - Failure to pay fare unlawful. 
Any person refusing to pay, or attempting to avoid payment of the lawful fare, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each offense. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-12)  
5.20.340 - Violation of Article I provisions—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Article I of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each offense, and any licensed owner or driver who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to such penalty, thereupon become liable to forfeit his license and be disqualified to hold a license thereafter. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-34)  
Article II. - Vehicles Operating on Fixed Routes 
 
5.20.350 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  The License Commission, following consultation with the Director of Traffic and Parking, may establish rules and regulations governing persons operating motor vehicles upon the public streets and ways in the City for the carriage of passengers for hire, in such a manner as to afford a means of transportation similar to that afforded by public transportation authorities, by indiscriminately receiving and discharging passengers along the route on which the vehicle is operated or may be running, or by transporting passengers for hire as a business between fixed and regular termini. 
B.  The number of licenses issued under Article II of this chapter shall be that number determined by the License Commission to be required to meet the standard of public convenience and necessity, without harming the public welfare. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-35)  
5.20.360 - License—Required. 
A.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the manner described in Section 5.20.350 of this article without first obtaining a license therefor from the License Commission pursuant to Chapter 122 of the Acts of 1930. Within forty-five days of receiving an application for a license to operate such a motor vehicle on a fixed route, the License Commission shall consult with the Director of Traffic and Parking, hold a public hearing on the application, and transmit its decision to the City Manager. 
B.  The City Manager shall, following receipt of the License Commission's decision as described above, transmit such decision to the City Council, which, pursuant to Chapter 159A of the General Laws, shall vote whether or not to accept the decision of the License Commission; provided, that the City Council shall be deemed to have accepted the decision of the License Commission if the Council does not act on the matter within sixty days of the date when the License Commission originally received the license application. In transmitting the License Commission's decision to the Council, the Manager shall indicate his own approval or disapproval of the decision. 
C.  Any application for a license to operate a motor vehicle on a fixed route is to be submitted in the first instance to the License Commission. Any such application which is received by the City Clerk shall be immediately transmitted to the License Commission for attention in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-36)  
5.20.370 - Proper service over the route. 
The licensee shall maintain proper service over the route for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-38)  
5.20.380 - Passengers—Carrying required—Exception. 
No person operating any motor vehicle so licensed shall refuse to carry any person offering himself to be carried as a passenger therein, unless the seats of the same are fully occupied, and the number of passengers thereon is the number allowed the operator to be carried at one time, or unless such person is intoxicated or disorderly. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-37)  
5.20.390 - Passengers—Number and seating. 
No greater number of passengers shall be carried at any time in any such motor vehicle than there are seats to accommodate such passengers; provided that, in addition thereto, children under seven years of age may be carried therein in arms or seated in the laps of parents or adult persons accompanying them, but no passenger with a child in arms or seated on the lap shall be permitted to sit with or immediately next to the driver of the vehicle, nor shall any passenger be permitted to ride upon any fender, dash, top floor, steps or running board of any such vehicle. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-40)  
5.20.400 - Full stop at railroad crossing. 
Every such motor vehicle shall come to a full stop immediately before crossing the tracks of any railroad at grade. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-43)  
5.20.410 - Found property—Operator duties. 
Every person operating any such motor vehicle shall deliver any article left therein by any passenger to the officer in charge of the lost-and-found department of the licensee not later than twenty-four hours after finding the same. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-42)  
5.20.420 - Passenger solicitation restrictions. 
No person operating any motor vehicle shall solicit passengers by outcry, or make any noise for the purpose of soliciting passengers. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-39)  
5.20.430 - Operators—Unlawful activities designated. 
No person operating any such motor vehicle shall collect fares, make change or discharge passengers while the vehicle is in motion, nor shall such operator possess a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar or lighted pipe while any passenger is being carried therein, nor drink any intoxicating beverage of any kind, nor be under the influence thereof, while engaged in operating such vehicle. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-41)  
5.20.440 - License—Suspension or revocation conditions. 
A.  The City Council may, pursuant to Chapter 159A of the General Laws, suspend or revoke any license granted for the operation of any such motor vehicle for any reason deemed by the City Council, in exercise of its discretion, to be sufficient, subject to any provisions of law relative to appeals or modifications thereof. 
B.  The License Commission may, pursuant to Chapter 122 of the Acts of 1930, suspend or revoke any license granted for the operation of any such motor vehicle described in Section 5.20.350 for good cause shown, following proper notice and hearing. 
C.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle described in Section 5.20.350 without express authority from both the City Council and the License Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-44)  
Article III. - Livery Vehicles 
 
5.20.450 - License—Requirements. 
The License Commission shall license any livery vehicle picking up any person or package in Cambridge for the purpose of transporting such person or package for hire. Each licensed livery vehicle which is not also a licensed hackney carriage must operate either based on a contract prearranged significantly prior to the time of the pickup, or based on a contract made pursuant to a prospective rider's telephone call to a company which receives requests for transportation for hire. No licensed livery vehicle which is not also a licensed hackney carriage may pick up a person in response to a street hail, or may stand in a public cab stand, or in a special cab stand authorized for Cambridge hackney carriages only. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-45)  
5.20.460 - License—Number issued. 
The License Commission shall determine the number of licenses needed under Section 5.20.450 to provide for public convenience and necessity without harming the public welfare, and that number shall be the maximum number of such licenses to be issued. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-46)  
5.20.470 - Found property requirements. 
Every licensee or agent of a licensee under this article shall, immediately after delivering any passenger in Cambridge, search the livery vehicle for any property which may have been left therein, and any property so found therein and not restored to the owner shall, within twenty-four hours, be delivered by the finder to the headquarters of the Cambridge Police Department. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-47)  
Article IV. - Radio Services and Similar Services 
 
5.20.480 - License—Requirements. 
A.  The License Commission shall license each enterprise which receives requests for transportation for hire and which, by wire, cable or radio, dispatches any vehicle: 
1.  Which is required to be licensed by the License Commission; or 
2.  Which is being directed to pick up a person or package in Cambridge. 
B.  The License Commission shall license the dispatchers and telephone opeators employed by an enterprise described in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-48)  
5.20.490 - License—Number issued. 
The License Commission shall determine the number of licenses needed under Section 5.20.480 to provide for public convenience and necessity without harming the public welfare, and that number shall be the maximum number of such licenses to be issued. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-49)  
Article V. - Administration and Enforcement 
 
5.20.500 - License commission defined. 
Wherever the term "License Commission" or "Commission" is used in this chapter, that term shall mean the Board of License Commissioners granted power by Chapter 95 of the Acts of 1922 to grant licenses under authority of Section 22 of Chapter 40 of the General Laws and granted power by Chapter 122 of the Acts of 1930 to grant licenses for the letting out of motor vehicles for hire, however computed or determined. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-60)  
5.20.510 - Rules and regulations. 
The License Commission may establish general regulations and individual conditions relative to any licenses issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-53)  
5.20.520 - Licenses—Carrying by drivers required. 
Every driver of a jitney or livery service licensed under this chapter shall at all times carry a copy of the license therefor issued by the License Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-57)  
5.20.530 - Licenses—No sale, assignment or transfer. 
A.  No license or permit described in this chapter shall be sold, assigned or transferred without the consent of the License Commission in writing. 
B.  Any licensee who shall cease to exercise the license shall at once surrender the license to the License Commission. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-54)  
5.20.540 - Licensees—Obedience to authorized directions. 
Every licensee and every agent of a licensee under this chapter shall, while exercising the license, obey the directions of a police officer, of an agent of the License Commission, and if the license is being exercised on the public way, of any agent of the Director of Traffic and Parking. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-58)  
5.20.550 - Licensees—Response to authorized questions. 
Licensees under this chapter will answer fully any question put to them by police officers or agents of the License Commission in the performance of their duty. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-55)  
5.20.560 - Licensing or transport of certain persons unlawful. 
A.  The License Commission will regard as unsuited to hold a license any licensee who, directly or by an agent, gives direction, information or service to a man or woman seeking a place or a person for immoral purposes, or anyone who offers such direction, information or service. It will regard as unsuited to hold a license any licensee who, directly or by an agent, continues to convey from place to place a person who is noisy or otherwise disorderly, or who conveys a person who is intoxicated, even though not disorderly, except directly to the place which the driver has reason to believe is the passenger's house, lodging or other abiding place. This provision shall not apply to cases in which persons are conveyed by direction of a police officer or other agent of the License Commission. 
B.  When a passenger becomes noisy or otherwise disorderly while in a carriage and persists in such conduct, after warning, the licensee or the licensee's agent may appeal to any policeman who shall assist in any lawful way and, if in the possession of the necessary evidence, shall prosecute the offending passenger. 
C.  The police shall observe with particular care the matters to which this section relates, and shall report thereon. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-56)  
5.20.570 - Unlicensed vehicles—Seizure and impoundment. 
Where a vehicle operator required to be licensed by this chapter picks up a person or property in Cambridge without such a license, in the presence of a police officer, such police officer may impound the vehicle, and any taximeter within the vehicle used by such operator in violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-50)  
5.20.580 - Unlicensed vehicles—Arrest of operator. 
Where a vehicle operator required to be licensed by this chapter picks up a person or property in Cambridge without such a license, in the presence of a police officer, the police officer may arrest such operator. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-51)  
5.20.590 - Additional license conditions. 
The License Commission may add conditions to, suspend, or revoke any issued license described in this chapter, for good cause shown, following proper notice and a hearing; provided, that the License Commission shall be authorized to offer a licensee whose license is about to be suspended the opportunity to pay a civil fine not exceeding three hundred dollars in place of having the license suspended. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-59)  
5.20.600 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Where a person is required to be licensed under this chapter and picks up a person or property in Cambridge without such a license, such person shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each violation. 
B.  Where a person receiving requests for transportation for hire is required to be licensed under this chapter and operates without such a license, such person shall be punished by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each violation. 
C.  Any person operating in a joint enterprise with one who violates a provision of this chapter shall also be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars for each violation. 
(Ord. 1065 (part), 1988: prior code § 16-52)  
Chapter 5.24 - GARBAGE AND SALVAGE COMPANIES 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - License—Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of collection and transportation of waste and other disposed material or collection and transportation of salvaged materials unless duly licensed by the Board of License Commissioners. 
(Prior code § 6-33)  
5.24.020 - License—Annual fees. 
The Board of License Commissioners is authorized to establish a schedule of fees for an annual license to engage in the business of the collection and transportation of waste and collection and transportation of salvaged materials based on the number of vehicles used in the business and the tonnage transported in each vehicle. 
(Prior code § 6-34)  
5.24.030 - License—Revocation. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter or any subsequent ordinance shall of itself be sufficient cause and reason to revoke any such license. The right is granted to the Board of License Commissioners at any time for any other cause sufficient to them to revoke any such license. 
(Prior code § 6-35)  
5.24.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who engages in the business of the collection and transportation of waste and other disposed material or collection and transportation of salvaged material without being licensed under this chapter shall forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense and each day such person is not licensed shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior code § 6-36)  
Chapter 5.28 - JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - License—Required. 
No person shall solicit for, be a collector of, or a dealer in junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags, cotton, feathers, paper stock, excelsior, straw or other inflammable junk, or be a keeper of a shop for the keeping, purchase, storage, sale or barter of junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags, cotton, feathers, paper stock, excelsior, straw or other inflammable junk, in the City, unless duly licensed therefor by the Board of License Comissioners, and unless such person complies with all ordinances and laws or and hereafter enacted with reference and applicable to junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags, cotton, feathers, paper stock, excelsior, straw or other inflammable junk. 
(Prior code § 6-8)  
5.28.020 - License—Form—Fees. 
A.  Each license issued shall set forth the name of the person licensed, the nature of the business, and the building, place or vehicle in which it is to be carried on and shall continue in force until May 1st next ensuing unless sooner revoked by the Board of License Commissioners. 
B.  No license shall be granted to a person, for the purchase, storage, sale, barter or exchange of rags, cotton, feathers, paper stock, excelsior, straw or other inflammable junk, unless such person shall conduct his business in a building of first class or second class construction and further shall conduct that portion of his business which relates to the storage of rags, cotton, feathers, paper stock, excelsior, straw or other inflammable junk in a portion of such fireproof building which is entirely enclosed by fireproof partitions, ceilings and floors of brick, concrete, corrugated or sheet iron, or other fireproof material, with fireproof doors and wire glass windows, and no such license shall be granted until a public hearing is held by the Board of License Commissioners, seven days notice of which shall be given by mailing a copy of the notice to abutting property owners and other persons interested within a radius of one hundred yards of the proposed building, such notice to be at the expense of the applicant. 
C.  The fees for licenses shall be as follows: 
1.  For keepers of shops for the purchase, storage, sale, barter or exchange of bottles, junk, old metals, secondhand articles and rags, except for keepers of shops for the purchase, storage, sale, barter or exchange of household furniture, and for such solicitors, collectors of and dealers in the aforesaid articles, ten dollars for such license; 
2.  For keepers of shops for the purchase, storage, sale, barter or exchange of household furniture, five dollars for each license; 
3.  For dealers in barrels and boxes, five dollars for each license; 
4.  For collectors of barrels and boxes, fifty cents for each license. 
D.  No such license should be transferable, nor shall such license be exercised on legal holidays. 
E.  The restrictions in this section forbidding a licensee to carry on his business except in a building of first or second class construction shall not apply to a licensee doing business in any building which was in existence prior to October 4, 1943; provided, that such building shall be equipped with sprinkler system, and provided also, that such building shall be otherwise satisfactory to the Chief of the Fire Department and the Superintendent of Buildings. 
(Prior code § 6-9)  
5.28.030 - Signposting. 
Every such keeper of a shop shall put in some suitable and conspicuous place on his shop a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters, so that the same may be distinctly seen. 
(Prior code § 6-11)  
5.28.040 - Hours of business. 
No keeper of any shop shall have his shop open for the transaction of business, nor shall he purchase, sell or barter any junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags, except between sunrise and ten p.m. of any week day. 
(Prior code § 6-14)  
5.28.050 - Record of purchases. 
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, storage, sale or barter of junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags shall keep a book in which shall be legibly written in the English language at the time of purchase of any article a description thereof, the name, age and residence, giving street and number, when possible, the person from whom and the day and hour when such purchase was made. No entry in such book shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced. Such book, any such shop and all articles of merchandise therein shall be open at all times to the examination of the Board of License Commissions, members of the Police Department, or any person authorized by the Board to make such examination. 
(Prior code § 6-10)  
5.28.060 - Vehicle regulations. 
Every vehicle used in the collection of junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags shall have the name of the owner and the number of his license, painted upon the outside of each side of his vehicle in plain, legible letters and figures of not less than one and one-half inches in height, so that they may be distinctly seen. The contents of such vehicle shall be subject at all times to the examination of the board of License Commissioners, any member of the Police Department, or any person authorized by the Board to make such examination. 
(Prior code § 6-15)  
5.28.070 - Purchases from minors. 
No keeper of such shop, and no solicitor, collector or dealer shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags from a minor or apprentice, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such. 
(Prior code § 6-12)  
5.28.080 - Resale restrictions. 
No article purchased or received by any keeper of such shop shall be sold until a period of at least thirty days shall elapse from the date of its purchase or receipt. 
(Prior code § 6-13)  
5.28.090 - License and badge of junk collector. 
Every license to a collector and dealer in, or keeper of a shop for the purchase, storage, sale or barter of junk, old metals and secondhand articles, and to every collector and dealer in rags in the City, shall contain the requirements of the ordinances and regulations applicable thereto, and shall also contain, with reference to the license issued to collectors and dealers in junk, old metals, secondhand articles and rags, the further provision that each such collector and dealer shall, in addition to his license, receive from the Board of License Commissions a badge, for which he shall pay the sum of seventy-five cents. While engaged in the collection of junk, old metals, secondhand articles or rags, every person so licensed shall wear in plain sign; a badge with the appropriate words and number thereon, and shall, upon the request of any Police Officer, exhibit his license for inspection. 
(Prior code § 6-17)  
5.28.100 - License—Revocation. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter or any subsequent ordinance that may be passed in the premises shall of itself be sufficient cause and reason to revoke any such license. The right is granted to the Board of License Commissioners at any time for any other good and sufficient casue to revoke any such license. 
(Prior code § 6-16)  
5.28.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Whoever, not being so licensed, keeps a shop, or is such solicitor, collector or dealer, in any other place or manner than that designated in the license, or after notice to him of the revocation of his license, shall forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense; and whoever violates any rule, regulation or restriction contained in his license, shall forfeit a sum not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense. 
(Prior code § 6-18)  
Chapter 5.32 - PAWNBROKERS 
Sections: 
 
5.32.010 - License conditions. 
The Board of License Commissioners shall issue licenses to pawnbrokers in accordance with the provisions of and subject to the limitations in 4 G.L., c. 140, §§ 70-85, inclusive, and any other acts relative to the business of pawnbrokers and any acts in amendment thereto now or hereafter passed. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 6-19)  
5.32.020 - Conduct of business—Hours. 
Every pawnbroker licensed in the City shall not be open for business except during the following hours: 
A.  On Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Saturdays from eight a.m. to six p.m. 
B.  On Thursdays and Fridays from eight a.m. to nine p.m. 
(Prior code § 6-20)  
Chapter 5.36 - PEDDLERS 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Permit required—Fee. 
No person shall, except in accordance with a permit from the Superintendent of Streets, sell upon any sidewalk of any public way any goods or article or permit to remain in any public way, for more than ten minutes, any goods or article of which he is the owner or in charge. No person shall place or keep any table, stall, booth or other erection, in any street, public place or any sidewalk, for the sale of any merchandise, without permission from the Superintendent of Streets. The fee for the permit set out in this chapter shall be fifty cents. 
(Prior code § 6-21)  
5.36.020 - Selling of certain foods—Permit required—Fee. 
The Board of License Commissioners may grant a license to hawk and peddle meats, butter, cheese, fish and fresh fruits or vegetables to a resident of the City who is of good repute as to morals and integrity. The fee for such license shall be ten dollars. This section shall not apply to any person who is not a resident of the City and who now holds a license. 
(Ord. 1047 (part), 1987; prior code § 6-23)  
5.36.030 - Hour restrictions—Disturbing the peace. 
No person hawking, peddling or selling or exposing for sale, any of the articles enumerated in 3 G.L., c. 101, § 17, shall cry his wares, before the hours of eight a.m. or after the hours of nine p.m., or at any time to the disturbance of the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 6-24)  
5.36.040 - Manner of conveying wares—Perishable goods. 
No hawker or peddler shall carry or convey any of the articles enumerated in 3 G.L., c. 101 § 17, in any manner that will tend to injure or disturb the public health or comfort, and if such articles are perishable in their nature, they shall be conveyed in vehicles or receptacles which are neat and clean and do not leak. Any vehicles, used as aforesaid, shall have printed on them in letters and figures at least two inches in height the name of the person selling and the number given him by the Board of License Commissioners. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 6-25)  
5.36.050 - Article sold by weight or measure. 
No hawker or peddler shall sell any of the articles enumerated in 3 G.L., c. 101, § 17, when such articles are sold by weight or measure, until such weight or measure shall have been stamped by the Sealer of Weights and Measures. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 6-26)  
5.36.060 - Restricted areas. 
No person shall, within the limits of Memorial Drive on the south from the Western Avenue Bridge to Hawthorn Street, to Mount Auburn Street, to Ash Street, to Mason Street, to Garden Street, to Chauncy Street, to Everett Street, to Oxford Street, to Kirkland Street, to Trowbridge Street, to Putnam Square to Putnam Avenue, to Western Avenue and return to Memorial Drive at the Western Avenue Bridge hawk or peddle, sell or expose for sale, distribute or give away goods, wares or merchandise within the confines of the area set out in this section except when authorized to do so by Chapter 101 of the General Laws and acts in amendments thereof or in addition thereto, except under a permit issued by the Chief of Police. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of newspapers. 
(Prior code § 6-28)  
5.36.070 - Conditions and terms—Revocation. 
The permit set out in Section 5.36.010 shall state the conditions and terms under which such permission shall be granted, with all of which the license shall be deemed to comply by accepting the permit, and a violation of any of the terms of such permit shall of itself be a sufficient cause for the revocation thereof. 
(Prior code § 6-27)  
5.36.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense. 
(Prior code § 6-29)  
Chapter 5.40 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
Chapter 5.40 was repealed by Ordinance 1171 effective November 6, 1995. 
(Prior code Ch. 11, Art. 3; see also Ord. Nos. 918 and 1047)  
Chapter 5.44 - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS LICENSE FEES AND REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.44.010 - Lodginghouses. 
As authorized under the provisions of 4 G.L., c. 140, § 23, the fee for each license granted for lodginghouses in the City shall be twenty-four dollars for the first four rooms and every room thereafter per annum. 
(Ord. 1135, 1992) 
(Ord. 1308, Amended, 09/17/2007)  
5.44.020 - Minors. 
The Board of License Commissioners shall issue licenses to minors to engage in street trades or other employment in accordance with all provisions and limitations of the laws of the Commonwealth, applicable to the employment or the working minors. 
(Prior code § 6-30)  
5.44.030 - Slaughterhouses. 
The annual license fee for carrying on the business of slaughtering meat cattle, horses, mules, sheep or swine shall be twenty-five dollars, payable on or before May 1st in each year. 
(Prior code § 12-14)  
5.44.040 - Tour guides. 
No person, unless licensed as hereinafter provided, shall act as a guide for hire in or upon any street, public ground or common. The City Manager shall grant licenses to one or more reputable and qualified person to act as guides in and upon any street, public ground or common, who shall pay therefor the sum of one dollar. Such duly licensed person, when engaged as guide for hire, shall wear, conspicuously placed on the front of his coat or hat, a badge containing the words "licensed guide" and shall produce for inspection the license issued as aforesaid, when requested by any public officer. 
(Prior code § 12-8)  
Chapter 5.48 - LICENSES AND PERMITS OF DELINQUENT TAXPAYERS 
Sections: 
 
5.48.010 - Tax Collector to furnish list of delinquent taxpayers. 
The Assistant City Manager for Fiscal Affairs, as the Cambridge official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges (hereinafter referred to as the "Tax Collector"), shall annually furnish to each city department, board, commission, or division which issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers (hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority"), a list of all persons, corporations, partnerships or other business enterprises which have neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve-month period and which have not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board. (Such persons, corporations, partnerships or other business enterprises shall hereinafter be referred to as "parties"). 
(Ord. 1119 (part), 1991)  
5.48.020 - Revocation of license of delinquent taxpayer—Notice and hearing. 
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the City as of the date of issuance of said certificate. 
(Ord. 1119 (part), 1991)  
5.48.030 - Payment agreement. 
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a delinquent tax payment agreement with the Tax Collector, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a license. The validity of said license shall be conditioned upon satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by law. 
(Ord. 1119 (part), 1991)  
5.48.040 - Waiver of denial, suspension or revocation. 
The City Council may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds that the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in G.L., c. 268A, § 1(e), has no direct or indirect business interest in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. 
(Ord. 1119 (part), 1991)  
5.48.050 - Exclusion of certain licenses and permits. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: 
Open burning, G.L., c.48, § 13; 
Bicycle permits, G.L., c. 85, § 11A; 
Sales of articles for charitable purposes, G.L., c. 101, § 33; 
Children work permits, G.L., c. 149, § 69; 
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, G.L., c. 140, § 21E; 
Fishing, hunting, trapping licenses, G.L., c. 131, § 12; 
Marriage licenses, G.L., c. 207, § 28; and 
Theatrical events, public exhibition permits, G.L., c. 140, §§ 181 and 183A. 
(Ord. 1119 (part), 1991)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Animals" means all mammals, fowl and reptiles, except man. 
B.  "At large" means off the premises of the owner or custodian and not under the control of the owner or custodian either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise. 
C.  "Keep" means possessing, controlling, exercising or allowing to run at large. 
D.  "Owner" means any person possessing, keeping, harboring or having custody of an animal. 
E.  "Park Ranger" shall mean the Chief Park Ranger at the Fresh Pond Reservoir, or any other park ranger designated by the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-1)  
6.04.020 - Dogs—License required—Fee. 
Every dog six months old or over shall be licensed pursuant to G.L. c. 140, § 137. As proof that the dog has been spayed or neutered, the owner or keeper shall present to the Director of the Animal Commission ("Director") or his or her designee a certificate of the registered veterinarian who performed the operation. Effective June 1, 2015, the fee for such license shall, except as otherwise provided, be ten dollars for a spayed or neutered dog and thirty dollars for a dog that is not spayed or neutered. If the Director or his or her designee is satisfied that the certificate of the veterinarian who performed the operation cannot be obtained, he or she may accept in lieu thereof a sworn statement of a veterinarian registered and practicing in the Commonwealth, describing the dog, and stating that he or she has examined the dog and that, in his or her opinion, it has been spayed or neutered. Pursuant to G.L. c. 140, § 139, no fee shall be charged for a license issued under this section for a service animal as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or regulations promulgated thereunder. No part of the fee shall be refunded because of the subsequent death, loss, spaying, castration, removal from the Commonwealth or other disposal of the dog. Nor shall any part of the fee paid by mistake be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 1321, 5/18/2009; Ord. 1275, 2004; 1125 § 2, 1991; Ord. 1096, 1990: Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-7)  
6.04.030 - Dogs—Leash or restraint—Required—Offense. 
A.  No person owning or keeping a dog shall permit it to be at large other than on his or her own premises; if it be on the premises of another person, it shall be with the knowledge and permission of such other person. The owner, keeper or person having custody of a dog which is not on the premises of the owner or upon the premises of another person with the knowledge and permission of such person shall keep the dog under control by means of a chain, rope or cord not exceeding six feet in length of sufficient strength to control the actions of such dog. 
B.  In any prosecution under this chapter, the presence of such dog at large upon premises other than the premises of the owner or keeper of such dog shall be prima facie evidence that such knowledge and permission was not had. 
C.  Any dog found to be at large in violation of this chapter shall be caught and confined by the Director or designee, or a Park Ranger(s), who shall notify forthwith the owner or keeper of such dog by telephone or by leaving a written message at his or her place of residence. If the Director or designee, or a Park Ranger(s) is unable to communicate with the owner or keeper by these means, he or she shall, within two days of such failure, notify such owner or keeper, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The owner or keeper shall have seven days from the date the dog is caught within which to recover the dog. The owner or keeper shall be liable for all costs of care and confinement, in addition to any other amounts allowed by law. 
D.  Return of the dog to the licensed owner or keeper shall be dependent on admission of ownership or the keeping of the dog and the assumption of responsibility by the licensed owner or keeper, plus full payment of all costs of care and confinement, in addition to any other amounts allowed by law. The Director or designee shall enter and prosecute a complaint against the owner or keeper of any dog taken into his or her custody under this section; provided, however, if within the twelve months next preceding this offense the owner or keeper has not been convicted for violation of this chapter or a dog owned or kept by him or her has not been taken into custody for violation of this chapter, the Director or designee may waive prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-9)  
6.04.040 - Dogs—Leash or restraint—Areas exempted where. 
A.  Dogs may go unleashed in areas within the City that have been designated as off-leash dog areas and signed as such. Dogs are permitted to use the off-leash dog areas provided that: 
1.  All dogs are leashed prior to entering and upon leaving the off-leash dog area; 
2.  The owner/keeper of the dog(s), at all times while his/her dog(s) is (are) using the designated off-leash dog area, is in attendance with the dog(s) in the designated area; 
3.  The owner/keeper of the dog(s) has a leash in his/her possession for each dog he/she owns/keeps that is using the designated area; 
4.  All dogs using the off-leash dog areas have a current Cambridge dog license which must be displayed on the dog at all times; 
5.  All dogs must be accompanied by an owner/keeper and be under his/her control at all times. 
6.  The following dogs are not permitted to use these off-leash dog areas: 
a.  Dogs determined to have a vicious disposition pursuant to M.G.L. ch. 140 §157 or Cambridge Municipal Code Chapter 6.08 
b.  Dogs in heat; 
c.  Dogs wearing prong or choke collars. 
B.  Each owner/keeper may only have a maximum of three dogs at one time in one of the off-leash dog areas. 
C.  All off-leash dog areas are subject to the provisions of M.G.L. ch. 140 §157 providing, inter alia, that excessive barking, display of vicious disposition and other disturbances or sources of annoyance may constitute a nuisance. 
D.  Use of designated off-leash dog areas will be permitted during the regular operating hours of the park in which the off-leash dog area is located. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 1125 § 3, 1991; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-8; 306, Amended, 06/04/2007)  
6.04.050 - Dogs—Nuisances unlawful. 
No person shall own or keep in the City any dog which by barking, biting, howling or in any other manner, disturbs the quiet of any person. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-2)  
6.04.060 - Dogs—Removal of waste required. 
It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his or her dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street or other public area, or on any private property neither owned nor occupied by such person. No such person shall appear with a dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street or other public area, or on any private property neither owned nor occupied by such person without the means of removal of any feces left by such dog. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-10)  
6.04.070 - Running at large—Permits for exhibitions. 
No owner or person having the care of any domestic fowl, or any goats, sheep, swine, horses, oxen, cows or other grazing animals, shall permit or suffer the same to go at large, or to graze on any street; and no person shall publicly exhibit any animal in the streets or public places of the City except in accordance with a permit from the Superintendent of Streets. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-3)  
6.04.080 - Fast driving. 
No person having the care or use of a horse or other beast of burden, carriage or drought, shall ride, drive or permit such horse or other beast to go at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having regard to traffic and the use of the way and the safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-4)  
6.04.090 - Frightening horses. 
No person shall, by any noise, gestures, words or other means, wantonly and designedly frighten and drive any horse in any street. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-5)  
6.04.100 - Enforcement officials designated. 
The Director, Animal Control Officers, or Park Ranger(s) shall have the authority of enforcing all sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-12)  
6.04.110 - Violation—Complaint disposition. 
A.  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of Sections 6.04.030 and 6.04.060 of this chapter, notices of violation (appearance tickets) may be issued by Sanitation Inspectors and Code Enforcement Inspectors detailed with the Public Health and Inspectional Services Departments, by persons appointed as Parking Control Officers detailed within the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, by any Police Officer, by the Director, Animal Control Officers, Park Ranger(s) and employees of the Water Department recommended by the Water Board and approved by the Police Commissioner in those areas under the jurisdiction of the Water Board. 
B.  Any owner or keeper of a dog, who has been observed by a Police Officer to have violated any provisions of Sections 6.04.020, 6.04.030, 6.04.040 and 6.04.060 of this chapter, and who refuses to give proper personal identification of his or her person to such Police Officer upon request, shall be subject to arrest. 
C.  All fines and penalties assessed and collected under this chapter may be enforced by issuance of non-criminal tickets pursuant to G.L. c. 40, Section 21D, or as otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 1097, 1990; Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-11)  
6.04.120 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sections 6.04.040, 6.04.050, 6.04.070, 6.04.080 or 6.04.090 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Section 6.04.020 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars for each offense. A violation of Section 6.04.030 shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars for each offense, plus any and all costs of care and confinement, and any other amounts allowed by law. A violation of Section 6.04.060 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars for each offense. ;hno; (Ord. No. 1373, 10/19/2015; Ord. 1125 § 1, 1991: Ord. 998 (part), 1983: prior code § 4-6)  
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMALS CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Regulation of vicious dogs. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent: 
1.  "Potentially vicious dog" means: 
a.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; or 
b.  Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or animals; or 
c.  Any dog whose owner has been cited on three separate occasions within the previous twelve months for failing to restrain said dog; or 
d.  Any dog not licensed according to City ordinance as provided in Section 6.04.020. 
2.  "Vicious dog" means: 
a.  Any dog having been previously found to be potentially vicious which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; or 
b.  Any dog which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on public or private property; or 
c.  Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting. 
d.  Notwithstanding the above definition of "vicious dog," no dog may be declared vicious if any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
e.  No dog may be declared vicious if any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog. 
f.  No dog may be declared vicious if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
3.  "Enclosure" means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog. Such enclosure shall be securely constructed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom so as to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. 
4.  "Impounded" means taken into the custody of the Animal Commission. 
5.  "Person" means a natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to a corporation, firm, partnership or trust. 
B.  Determination that Dog Is Vicious. 
1.  In the event that an agent or member of the Animal Commission has cause to believe that a dog is vicious, or upon the written complaint of a citizen made under oath and attesting to the same, the Director of the Animal Commission or his or her designee shall be empowered to convene a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the dog in question should be declared vicious. The Animal Commission shall, as is deemed necessary, conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation of the matter and shall notify the owner or keeper of the dog that a hearing will be held, at which time he or she may have the opportunity to present evidence why the dog should not be declared vicious. Service of notice shall be made by hand delivery or certified mail. The hearing shall be held promptly within no less than five nor more than ten days after service of notice upon the owner or keeper of the dog. The hearing shall be informal and open to the public. 
2.  After the hearing, the owner or keeper of the dog shall be notified in writing of the determination. If a determination is made that the dog is vicious, the owner or keeper shall comply with the registration provisions of this section, stated below, in accordance with a time schedule established by the Animal Commission, but in no case more than thirty days subsequent to the date of determination. If the owner or keeper of the dog contests the determination, he or she may, within five days of such determination, appeal the determination in the Third District Court of Eastern Middlesex County. 
3.  In the event that the Animal Commission has cause to believe that the dog in question is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the Commission may seize and impound the dog pending the aforesaid hearing and appeal. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be liable to the City for the costs and expenses of keeping such dog. 
C.  Determination that Dog Is Potentially Vicious. Any Animal Control Officer or other agent of the Animal Commission may make a determination without a hearing that a dog is potentially vicious, in accordance with the aforementioned definition of "potentially vicious dog." Such a determination may be subject to the review of the full membership of the Animal Commission upon the petition of the owner or keeper of said dog. 
D.  Registration Requirements. No vicious or potentially vicious dog shall be licensed by the City for any licensing period commencing after November 1, 1988 unless the owner or keeper of such vicious or potentially vicious dog shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The owner or keeper of a vicious or potentially vicious dog shall confine said dog inside his or her dwelling or inside a proper enclosure on his or her property. It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper of a vicious or potentially vicious dog to permit said dog to be outside the proper enclosure or dwelling unless said dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the control of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal; 
2.  The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall, at his or her own expense, have the licensing number assigned to such dog, or other such number as the Animal Commission shall determine, tattooed upon such vicious dog by a licensed veterinarian or other person trained as a tattooist. The Animal Commission may, in its discretion, designate the particular location of said tattoo; 
3.  The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall present to the Animal Commission proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars, covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such vicious dog during the twelve month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a provision requiring the City to be named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of the Animal Commission to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy; 
4.  The owner or keeper of a vicious or potentially vicious dog shall display a sign on his or her premises warning that there is such a dog on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from any adjacent public way; 
5.  The owner or keeper of a vicious or potentially vicious dog shall sign statements attesting that: 
a.  In the case of a vicious dog, the owner or keeper of said dog shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the twelve month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner or keeper shall cease to own or keep the vicious dog prior to expiration of such license, 
b.  The owner or keeper shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the vicious or potentially vicious dog on the property where said dog will be kept or maintained, 
c.  The owner or keeper shall notify the Animal Commission within twenty-four hours if a vicious or potentially vicious dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a human being, or has died or has been sold or given away. If the vicious or potentially vicious dog has been sold or given away, the owner or keeper shall also provide the Animal Commission with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of said dog; 
6.  The Animal Commission is empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section, and any agent of the Commission is empowered to seize and impound any vicious or potentially vicious dog whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. In the event that the owner or keeper of the dog refuses to surrender the animal to the Commission, the Commission Director may request a police officer to obtain a search warrant and to seize the dog upon execution of the warrant; 
7.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to K-9 or other dogs owned by any police department or any law enforcement officer which are used in the performance of police work; 
8.  The owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall pay, in addition to the standard dog license fee, a sum of ten dollars for each vicious dog registered. 
D.  Penalties for Violation. 
1.  a.  Any vicious or potentially vicious dog which does not have a valid license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or 
b.  In the case of a vicious dog, whose owner or keeper does not secure the liability insurance coverage required in accordance with this section, or 
c.  Any vicious or potentially vicious dog which shall be outside of the dwelling of the owner or keeper or outside of an enclosure and unmuzzled and/or otherwise unrestrained shall be confiscated by the Animal Commission and destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner after the expiration of a ten day waiting period exclusive of Sundays and holidays. In addition, the owner or keeper shall pay a one hundred fifty dollar fine. 
2.  If any vicious or potentially vicious dog shall, when unprovoked, kill, wound or worry or assist in killing or wounding any domestic animal, the owner or keeper of said dog shall pay a one hundred fifty dollar fine and the Animal Commission is empowered to confiscate and, after the expiration of a ten day waiting period, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, shall destroy said dog. For each subsequent violation the owner or keeper of said dog shall pay a fine of three hundred dollars. 
3.  If any vicious or potentially vicious dog shall, when unprovoked, attack, assault, wound, bite or otherwise injure or kill a human being, the owner or keeper shall pay a three hundred dollar fine and the Animal Commission is empowered to confiscate and, after the expiration of a ten day waiting period, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, shall destroy said dog. For each and any subsequent violation, said owner or keeper shall pay a fine of three hundred dollars. 
4.  No person shall be charged under subsections 1, 2 or 3 above unless the dog, prior to the offense alleged, shall have been declared vicious or potentially vicious pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
5.  The Animal Commission shall provide notice of the impoundment and/or pending destruction of a vicious or potentially vicious dog to the registered owner or keeper of said dog. Service of notice shall be made by hand delivery or certified mail within five days next following the date of impoundment. 
6.  If the owner or keeper of a dog impounded for an alleged violation of this section shall believe that there has not been a violation of this section, such owner or keeper may petition a court of competent jurisdiction praying that the dog not be destroyed. The impounded dog shall not be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's or keeper's petition. The dog shall remain impounded pending a hearing on the petition and any subsequent appeal. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: Ord. 1088, 1989)  
Chapter 6.12 - CARE AND USE OF LABORATORY ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Definitions. 
In the context of this ordinance the following definitions are adopted: 
(a)  An animal is any nonhuman vertebrate. 
(b)  An experiment is any procedure conducted by a research institution upon a live animal. 
(c)  A research institution is any facility operated in the City of Cambridge, any school or college of medicine, public health, dentistry, pharmacy, veterinary medicine, or agricultural, medical, biological, or diagnostic laboratory, biological corporation, hospital or other educational or scientific establishment within the City of Cambridge which, in connection with any of its activities, investigates or gives instruction concerning the structure and function of living organisms or the causes, prevention, control or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human beings or animals, or participates in the development, marketing, or testing of any commercial product utilizing live animals. 
(Ord. 1086, Added, 06/26/1989)  
6.12.020 - Commissioner of Laboratory Animals. 
A.  The City Manager shall appoint a Commissioner of Laboratory Animals (CLA) for the purpose of overseeing the care and use of laboratory animals in the City. The Commissioner shall neither be aligned with an antivivisection nor a biomedical research organization or movement. The CLA's qualifications should include an understanding of animal welfare, health, physiology, psychology and pathology, as well as the philosophy and goals of the animal welfare movement and scientific endeavor. 
B.  The CLA shall use the February 24, 1989 "Joint Report of the Mayor's Blue Ribbon Committee on the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals in Cambridge" as a guide to his or her oversight of the care and use of laboratory animals in Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-31)  
6.12.030 - Registration and registration fee. 
Each research institution shall register with the CLA. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-32)  
6.12.040 - Guidelines for the care and use of animals. 
All experiments on all animals within the City shall be undertaken in conformity with all federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations concerning the welfare of animals including the "Guide for the Care and Use of Animals" of the National Institutes of Health, the "Animal Welfare Act" (7 U.S.C. sections 2131, et seq.), the Health Research Extension Act of 1985, the "Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals," G.L. c. 140, s. 174D, and 105 CMR 910.000 et seq., all as amended or revised from time to time. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-33)  
6.12.050 - Animal care and use committees. 
A.  Each institution that performs research, experiments or biotechnical procedures using animals shall maintain or establish an autonomous animal care and use committee with the power to disapprove or restrict research, experiments or biotechnical procedures regarding the care and use of laboratory animals in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 6.12.040. Each animal care and use committee shall have a member who is not and has not been affiliated with the institution. 
B.  An individual not affiliated with the institution in any way and who is neither aligned with an antivivisection nor a biomedical research or other biotechnical organization or movement shall be appointed to the animal care and use committee. The nonaffiliated person should be knowledgeable about animal welfare philosophy and about the purpose of scientific research. The appointment of the nonaffiliated member shall be made by the chief executive of the institution for a term of one year subject to renewal at the expiration of the term. Appointment and renewal shall be binding only on approval of the Commissioner of Laboratory Animals. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-34)  
6.12.060 - Reports and information. 
Each animal care and use committee of each research institution shall provide the following information for review by the CLA at the time of his annual visit: 
A.  The number and species of animals used in the previous year; 
B.  The results of all federal and state inspections concerning animal care and use in the previous year; 
C.  The name and occupation of the nonaffiliated members of the animal care and use committee; 
D.  The dates of meetings of the animal care and use committee held in the previous year; 
E.  The number of experiments or protocols for procedures reviewed by the animal care and use committee in the previous year. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-35)  
6.12.070 - Reports of violations. 
The CLA shall report any violation of the standards prescribed in Section 6.12.040 to the chief executive officer of the research institution. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-36)  
6.12.080 - Inspections and investigations. 
The CLA shall make at least one annual visit to each research institution to inspect animal and research facilities and hold at least one annual meeting with the chairperson and with the nonaffiliated member of the animal care and use committee to discuss its work. The CLA may inspect any animal care and use committee reports and documents on his annual visit. The CLA shall make unannounced visits to inspect animal and research facilities as needed. Meetings and inspections should be made to ensure that the standards set forth in Section 6.12.040 are being followed. The CLA shall report to the City Manager from time to time and may make recommendations to him regarding the care and use of laboratory animals within the City. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-37)  
6.12.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any research institution that violates this chapter shall, after hearing by the Commissioner, be punished by a fine of three hundred dollars per violation per day. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1086 (part), 1989: prior code § 11-38)  
6.12.100 - Severability of Sections. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit anything otherwise required by federal or state law. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(1086, Added, 06/26/1989)  
Chapter 6.18 - PROHIBITING THE USE OF WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS IN TRAVELING SHOWS AND CIRCUSES 
 
6.18.010 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the Cambridge City Council to protect the public against hazards that wild and exotic animals used in traveling shows and circuses pose to society and to protect wild and exotic animals from cruel and inhumane treatment. 
( Ord. 1381 , 2/22/2016)  
6.18.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter only, the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and to be construed as follows: 
A.  "Circus" means a class C licensee that is licensed under the Animal Welfare Act (7 USC Section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments, regulations, and standards adopted pursuant to the Act, that offers performances by live animals, clowns and/or acrobats. 
B.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, trust, estate, or any legal entity, and any officer, member, shareholder, director, employee, agent or representative of these. 
C.  "Traveling show" means any mobile or stationary act or exhibition, circus, public show, trade show, photographic opportunity, carnival, city or county fair, ride, parade, race, performance, or similar undertaking incorporating wild or exotic animals wherein the animals are taken from their permanent residence and required to walk or travel for any distance. 
D.  "Wild or exotic animal" means any or all of the following orders and families, whether born in the wild or in captivity, and also any or all of their hybrids with domestic species. The animals listed in parentheses are intended to act as examples and are not to be construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of animals, unless otherwise specified: 
1.  Non-human primates and prosimians (such as chimpanzees, baboons, monkeys, etc.)—All species. 
2.  Felidae (such as lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, servals, etc.)—All species except domestic cats. 
3.  Canidae (such as wolves, coyotes, etc.)—All species except domestic dogs. 
4.  Ursidae (such as bears)—All species. 
5.  Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, etc.) All species. 
6.  Proboscidae (such as elephants)—All species. 
7.  Crocodilia (such as crocodiles, alligators, etc.)—All species. 
8.  Artiodactyla (such as hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, etc.)—All species except domestic cattle, swine, sheep or goats. 
9.  Perissodactyla (such as zebras, rhinos, and tapirs)—All species except domestic horses, donkeys or mules. 
10.  Struthioniformes (such as ostriches)—All species. 
11.  Casuariiformes (such as emus)—All species. 
E.  "Wildlife sanctuary" means a 501(c)(3) organization described in Section 170 (b)(1)(A)(vi) Internal Revenue Code 1986, and its subsequent amendments where: 
1.  No commercial trade in animals occurs (including, but not limited to, sale of animals, animal parts, by-products, offspring, photographic opportunities or public events for financial profit, or any other entertainment purposes); 
2.  No propogation of animals occurs in the facility; and 
3.  No unescorted public visitation is allowed; no direct contact between the public and wild animals is allowed; animals are not taken from the sanctuary or enclosures for exhibition. 
( Ord. 1381 , 2/22/2016)  
6.18.030 - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor, walk, exhibit, or operate a traveling show or circus that includes live wild or exotic animals on any public or private land within the City of Cambridge. 
( Ord. 1381 , 2/22/2016)  
6.18.040 - Enforcement. 
Police officers, the Director of the Animal Commission or his or her designee shall have the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and perform all the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter. All fines and penalties assessed and collected under this chapter may be enforced by issuance of non-criminal tickets pursuant to G.L. c. 40, Section 21D, or as otherwise authorized by law. 
( Ord. 1381 , 2/22/2016)  
6.18.050 - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating this section shall be fined not less than $150.00 and not more than $300.00 dollars per animal per day, or as otherwise permitted by law. 
( Ord. 1381 , 2/22/2016)  
6.18.060 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium Association; 
2.  Any wildlife sanctuary as defined under this chapter; or 
3.  Any museum, educational, governmental or medical institution, or any other duly licensed place where such animals are kept for the purpose of instruction, treatment, or study. 
( Ord. 1381 , 2/22/2016)  
Chapter 6.20 - RESTRICTIONS ON THE SALE OF ANIMALS IN PET SHOPS 
 
6.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Amphibian" means a member of the Amphibia class, subclass Lissamphibia 
B.  "Animal care facility" means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality, whose mission or practice is, in whole, or significant part, protecting the welfare of animals and the placement of animals in permanent homes or with animal rescue organizations. 
C.  "Animal rescue organization" means any not-for-profit organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue of animals and the placement of those animals in permanent homes, and which does not obtain birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles from a breeder or broker for payment or compensation. 
D.  "Bird" means a member of the Aves class. 
E.  "Breeder" means a person who maintains birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles for the purpose of breeding and selling their offspring. 
F.  "Broker" means a person who transfers birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles at wholesale for resale by another. 
G.  "Mammal" means a member of the class mammalia. 
H.  "Offer for sale" means to sell, offer for sale or adoption, barter, auction, give away or otherwise transfer a bird, mammal, amphibian, or reptile. 
I.  "Pet shop" means a retail establishment where mammals, birds, amphibians, arachnids or reptiles, are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined. 
J.  "Reptile" means a member of the Reptilia class. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.020 - Prohibition on Retail Sales. 
A.  A pet shop may offer for sale only those arachnids, birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles that the pet shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with: 
1.  An animal care facility, as defined in section 6.20.010 of this chapter; or 
2.  An animal rescue organization, as defined in section 6.20.010 of this chapter; or 
3.  An animal sold or displayed for agricultural uses; or 
4.  Dead animals sold or displayed as breeder animals. 
B.  Each pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source of each arachnid, bird, mammal, amphibian, or reptile the pet shop acquires, for at least one year following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available, immediately upon request, to the Director of the Animal Commission, any Animal Control Officer, Police Officer and/or Sanitation Inspector or Code Enforcement Inspector detailed with the Public Health and Inspectional Services Departments. 
C.  Each pet shop offering arachnids, birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles for sale shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each animal, a sign listing the name of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from which each arachnid, bird, mammal, amphibian, or reptile in the cage or enclosure was acquired. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.030 - Prohibition on Sales in Public Places. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, exchange, trade, barter, lease or display for a commercial purpose any arachnid, bird, mammal, amphibian, or reptile on any roadside, public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, other recreation area, flea market or other outdoor market, or commercial or retail parking lot regardless of whether such access is authorized by the property owner. 
B.  This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  The display for adoption of arachnids, birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles by an animal care facility or an animal rescue organization, as defined in section 6.20.010 of this chapter; or 
2.  The display of arachnids, birds, mammals, amphibians, or reptiles as part of a state or county fair exhibition, 4-H program, or similar exhibitions or educational programs. 
3.  An animal sold or displayed for agricultural uses. 
4.  Dead animals sold or displayed as breeder animals. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.040 - Enforcement Officials Designated. 
The Director of the Animal Commission, Animal Control Officers, Police Officers and Sanitation Inspectors and Code Enforcement Inspectors detailed with the Public Health and Inspectional Services Departments shall have the authority of enforcing all sections of this chapter. All fines and penalties assessed and collected under this chapter may be enforced by issuance of non-criminal tickets pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 21D, or as otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who sells an arachnid, bird, mammal, amphibian, or reptile in violation of section 6.20.020 or 6.20.030 of this chapter shall be fined three hundred ($300.00) dollars. Each animal sold or offered for sale in violation of these sections shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.060 - Implementation. 
An advisory committee will be created by the City Manager to assist Cambridge pet shops to comply with Chapter 6.20. The committee will include a representative of the Cambridge Animal Commission. The committee will also include at least one representative from Cambridge pet shops, and one representative each from the Humane Society of the United States, the Animal Rescue League of Boston, and the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. The committee will be chaired by a designee of the City Manager; will remain in effect for eighteen months after passage of the ordinance; and will issue an implementation status report to the City Council before the end of its eighteen month term. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.070 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application thereof shall not be affected and shall continue to be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
6.20.080 - Effective Date. 
The provisions of these sections shall be effective one year after passage. 
(Ord. 1396, 8/7/2017)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
   
Chapter 8.08 - EXPLOSIVES AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 
 
8.08.010 - Petroleum license—Approval authority. 
Licenses shall be granted by the Board of License Commissioners pursuant to the regulations and restrictions contained in 4 G.L., c. 148, §§ 1, et seq. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 6-31)  
8.08.020 - Petroleum license—Annual fees. 
A.  Garages and Keeping and Storage for Sale of Gases or Petroleum Products. 
1.  Fees for the licenses for garages and for the keeping and storage for sale of petroleum products or any other inflammable fluids or gases or petroleum products, required under Chapter 148 of the General Laws, Section 13, as amended, are established as follows: 
Aggregate Car Storage Capacity for each Garage 	Fee for Original License and Certificate of Registration 
4 to 10 cars 	$ 31.00 
11 to 50 cars 	  60.00 
51 to 100 cars 	  121.00 
101 and over 	  181.00 
 
2.  No fee for certificates of registration shall be required for garages having a capacity of not more than three cars. 
3.  Fees for licenses for keeping and storage for sale of petroleum products or any other inflammable fluids or gases are established as follows, except where the license is issued for the keeping and storage for direct consumption on the premises licensed or direct consumption by motor vehicles owned by the licensee or his assignee. 
Aggregate Storage Capacity for Entire Parcel of Land Licensed (in gallons) 	Fee for Original License and Certificate of Registration 
1 to 5,000 	$ 60.00 
5,001 to 15,000 	  121.00 
15,001 to 30,000 	  242.00 
30,001 to 50,000 	  363.00 
50,001 to 100,000 	  484.00 
100,001 to 200,000 	  605.00 
200,001 to 300,000 	  726.00 
300,001 to 400,000 	  847.00 
400,001 to 500,000 	  968.00 
500,001 to 1,000,000 	  1,089.00 
1,000,000 and over 	  1,210.00 
 
4.  If a license is applied for solely for the purpose of keeping and storage, for direct consumption on the premises licensed or for direct consumption by motor vehicles owned by the licensee or his assignee, and not for the sale of petroleum products or any other inflammable fluids or gases or petroleum products, the fee shall be twelve dollars and ten cents, provided that such petroleum products, inflammable fluids or gases are not used in the manufacture of a product which is then sold at a profit. 
5.  Certificates of registration must be filed on or before April 30th of each year. 
B.  Special Garages. Special parking garages constructed without exterior walls shall for the purposes of this chapter be construed as open air parking and the fee for such parking shall be as follows: Twelve dollars and ten cents for each car. 
C.  Gases in Cylinders. 
1.  The keeping and storage of inflammable gases in cylinders above ground by an individual shall require payment of the following fees: 
Aggregate Storage (in cubic feet) 	Fee for Original License and Certificate of Registration 
10,000 to 20,000 	$ 48.00 
20,001 to 30,000 	  97.00 
30,001 to 40,000 	  193.00 
40,001 and over 	  363.00 
 
2.  No fee for certificate of registration shall be required for storage of inflammable gases under ten thousand cubic feet. A permit shall be issued by the Fire Department for any storage of such gases less than ten thousand cubic feet. 
(Ord. 1134, 1992) 
(Ord. 1134, Amended, 04/02/1992)  
8.08.030 - Gunpowder and explosives—Enforcement of use regulations. 
The Chief of the Fire Department shall enforce the provisions of 4 G.L., c. 148 as to keeping, storage, use, manufacture, sale, etc., of gunpowder, dynamite, crude petroleum or any of its products or explosives or inflammable fluids or compounds, etc., and any and all other laws hereafter enacted relative to such substances. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 10-28)  
Chapter 8.12 - GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS 
 
8.12.010 - Self-service station regulations. 
The dispensing of motor fuel by means of self-service automated dispensing systems shall be permitted at any authorized gasoline station. All installations shall comply with the regulations promulgated by the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations in the Commonwealth. 
( Ord. 1391 , 4/3/2017; Ord. 1026, 1985: prior code § 6-32A)  
Chapter 8.16 - NOISE CONTROL 
 
8.16.010 - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance" of the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.020 - Declaration of findings and policy—Scope. 
A.  Declaration of Findings and Policy. Whereas excessive sound and vibration are a serious hazard to the public health and welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and whereas the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health or welfare or safety or degrade the quality of life; now, therefore, it is the policy of the City to prevent excessive sound and vibration which may jeopardize the health and welfare or safety of its citizens or degrade the quality of life. 
B.  Scope. This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound and vibration originating within the limits of the City, unless otherwise exempted by law. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.030 - Definitions. 
1.  "Authorized enforcement personnel" means the City Police Commissioner, the Commissioner of the Inspectional Services Department, the Chairperson of the License Commission and their designees. 
2.  "Commercial area" means any area defined as an office or business district by the City zoning ordinance, Article 3.000. 
3.  "Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
4.  "Daytime" means the period between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. daily except Sunday and holidays according to the time system locally in effect. 
5.  "dB" means the abbreviation for decibel. 
6.  "dB(A)" means the A-weighted sound level in decibels, as measured by a general purpose sound level meter complying with the provisions of Specifications for Sound Level Meters (S1. 4 1971), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), properly calibrated, and operated on the "A" weighting network. 
7.  "Demolition" means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
8.  "Emergency" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
9.  "Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
10.  "Hz" means the abbreviation for Hertz, which means cycles per second. 
11.  "Impact device" means a construction device in which or by which a hammer, meaning a moving mass of hard solid material, is mechanically by means of a working fluid or compressed air caused to repetitively impact upon and transmit kinetic energy to a tool. The tool may be included as a part of the device, as in the case of a moil on a paving breaker or the drill steel of a jackhammer, or it may be a mass to which the impact device is temporarily connected as in the case of a pile and pile driver. Examples of impact devices are pile drivers, paving breakers and power impact hammers, impact wrenches, riveters and stud drivers. 
12.  "Industrial area" means any area defined as an industrial district by the City zoning ordinance, Article 3.000. 
13.  "L 10 level" means the A-weighted sound level exceeded ten percent of the time. 
14.  "Motor vehicles" means any vehicle so defined in G.L., c. 90, § 1. 
15.  "Motorcycle" means any vehicle so defined in G.L., c. 90, § 1. 
16.  "Noise disturbance" means any sound which (a) causes temporary or permanent hearing loss in persons exposed; or (b) is injurious to the public health; (c) causes a nuisance which is prohibited by law; or (d) is defined as a noise disturbance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
17.  "Noise sensitive zone" means any area designated by the enforcement authority pursuant to subsection B of Section 8.16.040 of this chapter for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet. Noise sensitive zones shall include, but not be limited to, areas where noise sensitive activity occurs, such as the operation of schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals and nursing homes. 
18.  "Person" means any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. 
19.  "Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
20.  "Public space" means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
21.  "Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
22.  "Residential area" means any area defined as a residence district by the City zoning ordinance, Article 3.000. 
23.  "Sound pressure level" is numerically equal to twenty times the logarithm (to the base ten) of the sound pressure to the reference sound pressure (the reference sound pressure shall equal twenty micropascals). Unless otherwise stated, the level is understood to be that of a root mean-square pressure. 
24.  "Weekday" means any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.040 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement Officials. The Police Commissioner, the Commissioner of the Inspectional Services Department and the Chairperson of the License Commission shall be the authorized enforcement personnel charged with the enforcement of these provisions. 
B.  The License Commission may designate any appropriate area as a noise sensitive zone as that term is defined in Section 8.16.030(17) of this chapter. 
C.  Violations. Authorized enforcement personnel may: order and specify reasonable remedial actions to be taken by a violator of this chapter to achieve compliance; or issue citations, pursuant to G.L., c. 40, § 21D, for violations of these provisions assessing fines of three hundred dollars for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue. Additionally, any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined three hundred dollars. 
D.  Injunction. As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter and which causes a noise disturbance may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
E.  Suspension or Revocation of License or Permit. As an additional remedy for violation of any provision of this chapter, any enforcement official under subsection A of this section may summarily suspend, and after a hearing may revoke, any license or permit, including a building or demolition permit. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.050 - General prohibition of noise disturbances. 
No person or persons owning, leasing or controlling the operation of any source or sources of noise shall wilfully, negligently, or through failure to provide necessary equipment or facilities or to take necessary precautions, permit the establishment or continuation of a condition of noise disturbance. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.060 - Measured noise disturbance. 
A.  This section shall apply to the use or occupancy of any lot or structure thereon and to the noise produced thereby, but shall not apply to the following: 
1.  To the intermittent or occasional use, during the daytime, of light homeowner's residential outdoor equipment or commercial service equipment provided said equipment and its use complies with other provisions of this chapter; 
2.  To construction activities and the associated use of construction devices nor to the noise produced thereby, provided such activities, and such equipment and its use, comply with provisions of this chapter. 
3.  To bell towers or clock towers with bels or chimes. 
(Ord. 1206, Added, 07/27/1998) 
B.  Noise in Residential Areas or Affecting Residential Property. No person shall create or cause to be emitted from or by any source subject to the provisions of this chapter, any noise which causes or results in a noise level, measured at any lot line of any lot located in any residential area or in residential use elsewhere in conformance with the zoning ordinance, in excess of any level of subsection E of this section, residential district noise standard, provided, that if said lot is located in any industrial area, the noise level measured at the lot line shall not exceed any level of subsection E of this section, residential-industrial noise standard. Noise emitted from construction sites shall be excepted from this regulation. 
C.  Noise in Commercial Areas. No person shall create or cause to be emitted from or by any source subject to the provisions of this chapter, any noise which causes or results in a noise level, measured at any lot line of any lot in any commercial area other than a lot in residential use in conformance with the zoning ordinance, in excess of any level of subsection E of this section, business district noise standard. Noise emitted from construction sites shall be excepted from this regulation. 
D.  Noise in Industrial Areas. No person shall create or cause to be emitted from or by any source subject to this chapter, any noise which causes or results in a noise level, measured at any lot line of any lot in recreational or business use in any industrial area in conformance with the zoning ordinance, in excess of any level of subsection E of this section, industrial district noise standard. Noise emitted from construction sites shall be excepted from this regulation. 
E.  Area Noise Standards. Noise standards referred to in this chapter for the several zoning districts of the City, as defined in and established pursuant to the City zoning ordinance are established by Table 8.16.060E following this section. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991) 
TABLE 8.16.060E 
TABLE OF ZONING DISTRICT NOISE STANDARDS 
Maximum Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels 
Octave Band Center Frequency Measurement (Hz) 	Residential Area 	Residential in Industrial 	Commercial Area 	Industry Area 
	Daytime 	Other Times 	Daytime 	Other Times 	Anytime 	Anytime 
31.5 	76 	68 	79 	72 	79 	83 
63 	75 	67 	78 	71 	78 	82 
125 	69 	61 	73 	65 	73 	77 
250 	62 	52 	68 	57 	68 	73 
500 	56 	46 	62 	51 	62 	67 
1,000 	50 	40 	56 	45 	56 	61 
2,000 	45 	33 	51 	39 	51 	57 
4,000 	40 	28 	47 	34 	47 	53 
8,000 	38 	26 	44 	32 	44 	50 
Single Number 
Equivalent (dB(A)) 	60 	50 	65 	55 	65 	70 
 
(Ord. 1206, Added, 07/27/1998)  
8.16.070 - Restrictions on noise emitted from construction sites. 
A.  1.  Except as provided for in subsections C and D of this section, it is unlawful for any person to operate any construction device or devices on any construction site if the operation of such device or devices emits noise, measured at the lot line of the affected property, in excess of the values shown below: 
Lot Use of Affected 	L 10 	Maximum Noise 
Property 	Level 	Level 
Residential 	75 dB(A) 	86 dB(A) 
Business or Office 	80 dB(A) 	— 
Industrial 	85 dB(A) 	— 
 
2.  The same level shall apply to a public way as applies to an industrial use. Measurements should not be taken closer than fifty feet or approximately fifteen meters from the nearest active construction device on the construction site. The maximum noise level shall be measured on the sound level meter at slow response. 
B.  The L 10 level shall be determined in the following manner: 
1.  Every ten seconds, on the mark, the A-weighted noise level on the sound level meter with slow response is recorded until one hundred observations have been made. If, during any of these observations, a measurement is substantially affected by any source outside the construction site (such as aircraft overflight), measurements made during these periods will not be considered. However, the observation period shall be extended until one hundred valid measurements are obtained. The L 10 level will be that level that is equal to the tenth highest level recorded. 
2.  If, in the estimation of the person taking the measurements, outside noise sources contribute significantly to the noise level, the above procedure shall be repeated (with the same outside noise source contributions) when construction is inactive, in order to determine the existing background L 10 level. The L 10 level during construction must exceed the background L 10 level by 5 dB(A) to be considered a violation of subsection A of this section. 
C.  1.  Except as provided for in subsection D of this section, it shall be unlawful to operate a construction device at any street excavation, grading or repair, utility street work installation or repair, which produces a noise level exceeding 86 dB(A) at a distance of fifty feet or approximately fifteen meters from the device. 
2.  The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any construction site covered by subdivision C(1). The provisions of this subsection will not be applicable to any construction device used in emergency service work that is necessary to return utility service to an area provided that within twenty-four hours such device is brought into compliance with this section or is not reused within the City until it does comply. 
D.  The provisions of subsections A and C of this section shall not be applicable to impact devices. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.080 - Non-measured noise disturbances. 
Noise Disturbances Prohibited. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. Non-commercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this section. Bell towers and clock towers with bells or chimes shall be exempt from the operation of this section. (Ord. 1206, Added, 07/27/1998) 
A.  Horns, Signalling Devices, Etc. The sounding of any horn or signalling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signalling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signalling device except the one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signalling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
B.  Radios, Phonographs, Etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker or public address systems, unless used by the City of Cambridge, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure, vehicle or dwelling unit in which it is located. 
C.  Street Sales. Offering for sale or selling anything by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area of the City except between the hours of eight a.m. and five p.m. if all necessary permits are obtained. 
D.  Animals, Birds. Etc. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which frequently or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which are plainly audible within a noise sensitive zone, or plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the lot line of the lot on which it is located. 
E.  Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. the following day on weekdays, or between the hours of nine p.m. and nine a.m. the following day when the following day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the lot line of the lot on which such activity is located, or to be plainly audible within a noise sensitive zone. 
F.  Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work: 
1.  Between the hours of six p.m. and seven a.m. the following day on weekdays, or between the hours of six p.m. and nine a.m. the following day when the following day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the lot line of the lot on which said activity is located, or within a noise sensitive zone, except for emergency work of public service utilities or by special variance issued pursuant to subsection B of Section 8.16.090; 
2.  This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools subject to subsection L of Section 8.16.080. 
G.  Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs and Testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the lot line of the lot on which said activity is located, or within a noise sensitive zone. 
H.  Places of Public Entertainment. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the source or to be plainly audible within a noise sensitive zone. 
I.  Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at fifty feet from the source if on a public space or public right-of-way. For the purposes of this section, "vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground- or structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects. 
J.  Emergency Signalling Devices. 
1.  The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signalling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in subdivision (2) following. 
2.  a.  Testing of a stationary emergency signalling device shall occur at the same time of day each time such a test is performed, but not before eight a.m. or after ten p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall such test time exceed ten minutes. 
b.  Testing of the complete emergency signalling system, including the functioning of the signalling device and the personnel response to the signalling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before eight a.m. or after ten p.m. The time limit specified in paragraph (a) above shall not apply to such complete system testing. 
3.  a.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar (or fire) alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically terminated within ten minutes of activation and does not sound again at all within the hour. 
b.  In addition to the enforcement provisions of 8.16.040, violators of section (a) above shall be subject to a fine of $l00.00 for each violation. Each ten (l0) minute interval of sounding, or part thereof, after the initial ten (l0) minutes sounding shall constitute a separate violation. 
c.  Fines for the sounding of burglar or fire alarms in violation of this ordinance may be assessed against the owner or occupant of the building in which the alarm is located. 
d.  Any motor vehicle, located on either public or private property, whose alarm has been sounding in excess of ten (10) minutes in an hour, is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance subject to immediate abatement. To effect abatement, policy must first observe personally that the sounding has lasted in excess of ten (10) minutes, and then make reasonable efforts to contact the owner of such vehicle to either have the owner shut-off the alarm or to authorize police to arrange for the shut-off of the alarm. If such efforts are unsuccessful, police are hereby authorized to abate the nuisance by arranging for tow company employees to shut off the alarm and/or to tow the motor vehicle to a storage area or other place of safety. In addition to any fines for violating this Chapter, the registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for all reasonable expenses, costs and charges incurred by the deactivation of the alarm, and by the removal and storage of such vehicle. 
K.  Noise Sensitive Zones. 
1.  Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any noise sensitive zone as defined by this chapter, so as to disrupt the activities normally conducted within the zone, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone; or 
2.  Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any noise sensitive zone, as defined by this chapter, containing a hospital, nursing home, or similar activity, so as to interfere with the functions of such activity or disturb or annoy the patients in the activity, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the presence of the zone. 
L.  Domestic Power Tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snow blower, or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. so as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the lot line of the lot on which said activity is located, or in a noise sensitive zone. 
M.  Electronic Bug Killing Devices. The use of an electric bug killing device between the hours of eleven p.m. and eight a.m. if a written objection to such use by an abutter has been received by the City Clerk within one year. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 1167, Amended, 09/11/95; Ord. No. 1167, Amended, 09/11/95) 
(1206, Added, 07/27/1998; 1200, Amended, 04/27/1998, additions to 8.16.080 (J) (3))  
8.16.081 - Leaf Blowers 
Statement of purpose. The City Council hereby finds that the reduction of noise and emissions of particulate matter resulting from the use of leaf blowers is a public purpose that protects the public health, welfare and environment of the City of Cambridge and its citizens. The City Council recognizes that a total ban on the use of such equipment would have a severe adverse impact on the ability of the City to effectively remove leaves, dust, dirt, grass clippings, cuttings and trimmings from trees, shrubs and other types of litter and debris from streets, sidewalks, cemeteries and large recreational facilities and other open spaces and to clean and maintain such facilities without relaxing restrictions on the use of such equipment for maintenance operations of such facilities. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007) 
8.16.081.1 Use Regulations. The use of leaf blowers shall be regulated as follows: 
1.  Definitions. 
a.  Definition of leaf blower. Leaf blowers are defined as portable, handheld or back pack style power equipment that is powered by fuel or electricity and used in any landscape maintenance, construction, property repair, or property maintenance for the purpose of blowing, moving, removing, dispersing or redistributing leaves, dust, dirt, grass clippings, cuttings and trimmings from trees and shrubs or any other type of litter or debris. 
b.  Definition of commercial leaf blower operator. Any entity or organization that employs two (2) or more employees that receives income, remuneration or compensation of any kind, whether as a fee, a charge, a salary, wages or otherwise, for operating a leaf blower, except that municipal operators and municipal contractors are excluded from this definition. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007) 
8.16.081.2 Limitations on Use. 
a.  The use of leaf blowers is prohibited except between March 15 and June 15 and between September 15 and December 31 in any year. The provisions of this subsection 8.16.081.2.2(a) do not apply to the use of leaf blowers in accordance with the provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance and regulations promulgated hereunder by municipal operators and municipal contractors performing leaf blower operations in Mayor Thomas W. Danehy Park, Fresh Pond Reservation, Thomas P. O'Neil, Jr. Municipal Golf Course at Fresh Pond, Cambridge Municipal Cemetery, Old Burial Ground or performing emergency operations and clean-up associated with storms, hurricanes and the like or by operators performing leaf blower operations on one or more adjoining parcels of land in common ownership that together comprise a total of two (2) acres or more, so long as the owners of such land comply with the provisions of subsection 8.16.081.2.2(c). 
b.  The use of leaf blowers is further prohibited on Sundays and legal holidays except Columbus Day and Veterans' Day and prohibited on other days except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Saturdays, Columbus Day and Veterans' Day. Commercial leaf blower operators may operate leaf blowers between the hours of 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m. only on Columbus Day and between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. only on Veterans' Day, consistent with the provisions of G.L. c. 136, §13 as it may be amended. The provisions of this subsection 8.16.081.2.2(b) do not apply to the use of leaf blowers in accordance with the provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance and regulations promulgated hereunder by municipal operators and municipal contractors performing leaf blower operations in Mayor Thomas W. Danehy Park, Fresh Pond Reservation, Thomas P. O'Neil, Jr. Municipal Golf Course at Fresh Pond, Cambridge Municipal Cemetery, Old Burial Ground or performing emergency operations and clean-up associated with storms, hurricanes and the like or by operators performing leaf blower operations on one or more adjoining parcels of land in common ownership that together comprise a total of two (2) acres or more, so long as the owners of such land comply with the provisions of subsection 8.16.081.2.2(c). 
c.  Commercial leaf blower operators and owners of one or more adjoining parcels of land in common ownership that together comprise a total of two (2) acres or more seeking to operate leaf blowers on such land shall not be permitted to operate leaf blowers, but may be exempted from the prohibition of this subsection 8.16.081.2.2(c) if they submit an operations plan to the City Manager or his or her designee for review and approval. At a minimum, the operations plan shall: address the owner's or operator's efforts to mitigate the impacts of noise and emissions upon citizens and the occupants and owners of nearby property, include an inventory of all leaf blowing equipment owned and to be used by the owner or operator in its operations program, which shall comply with the noise and emission restrictions set forth in this Leaf Blower Ordinance and regulations promulgated hereunder, and include the owner's or operator's plan for educating users of its equipment on the proper use of equipment as well as the need to mitigate impacts upon others. The operations plan shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his or her designee, who shall ensure that it complies with the applicable provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance and regulations promulgated hereunder, and shall impose any conditions that may be required in order for the owner or operator to comply with the provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance and regulations promulgated hereunder. No operations plan submitted by owners of one or more adjoining parcels of land in common ownership that together comprise a total of two (2) acres or more seeking to operate leaf blowers on such land shall be approved by the City Manager unless there has been a showing of significant hardship. 
d.  Leaf blower operations shall not cause leaves, dirt, dust, debris, grass clippings, cuttings or trimmings from trees or shrubs or any other type of litter or debris to be blown or deposited on any adjacent or other parcel of land, lot, or public right-of-way/property other than the parcel, land, or lot upon which the leaf blower is being operated. Leaves, dirt, dust, debris, grass clippings, cuttings or trimmings from trees or shrubs or any other type of litter or debris shall not be blown, swept or raked onto or into an adjacent street or gutter, except by municipal employees or municipal contractors or leaf blower operators placing leaves, dust, dirt, grass clippings, cuttings and trimmings from trees and shrubs on a municipal street or sidewalk for collection and pick-up, during municipal street and sidewalk sweeping and cleaning operations. In no event shall leaves, dirt, dust, debris, grass clippings, cuttings or trimmings from trees or shrubs or any other type of litter or debris be blown, swept or raked onto or into catch basins or onto vehicles, persons or pets. Deposits of leaves, dirt, dust, debris, grass clippings, cuttings or trimmings from trees or shrubs or any other type of litter or debris shall be removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner which will prevent dispersement by wind, vandalism or similar means. 
e.  All leaf blowers shall satisfy the emissions standards of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and noise level standards as follows: the sound emitted from any leaf blower shall be rated by the manufacturer to be no greater than 65 decibels. 
f.  On parcels of 10,000 square feet or less, only one leaf blower at a time may be used, and on parcels larger than 10,000 square feet, only one leaf blower may be used within each 10,000 square foot area. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007) 
8.16.081.3 Fees. 
A fee for the City to recover all costs connected with emission or sound testing and enforcement may be charged in an amount set by the License Commission and approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007) 
8.16.081.4 Regulations 
The License Commission and the Commissioner of Public Works shall have the authority to promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007) 
8.16.081.6 Severability. 
The provisions of this Chapter are severable. If any section, provision or portion of this Chapter is determined to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be valid. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007) 
8.16.081.7 Effective Date. 
The provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance shall be effective commencing on March 1, 2008 except as to City of Cambridge contracts now in effect, as to which the provisions of this Leaf Blower Ordinance shall be effective commencing on September 15, 2008. 
(Ord. 1311, Added, 12/10/2007)  
8.16.090 - Exceptions and variances. 
A.  Emergency Exception. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to (a) the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or (b) the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
B.  Special Variances. 
1.  The License Commission shall have the authority, consistent with this section, to grant special variances which may be requested pursuant to any section of this chapter. 
2.  Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this section shall file an application with the License Commission. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the special variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be published according to procedure. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file a statement with the License Commission containing any information to support his claim. If the License Commission finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing may be held. 
3.  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the License Commission shall balance the hardship to the applicant and the community, of not granting the special variance, against the adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the special variance. The License Commission shall also consider whether the noise disturbance occurs in or across a buffer zone. Buffer zones shall be the imaginary line along the ground surface, its vertical extension, and the area at fifty feet on either side of the line, which separates a residential area from a commercial area or an industrial area. Applicants for special variances and other persons contesting special variances may be required to submit any information the License Commission may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the License Commission shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying the special variance. 
4.  Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound or activity for which the special variance was granted. 
5.  Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial special variances under subdivision (2). 
6.  The License Commission may issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant a special variance. 
C.  Variances for Time to Comply. 
1.  Within sixty days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner of any commercial or industrial source of sound may apply to the License Commission for a variance in time to comply with Section 8.16.080I, vibration, or Section 8.16.060, measured noise disturbance. 
2.  Any person seeking a variance in time to comply shall file an application with the License Commission. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter prior to the date requested in the application would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. Notice of an application for a variance in time to comply shall be published according to procedure. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the variance in time to comply may file a statement with the License Commission containing any information to support his claim. If the License Commission finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing may be held. 
3.  In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the License Commission shall balance the hardship to the applicant and the community, of not granting the variance in time to comply against the adverse impact on health, safety, and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting the variance. The License Commission shall also consider whether the noise disturbance occurs in or across a buffer zone. Buffer zones shall be the imaginary line along the ground surface, its vertical extension and the area at fifty feet on either side of the line which separates a residential area from a commercial area or an industrial area. Applicants for variances in time to comply and persons contesting variances may be required to submit any information the License Commission may reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the License Commission shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the variance in time to comply. 
4.  Variances in time to comply shall be granted to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a schedule for achieving compliance. The variance in time to comply shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the variance shall terminate the variance and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter for which the variance was granted. 
5.  Application for extension of time limits specified in variances in time to comply or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial variances under subsection B of Section 8.16.090, except that the License Commission must find that the need for the extension or modification clearly outweighs any adverse impacts of granting the extension or modifications. 
6.  The License Commission may issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a variance in time to comply and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant a variance. 
D.  Reconsideration. Any person aggrieved by a decision or action of the authorized enforcement officials may, within ten business days of said decision or action, request reconsideration of same by the official. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
8.16.100 - Miscellaneous. 
A.  Severability. It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the City Council that if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable. 
B.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are repealed. 
C.  This chapter shall take effect thirty days after its adoption. 
(Ord. 1121 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 8.20 - RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY 
 
8.20.010 - Purpose. 
All use of recombinant DNA (RDNA) in the City shall be undertaken only in strict conformity with the guidelines set out in Section 8.20.020, the other requirements of this chapter and health regulations promulgated by the Cambridge Commissioner of Health and Hospitals (the Commissioner). 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Guidelines" means: 
1.  National Institutes of Health Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules as published in the Federal Register of May 7, 1986. 
2.  Any amendments, revisions or substitutions subsequent to the above-referenced guidelines, including, but not limited to: 
Notices of action under NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecule on August 24, 1987, July 29, 1988, October 26, 1988, March 13, 1989, March 1, 1990, September 12, 1990, July 18, 1991, October 15, 1991, November 21, 1991, January 28, 1992, and April 22, 1992. 
3.  Such amendments to subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) above which are adopted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and approved by the Commissioner. Amendments not acted upon by the Commissioner within sixty days shall be considered approved. In the event that the NIH shall discontinue or abolish its guidelines, those guidelines in effect at the time of such discontinuance shall remain in effect in Cambridge. 
B.  "Person" means an institution, corporation, firm, partnership, association, executor, administrator, guardian, trustee, agent, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
C.  "Recombinant DNA molecules" and "organisms and viruses containing RDNA" are those defined in the guidelines referred to in subsection (A)(1) above, and such amendments as may be approved by the Commissioner. Amendments not acted upon by the Commissioner within sixty days shall be considered approved. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.030 - Cambridge Biosafety Committee—Membership—Staff. 
A.  The Cambridge Biosafety Committee (CBC) (formerly known as the Cambridge Biohazards Committee) shall be composed of the Commissioner or his/her designee, the chairperson of the Cambridge Health Policy Board, or a board members designated by the chairperson, and a minimum of three other members to be appointed by the City Manager. The City Manager is authorized to provide for the adequate staffing of the CBC. Members of the CBC shall be special municipal employees. 
B.  The CBC and the Commissioner are authorized to retain competent professional assistance in carrying out their duties under this chapter. 
C.  The salaries and expenses of the staff and consultants of the CBC under this chapter shall be apportioned to the persons holding permits under Section 8.20.050. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.040 - Cambridge Biosafety Committee—Duties and responsibilities. 
The responsibilities of the CBC shall include: 
A.  Establishing policies, procedures and criteria to aid in the implementation of this chapter; 
B.  Determining the manner in which permit holders make reports or applications to the CBC, and the type of information required in such reports or applications. Reviewing reports, applications and recommendations by the Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBC) and approving them where appropriate. Carrying out site visits to permitted facilities; 
C.  Reviewing manuals and worker training programs, approving health-safety programs and monitoring the procedures required by this chapter; 
D.  Developing a procedure for persons to report to the CBC violations of this chapter, the guidelines or any health regulation. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.050 - Permit requirements. 
A.  All persons proposing to use RDNA must obtain a permit from the Commissioner with the approval of the CBC. Permit requirements shall, at a minimum, include written agreement to: 
1.  Follow the guidelines as defined in this chapter; 
2.  Follow other conditions set forth in this chapter; 
3.  Allow reasonable inspections of facilities and pertinent records by the CBC; 
4.  Prepare a health and safety manual which contains all procedures relevant to the use of RDNA at all levels of containment in use at the facility, and a program for waste disposal in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws. The manual shall be submitted to the CBC for review; 
5.  Establish a training program of safeguards and procedures for personnel using RDNA; 
B.  Permits shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis. The Commissioner may establish fees for the issuance and renewal of permits.  
8.20.060 - Institutional Biosafety Committees. 
The Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBC) shall be established in accordance with the guidelines, except that the required composition of each IBC shall include at least one representative from the surrounding community approved by the Health Policy Board. The IBC shall be the final arbiter within an institution with regard to the implementation of this chapter and the guidelines. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.070 - Reports. 
Each holder of a permit shall file regular reports with the CBC, in a manner to be determined by the CBC. All minutes of IBC meetings must be sent to the Commissioner and the CBC. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.080 - Medical surveillance program. 
Each permit holder must provide an appropriate medical surveillance program as determined by its IBC and consistent with the guidelines. Such programs must be approved by the CBC. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.090 - Violation of guidelines— Notification. 
The permit holder shall report, within thirty days, to the Commissioner and the CBC any significant problems with or violations of the guidelines and any significant RDNA-related accidents or illnesses. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.100 - Protection against rodents and insects. 
Effective rodent and insect control programs must be in place on premises where RDNA use under this chapter takes place. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.110 - Restrictions. 
A.  RDNA use requiring containment defined by the guidelines as "BL4" shall not be permitted in Cambridge. 
B.  Any accidental release which represents a significant potential hazard to employees or the public shall be reported to the Commissioner immediately, and in no case more than twenty-four hours after the release. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
8.20.120 - Enforcement—Violation— Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars per violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
B.  Once a permit has been issued, it may be revoked, suspended, modified or not renewed by the Commissioner only upon a determination by the Commissioner and the CBC, after due notice and hearing, that the permit holder has materially failed to comply with this chapter, the permit agreements or the guidelines. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above, the Commissioner, upon a determination that any violation constitutes an immediate and severe threat to the public health and safety, may order the immediate closure of any premises or laboratory engaging in or contributing to such threat, without prior notice and hearing but with subsequent notice and hearing. 
(Ord. 1148 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 8.24 - REFUSE AND LITTER 
 
8.24.010 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the City Council that this chapter be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of handling, collecting and disposing of refuse and for the maintenance of public and private property free of litter in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition for the appearance, health and safety of the community. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-71)  
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Aluminum" means aluminum cans, aluminum foil, and aluminum containers or trays used in packaging, preparation or cooking of food. 
B.  "Authorized litter receptacles" means receptacles for the use of the general public placed outdoors by the City or by private persons on either public or private property. The receptacles shall be designed so as to prevent the escape of litter onto any public or private property. The receptacles may be identified by an appropriate sign, furnished either by the City or the owner, which includes the statement, "No Littering Under Penalty of Law. Fine $50.00." 
C.  "Authorized recycling receptacle" means "household recycling receptacle (otherwise known as household recycling bin)", "toter" or "paper leaf bag" as defined herein, or other containers defined in regulations written pursuant to Section 8.24.070. 
D.  "Authorized refuse receptacles" means authorized recycling receptacles and authorized rubbish receptacles, including dumpsters licensed pursuant to Chapter 8.25. 
E.  "Authorized rubbish receptacles" means receptacles that contain rubbish generated by owners or occupants of the private property where they are located that are awaiting collection and are kept outdoors on private property or set out for curbside collection including dumpsters licensed pursuant to Chapter 8.25. They shall be constructed preferably of heavy plastic (not plastic bags) or of metal, with tight-fitting covers, and shall be flytight, rodent resistant, nonflammable and waterproof, provided, however, that dumpsters shall be kept in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 8.25 of this Code. On the day of pick-up only, heavy plastic bags of not less than three mil that are flytight, rodent resistant, non-flammable and waterproof, fastened tightly with wire, strings or tape, may be set out for curbside collection. Authorized rubbish receptacles for City rubbish collection, other than dumpsters licensed pursuant to Chapter 8.25 shall not exceed fifty-gallon capacity, and shall not exceed fifty pounds per container, or one hundred fifty pounds per household per week. Limitation on size or weight does not apply to authorized rubbish receptacles for private collection. 
F.  "Cans" means all containers composed in whole of iron or steel (so-called tin cans) used as containers for the packaging or storage of various food and non-food items including empty aerosol cans, except containers that contain paint or petroleum-based solvents. 
G.  "Commercial establishment" means any nonresidential building, including, but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale, industrial, manufacturing, dining, offices, professional services, automobile service, hotels and motels, restaurants, or shipping and receiving areas. 
H.  "Corrugated cardboard" means paper in which a portion has been made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridges and grooves) and is placed between two flat surfaces for the sake of strength, and which is commonly used to form cartons. 
I.  "Glass containers" means bottles and jars of any color, made of silica, sand, soda ash, and limestone, being transparent or translucent, and used for packaging or bottling various materials. This does not include plastics or glass products such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate glass, light bulbs, dishes or ceramics. 
J.  "Household recycling receptacle" means a container, up to 20 gallons in size, used to store recyclables before they are collected in the curbside recycling program. 
K.  "Leaves" means deciduous and coniferous seasonal deposition from trees. 
L.  "Litter" means all refuse, and includes any other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. 
M.  "Magazines" means publications printed on glossy, clay-coated paper. 
N.  "Multifamily dwelling" means any place of residence with seven or more dwelling units, including apartments, cooperatives, condominiums, group houses, roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
O.  "Newspaper" means newsprint-grade paper, the common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed, and includes all newspaper advertisement, comics and enclosures. This does not include newspaper soiled by food, paint, petroleum products, oil or oil solvents, or other solid wastes that are not recyclable. 
P.  "Nonprofit establishment" means an established organization or foundation dedicated to public service or culture, including, but not limited to, religious, educational and health care functions. 
Q.  "Occupant" means any person living, sleeping or cooking in, or conducting any commercial or nonprofit activity, or having actual possession of any building or part thereof. 
R.  "Owner" means any person or entity which alone or jointly or severally with others: 
1.  Shall have legal or equitable title to any private property with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
2.  Shall have charge, care or control of any private property as owner or agent or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner or any other person in a representative capacity. 
S.  "Paper leaf bag" shall be a sanitary Kraft Paper Sack or equal of thirty-gallon capacity, two-ply fifty-pound wet strength with decomposing glue and reinforced self-supporting square bottom closure. 
T.  "Recyclable Plastic" means clear and colored plastic bottles and jugs marked #1-#7 with the exception of Styrofoam and plastic film or bags. 
U.  "Recyclable materials" means any type of refuse designated by the Cambridge Commissioner of Public Works through rules and regulations issued under this chapter to be separated for recycling or composting. 
V.  "Refuse" means all solid waste generated by occupiers of land in Cambridge, excluding construction demolition debris. 
W.  "Residential dwelling" means any residential building, including single-family homes, apartment buildings, buildings containing cooperatives and condominiums, group houses, roominghouses or boardinghouses. 
X.  "Rubbish" means all refuse excluding recyclable materials. 
Y.  "Sorted office paper" means printed or unprinted sheets, shavings and cuttings of colored or white sulphite or sulphite ledger, bond, writing and other paper which have a similar fiber and filler content, and which are free of treated, coated, padded and heavily printed paper, carbon paper and nonpaper materials. 
Z.  "Toter" means a central collection container used for storage of recyclable materials between pickups from numerous households in a multifamily dwelling and compatible with collection equipment used by the City's recyclables collection contractor. 
AA.  "White goods" means major kitchen and laundry appliances including, but not limited to, stoves, washers, refrigerators and dryers. Nothing in this definition shall waive compliance with the rules and regulations for the generation, transportation, storage, and disposal of hazardous waste. 
BB.  "Yard waste" means grass clippings, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste, and twigs and brush not longer than two feet in length and one-half inch in diameter. 
(Ord. 1328, 9/14/2009; Ord. 1293, Amended, 12/19/2005; Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-72)  
8.24.030 - Private property owners and occupants—Duties. 
A.  Residential Property. 
1.  Every owner (or occupant or owner's agent if designated in a written agreement), shall supply authorized refuse receptacles sufficient to contain all refuse accumulated between collection days. 
2.  Every owner (or occupant or owner's agent if designated in a written agreement) of a dwelling unit shall cause the shared or common areas of the dwelling, its premises and yard area, and the adjoining sidewalk and gutter to be maintained in compliance with Sections 8.24.040 and 8.24.140 of this chapter. 
3.  Every occupant (or owner's agent if designated in a written agreement) shall store and dispose of all refuse in a clean and sanitary manner in compliance with Sections 8.24.070, 8.24.090, 8.24.110, and 8.24.130 through 8.24.170 of this chapter. 
4.  Every owner (and owner's agent if such agent is legally required and is designated in a written agreement) of a dwelling in which he does not reside, shall be severally and jointly responsible for maintaining the entire premises including the yard area and the adjoining sidewalk and gutter in compliance with this chapter. 
5.  Every owner of any residential dwelling with 3 or more units in which the owner does not reside shall have posted contact information for the owner (or owner's agent who is responsible for the maintenance of the premises if designated in a written agreement) in a location visible from the outside entrance, which posting shall be on a durable material no smaller than 20 square inches. 
B.  Private Property Occupied by Multifamily Dwellings, Commercial or Nonprofit Establishments. Every owner (or occupant, if designated in a written agreement) shall supply a sufficient quantity of authorized refuse receptacles in compliance with Sections 8.24.070, 8.24.090, 8.24.110 and 8.24.120 through 8.24.160, of this chapter. If refuse is not collected by the City, arrangements shall be made for adequate and regular private collection of refuse in compliance with Sections 8.24.070 through 8.24.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1328, 9/14/2009; Ord. 1293, Amended, 12/19/2005; Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code §17-74)  
8.24.040 - Private property owners and occupants—Keeping premises and adjacent areas free of litter. 
A.  Maintenance of Private Property. Every owner or occupant of private property shall maintain his property free of any accumulation of litter, and shall prevent any litter from escaping to any other public or private property. 
B.  Maintenance of Sidewalks. 
1.  Every owner or occupant of private property bordering on a street where there is a public or private sidewalk or footway shall maintain such sidewalk or footway and the adjoining gutter to the center of the street free of litter. 
2.  Every owner or occupant of private property shall cut and dispose of weeds in any yard area or vacant lot, or around any public or private property. 
3.  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, square or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk, footway or driveway. 
C.  Litter From Residential, Commercial or Nonprofit Establishments. 
1.  Litter from residential, commercial or nonprofit establishments shall not be thrown or deposited in any public litter receptacles by the owners, occupants, employees or agents of the residential, commercial or non-profit establishments. 
2.  Commercial or nonprofit establishments may maintain authorized litter receptacles for the use of the general public outdoors on private property or on the adjoining sidewalk in a manner not to inconvenience the use of the sidewalk by pedestrians. The establishments are encouraged to identify such authorized litter receptacles as described in Section 8.24.020 of this chapter and the establishment shall cause the receptacles to be emptied regularly. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-75) 
(Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007)  
8.24.050 - City's duties and responsibilities. 
A.  The City shall maintain regular schedules of street cleaning, and shall post signs City-wide and otherwise publicize by all appropriate means the schedules of regular street cleaning times. 
B.  The City shall maintain regular schedules of refuse collection subject to the provisions of Sections 8.24.070, 8.24.090, 8.24.130 and 8.24.140 of this chapter, and shall publicize the schedules by all appropriate means. 
C.  The City shall maintain and service authorized litter receptacles in the City. 
D.  The City shall require all federal, state and local government organizations to comply with the regulations in Sections 8.24.040, 8.24.070 through 8.24.160 and 8.24.240 of this chapter, for owners of private property and for commercial or nonprofit establishments. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-81) 
(Ord, 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007)  
8.24.070 - Mandatory recycling. 
A.  Purpose and Declaration of Policy. This section has been created because of the great interest of the people of Cambridge in preserving the environment by reducing the amount of refuse sent to landfills and incinerators. It shall be the policy of the City to reduce the amount of solid waste generated and to require the recycling of recyclable materials to the fullest extent possible. 
B.  Establishment of Program. There is established a program for the mandatory separation of certain recyclable materials from refuse which shall apply to all buildings in Cambridge, and shall be carried out under the supervision of the Commissioner of the Cambridge Department of Public Works (DPW). 
C.  Mandatory Separation of Recyclable Materials. It shall be mandatory for each owner or occupant in Cambridge to separate all designated recyclable materials from other refuse in accordance with the provisions of this section. These mandatory recycling requirements shall apply to all buildings without regard to whether the building's solid waste is collected by the City. 
1.  Buildings Which Receive City Solid Waste Collection Services. It shall be mandatory for each owner or occupant of a building which receives City solid waste collection services to separate from other refuse all recyclable materials designated by the Commissioner in rules and regulations issued under this section. Owners of multifamily dwellings shall submit a recycling plan to the Commissioner or his or her designee in accordance with subsection E of this section. This requirement shall also apply to all City-owned buildings, including schools. 
2.  Buildings Which Do Not Receive City Solid Waste Collection Services. It shall be mandatory for each owner or occupant of a building which does not receive City solid waste collection to separate all designated recyclable materials from other refuse in accordance with a recycling plan to be submitted to the Commissioner or his or her designee, in accordance with subsection E of this section. 
D.  Collection of Recyclable Materials. 
1.  Residential Dwellings. 
a.  As long as funds are available, the City will provide one household recycling receptacle to each dwelling unit in residential dwellings with six or fewer units that are not primarily used to house students and/or staff of nonprofit establishments. The City shall retain ownership of all its household recycling receptacles and the resident of each dwelling unit shall take proper care to protect such receptacle from loss or damage. Receptacles that are lost or stolen will be replaced by the City as long as the City's supplies last. After City supplies are depleted, it shall be the responsibility of the resident of each dwelling unit to obtain a suitable replacement within forty-five days. In such buildings, the materials designated for recycling in rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner shall be placed in the household recycling receptacles. 
b.  As long as funds are available, the City will provide a suitable number of household recycling receptacles and/or toters to buildings with seven or more units that are not primarily used to house students and/or staff of nonprofit establishments. The number of household recycling receptacles and/or toters to be provided shall be determined by the City for each individual building. The City shall retain ownership of all its household recycling receptacles and toters and the owner or owners of the building shall take proper care to protect such containers from loss or damage. If the containers are lost or stolen, it is the responsibility of the owner or owners of the building to obtain a suitable replacement within forty-five days in accordance with rules and regulations to be issued by the Commissioner under this section. In such buildings, the materials designated for recycling in rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner shall be placed in the household recycling receptacles and/or toters. If owners or occupants desire recyclables collection from a location on private property, collection more than once a week, or larger containers than the City provides, they must arrange for private collection of recyclables and are responsible for the costs of collection. 
c.  During the leaf and yard waste collection season, owners or occupants shall place their leaves and yard waste in paper leaf bags (as defined in subsection C of this section) or open barrels to be provided by the owner or occupant. Barrels must be marked with City-approved yard waste labels. However, if the owner or occupant employs a commercial landscaping company, the landscaping company is responsible for hauling away the leaves and yard waste from the owner's property. 
d.  The preparation and placement of recyclables shall be accomplished in accordance with rules and regulations to be issued by the Commissioner under this section. 
e.  All recycling containers and receptacles shall be placed for collection on the outer edge of the sidewalk, so as not to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians, or in such other place and on days specified by the Commissioner in rules and regulations to be issued under this section. 
f.  Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic garbage bags for collection, removal or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same refuse containers as rubbish or mixed with rubbish or litter for collection, removal or disposal. If separation of recyclable materials from rubbish does not take place, the City may decide not to collect said rubbish. 
g.  Upon placement of recyclables for the City or its contractor at the curbside, pursuant to this subsection, such recyclables shall become the property of the City. It shall be a violation of this section if any person, other than authorized agents of the City acting in the course of their employment or contract, collects or causes to be collected any recyclables so placed. Each and every such collection in violation of this subdivision from one or more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection I of this section, any violator of this subsection shall make restitution to the City for the value of recyclables illegally removed. 
2.  Commercial and Nonprofit Establishments. In commercial nonprofit establishments, the materials designated for recycling in rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner shall be placed in recycling receptacles provided by the owner or owners of such buildings. The owner or owners of such buildings shall be responsible for the costs of recyclables separation and collection. Any savings in solid waste disposal realized due to recycling shall accrue to the owner or owners of such buildings. The owner or owners of such buildings shall submit recycling plans to the Commissioner in accordance with subsection E of this section. The Commissioner shall have the authority to require documentation from the City's recyclables collection contractors and from any owner, lessee or tenant of a building which does not receive City recyclables collection services, that recyclables are being delivered to a broker or end market that causes the material to be recycled or composted rather than landfilled or incinerated. 
E.  Recycling Plans. 
1.  All property owners of property whose recycling is not collected by the City are required to submit recycling plans to the Commissioner upon request. 
2.  Contents of Plan. Each recycling plan will cover the following items: 
a.  Which recyclables will be put out for collection; 
b.  Frequency of collection; 
c.  Methods to be used for collection, including types of containers; 
d.  Any other items which may be specified in rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner under this section. 
3.  Format of Plan. Plans shall be submitted in a format to be specified in rules and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner under this section. 
F.  Recyclable Materials. The recyclable materials to be separated shall be designated by the Commissioner in rules and regulations to be issued under this section. If the Commissioner designates a material as recyclable, such designation shall govern the treatment of such material notwithstanding the provisions of any ordinance to the contrary. 
G.  Recycling Advisory Committee. There is established a Recycling Advisory Committee. The Committee, as requested, shall provide advice, assistance and recommendations to the Commissioner regarding the recycling program. The Committee shall be appointed by the City Manager, and shall consist of at least nine persons with a demonstrated interest in recycling, at least six of whom are residents of Cambridge. At least one member chosen shall be a user of or familiar with the City's Recycling Dropoff Center, one member shall represent the private real estate industry (apartment management), and one member shall be a designee of the Cambridge Housing Authority. One member shall represent the business community, and one member shall represent nonprofit institutions. The term shall be three years. The Commissioner, or his or her designee, shall be an ex officio member of the Committee. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: Ord. 1137, 1992: Ord. 1117 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007)  
8.24.090 - Receptacles—Sidewalk placement time restrictions. 
Whoever desires the removal of refuse from private property shall cause the refuse to be placed in authorized refuse receptacles and to be set in an easily accessible place upon the sidewalk. The authorized refuse receptacles shall be placed on the sidewalk no earlier than six p.m. of the day immediately prior to the day of collection as designated by the Commissioner of Public Works for collection for the area where the premises are located and shall be removed from the sidewalk no later than six p.m. of the day of collection. The authorized refuse receptacles shall not be placed upon the sidewalks in a manner to inconvenience the use of the sidewalks by pedestrians. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-76(d)) 
(Ord. 1293, Amended, 12/19/2005) 
(Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007; Ord. 1293, Amended, 12/19/2005)  
8.24.100 - Receptacles—Screening from public view. 
Every owner or occupant of private property may maintain authorized rubbish receptacles outdoors on such private property provided the receptacles are screened from the view of public streets and sidewalks. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-76(a))  
8.24.110 - Private collectors—Methods of storage, collection and disposal. 
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the right to specify the times and methods of storage, collection and disposal of refuse by any private collector. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-76(k))  
8.24.120 - Commercial or nonprofit establishments or multifamily dwellings—Frequency—Receptacle specifications. 
A.  The Commissioner of Public Works may, at his or her discretion, and if the public convenience and necessity so require, determine that the volume of refuse from a commercial or nonprofit establishment or multifamily dwelling is beyond the capacity of the Department of Public Works to collect or dump, and upon making such a determination, the Commissioner shall so notify the owner, manager, tenant or occupant of the commercial or nonprofit establishment or multifamily dwelling that the City will not collect refuse from the commercial or nonprofit establishment or multifamily dwelling and that the owner, manager, tenant or occupant of the commercial or nonprofit establishment or multifamily dwelling shall apply for a dumpster license if applicable, and shall arrange for private collection in accordance with Chapter 8.25. 
B.  All refuse awaiting private collection shall be in refuse receptacles which shall contain only refuse generated by owners or occupants of the private property where they are located and shall be flytight, rodent resistant, nonflammable and waterproof, and shall be so constructed as to prevent the escape of litter onto public or private property, provided, however, that dumpsters shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.25. All such refuse receptacles shall be kept on private property at all times and not on public streets or sidewalks. All such refuse receptacles in residentially zoned areas or within thirty feet of such an area shall be screened from view by being completely enclosed by a fence at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. 1328, 9/14/2009; Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007; Ord. 1293, Amended, 12/19/2005; Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: Ord. 1126, 1991; prior code § 17-76(l)) 
Editor's note— Ord. 1328, adopted September 14, 2009, changed the title of section 8.24.120 from "Commercial or nonprofit establishments—Frequency—Receptacle specifications" to "Commercial or nonprofit establishments or multifamily dwellings—Frequency—Receptacle specifications." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
8.24.130 - Oversize items—Collection procedures. 
Large bulky items of refuse such as refrigerators, air conditioners, stoves and other bulky appliances will be collected by the City only by special arrangement with the Department of Public Works. Persons desiring such collection should notify the Commissioner. The City Manager may at his discretion direct the Commissioner to charge a fee for the collection of certain items, or the Commissioner may, at his or her discretion, determine that certain items are unsuitable for collection by the City, and may direct the owner to arrange for private collection or may charge a reasonable fee for collection by the City. The determination of the Commissioner shall be final. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code §17-76(g)) 
(Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007)  
8.24.140 - Bulk refuse—Preparation and placement. 
Refuse that is larger than can be contained in authorized refuse receptacles shall be securely tied in compact bundles, not to exceed fifty pounds in weight and two feet in length. Large cardboard cartons shall be flattened down no larger than three feet by three feet, may be collected for recycling only, and may not be used as refuse receptacles. Such bulk refuse shall be set out in the same place and under the same restrictions as those for authorized refuse receptacles in Section 8.24.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-76(e)) 
(Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007)  
8.24.150 - Burning of refuse prohibited. 
The burning of leaves and other refuse is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-76(f))  
8.24.160 - Temporary container placement in parking spaces. 
The Commissioner of Public Works may preempt parking spaces for limited periods of time at any area for the purpose of installing temporary containers for the collection of large items of rubbish or of shrub and tree trimmings. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-76(j))  
8.24.170 - Litter—Pedestrians on public property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, square, playground, park or other public place except in authorized public or private litter receptacles. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-73(a))  
8.24.180 - Litter—Pedestrians on private property. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied, open or vacant private property, whether or not occupied by such person, except in authorized private litter receptacles or authorized private rubbish receptacles. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-73(c))  
8.24.190 - Litter—Throwing from vehicles. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street, sidewalk, square, playground, park or other public place. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-73(c))  
8.24.200 - Litter—Load-carrying vehicles. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed and loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown off or deposited upon any street, sidewalk, square, playground, park or other public place. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-73(d))  
8.24.230 - Publicity—Citizen information service. 
A.  The City shall publicize the provisions of this chapter through the media of signs, advertisements, flyers, leaflets, announcements on radios and television, newspaper articles and through any other appropriate means, so that all citizens will have the opportunity to become informed about the legal duties of property owners and occupants, pedestrians and motorists, and about the City recycling, refuse and anti-litter services. 
B.  The City shall maintain a citizen information service information and complaints about litter, recycling, refuse and snow removal problems. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-82)  
8.24.240 - Fees—Collection of refuse. 
The Commissioner of Public Works shall collect amounts due for refuse collections for which charges are imposed, and shall keep suitable records thereof. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: prior code § 17-77)  
8.24.260 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Noncriminal Disposition. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, § 21D. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner of Public Works shall be the enforcing officer, except that the Commissioner may delegate his enforcing authority to designated Public Works Enforcement Officers and the Commissioner of Inspectional Services and his designees. The penalty for each violation shall not exceed three hundred dollars. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993: Ord. 1084 § 3, 1989) 
(Ord. 1310, Amended, 10/29/2007)  
8.24.270 - Rules and regulations. 
The Commissioner, with the approval of the City Manager, may promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1152 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 8.25 - DUMPSTER LICENSES 
 
8.25.010 - Purpose. 
Because the unregulated maintenance and operation of dumpsters, including construction site dumpsters presents a threat to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, no person, business, or any other entity shall operate, keep, store, or maintain a dumpster or temporary dumpster (defined below) without first obtaining the dumpster license required by this chapter, and shall maintain said dumpster in accordance with said license, this chapter, and any regulation promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in the following clauses. Where words and phrases are not defined in the following clauses, such words and phrases shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
A.  "Dumpster" shall mean any container, receptacle, compactor unit, trailer, roll-off, or similar unit with or without wheels that is used for temporary storage, containment, or transport of refuse, debris, trash, garbage, food waste, solid waste, recyclable material, incidental demolition debris, or other discarded or like materials. It shall not apply to ordinary household trash cans of a volume of fifty gallons or less, recycling receptacles of ninety-six gallons or less, to plastic bags storing these materials in compliance with the regulations of the City, or to solid waste disposal trucks operated by a company duly licensed by the City License Commission or used or operated by the City. 
B.  "Temporary dumpster" shall mean a dumpster that is used in connection with construction, demolition, fairs or for similar temporary needs, the dumpster license for which shall be issued for a period not to exceed thirty days, renewable for additional thirty-day periods upon application, not to exceed a total period of twelve months. 
C.  "Lot" shall mean a parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or by streets, which is designated by its owner to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, to which a dumpster serves for waste disposal. 
D.  "Dumpster license" (also referred to hereafter as "license") shall mean the license required by this chapter and issued by the Inspectional Services Department upon satisfactory review of the dumpster license application and dumpster plan. 
E.  "Dumpster plan" shall mean an operational and maintenance plan for each dumpster governed by this chapter. The dumpster plan shall also include all information included in the dumpster license application (defined in section 8.25.040 below). 
F.  "Responsible party" shall mean the owner or other person using the dumpster with an interest in any part or parts of the lot upon which the dumpster is used, maintained or stored, any tenant upon the lot, the property manager for the lot, and/or any other users of a dumpster on the lot. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.030 - Applicability. 
The dumpster ordinance shall apply to all existing and future dumpsters located within the City. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.040 - Dumpster license. 
A.  License Required. No dumpster, including a temporary dumpster, shall be used, without first obtaining a license from the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, but not including a dumpster used for one-day special events permitted by the City. If a dumpster is to be located upon a public way, then a permit from the City Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department must also be obtained. If the Commissioner of Inspectional Services determines that a submitted dumpster license application is accurate and adequate to keep the site free from debris, refuse, trash, solid waste or like material that is injurious to the public health, safety, and environment, the Commissioner may issue a license for the establishment or dumpster. Performance of the activities scheduled in the dumpster plan shall be a condition of the license and nonperformance of the activities scheduled in the dumpster plan shall be a violation of the license and conditions of this chapter. 
B.  Contents of License Application. A complete application (also referred to hereafter as "application") consists of a completed application form and a dumpster plan attached thereto. The dumpster license application form shall be in a form approved by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services. It shall be the responsibility of all responsible parties to submit and sign the application and to take possession of and be jointly responsible for the license. In the event that a responsible party terminates use of the dumpster, then the owner of the lot shall be required to obtain a new license with any new responsible party. All responsible parties shall agree to follow the dumpster plan, and be jointly and severally liable with the owner of the lot, and indemnify the City for any damages caused by non-compliance with the duties contained in this chapter. 
C.  Dumpster Plan. A dumpster plan shall, at a minimum, include the following information, or other information as required by the Inspectional Services Department: 
1.  The address of the lot on which the dumpster is located; 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the lot; 
3.  The name, address, and telephone number of the tenant operator(s) of the establishment(s) located on the lot which will use the dumpster; 
4.  The type of establishment(s) located on the lot which will use the dumpster and nature of its (or their) business; 
5.  A description of how employees or residents are notified about the proper use of a dumpster and copy of all written materials given to employees or residents; 
6.  A plot plan accurately depicting the lot; 
7.  The location of any dumpster and associated fencing or screening on the lot, and the location of the dumpster in relation to all abutting property; 
8.  A weekly schedule detailing the times and days of the week for cleaning the dumpster and lot, and maintaining the lot free of windblown litter and refuse; 
9.  The name of the owner of the lot or responsible party or designee responsible for overseeing the cleaning and maintenance of the lot; 
10.  The name, address, contact name, and telephone number of the waste hauling company responsible for servicing the establishment or dumpster; and the name, address, contact name, and telephone number of the person or entity signing the contract with the waste hauling company; 
11.  The date, time, and frequency of service by the waste hauling company including proof of recycling and anticipated volume of refuse and recycling based on the previous year's invoices, if applicable; 
12.  Any and all permits and/or licenses issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection relating to the management, storage, and disposal of solid wastes and hazardous materials and hazardous wastes generated, stored, or disposed on the lot; 
13.  Any and all permits and/or licenses issued by the Cambridge Fire Department, the Inspectional Services Department, the Department of Public Works or other relevant City or governmental agencies; 
14.  The name, address, and phone number of the pest control company servicing the establishment or dumpster; 
15.  Any other information required by the Inspectional Services Department to ensure that the lot is maintained in a sanitary condition free of debris, refuse, trash, solid waste or like material that is injurious to the public health, safety, and environment; and 
16.  A copy of the contract with the waste hauling company responsible for servicing the dumpster. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.050 - Dumpster license fee. 
The fee for the license shall be one hundred dollars. The license shall be applied for annually. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.060 - Term of license. 
The term of each license shall be one year, except that a license for a temporary dumpster shall be for a period not to exceed thirty days, renewable for additional thirty-day periods, not to exceed a total period of twelve months. Annually on a date set by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services or designee, all persons who operate or maintain dumpsters shall file, renew, or amend a dumpster plan and obtain a new license. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.070 - Location requirements. 
All dumpsters shall be located at a distance from the lot line, as approved by the Inspectional Services Department, so as not to interfere with the safety, convenience, or health of abutters, residents, and the public. All dumpsters shall be placed so that any liquid or runoff from the dumpster shall not enter any catch basins or storm drains. All dumpsters shall be placed so as not to interfere with the physical integrity of the curb, sidewalk, and public parking. The location of all dumpsters shall also be subject to approval by the Cambridge Fire Department and a City traffic, parking and transportation permit is required for any dumpster to be placed upon a public way. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.080 - Container requirements. 
All dumpsters shall be in new or good condition free of damage caused by wear or misuse that would allow leaks or access by rodents. All dumpsters shall be covered and secured at all times except when being filled or emptied. Temporary dumpsters shall be covered when not in use (including overnight) at a minimum with a tight-fitting tarp. All dumpsters shall be deodorized and washed on a regular schedule. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services, or designee, may require more frequent cleaning, if necessary. If rodent activity or other site hygiene issues are prevalent, the Commissioner of Inspectional Services may require additional design/containment requirements utilizing best available technology. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.090 - Screening/fencing requirements. 
All dumpsters governed by this chapter shall be screened or fenced off from view from public ways, sidewalks, and adjoining properties at all sites other than construction sites, unless requirements are waived by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.100 - Posting requirements. 
The dumpster plan and license shall be posted in a visible location on the lot or establishment thereon, accessible to an inspector on the premises. All dumpsters shall display a clearly visible decal or stencil showing the name and telephone numbers of the company/contractor servicing the dumpster. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.110 - Other requirements. 
It is the responsibility of the owner of the lot and/or responsible party to ensure that all other approvals, licenses and permits required by the City and Commonwealth of Massachusetts have been obtained, including but not limited to the mandatory recycling provisions of Chapter 8.24 of this Code. The dumpster license shall be applicable only to the owner or tenants or establishments licensed to use the dumpster and only to the lot to which the dumpster serves, and no trash or other items from any other lots, properties, buildings or other sources may be placed in or transferred to the dumpster in question. The issuance of this license shall under no circumstances be construed as a waiver from any other license or permit required. It is the responsibility of the owner of the lot and/or responsible party to take appropriate action to immediately cause the dumpster to be emptied of its contents when full. It is the responsibility of the owner of the lot and/or responsible party to maintain the area free of odors, debris, litter, overflow, and all other nuisances including pests. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.120 - Inspections. 
A.  Authority. In order to properly carry out their respective responsibilities under this chapter, and to ensure that the public health, safety and environment are protected from the hazards posed by unsanitary and unhealthy conditions, the Inspectional Services Department is authorized to examine and/or survey at any reasonable time all establishments and dumpsters licensed hereunder. 
B.  Systematic Area Inspections. The Inspectional Services Department is authorized to develop and adopt plans and regulations for systematic, periodic area-wide inspections of dumpsters and establishments required to obtain a license. 
C.  Interference with Inspection. If any owner, occupant, or other person refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to the lot, operation, or premises where inspection is authorized by this chapter, the Inspectional Services Department may seek in a court of competent jurisdiction an inspection warrant that allows for the inspection of the lot and apprises the owner of the lot and/or responsible party concerning the nature of the inspection, the scope of the inspection, and justification for it and may seek the assistance of the Police Department in presenting said warrant. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.130 - Violation. 
A.  The operation or maintenance of any dumpster governed by this chapter without a license; the failure to operate or maintain the same in accordance with a validly issued license; the interference with an inspection, including inspections conducted pursuant to a validly issued inspection warrant; and/or any other violations of the terms of this chapter, shall constitute a violation and a citation shall be issued by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services or designee. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense, including but not limited to any days in which the Commissioner of Inspectional Services or designee is forced to obtain and/or exercise an inspection warrant. 
B.  Notice of violation shall be sent or hand delivered to the offender, the owner of the lot or responsible party at the lot or establishment thereon, to their last known address, or to addresses listed on the dumpster plan. Any violation herein shall be considered a municipal charge as described in G.L. c. 40, § 57. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.140 - Administrative hearings. 
A.  Right to Hearing. Any person upon whom a notice of violation has been served may request a hearing from the Inspectional Services Department by filing a written petition requesting a hearing on the matter with the Inspectional Services Department within seven days after the day the notice of violation was sent or hand delivered. 
B.  Hearing Notice. Upon receipt of a petition, the Inspectional Services Department shall inform the petitioner of the date, time, and place of the hearing in writing. 
C.  Time for Hearing. The hearing shall commence within thirty days after the day on which the notice of violation was served. The time period in which the cited violations must be remedied shall be stayed upon receipt of the petition for a hearing until such time as the hearing is held. 
D.  Hearing of Petitioner. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary evidence, and to show why the notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. Failure to hold a hearing within the time period specified herein shall not affect the validity of any notice of violation. 
E.  Final Decision after Hearing; Failure to Comply with Final Order. 
1.  Within seven days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Inspectional Services Department shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice of violation and shall inform the petitioner in writing of its decision and the reasons therefor. If the Department sustains or modifies the notice of violation, said violation shall be remedied within the time period allotted in the original notice of violation or in the modification. 
2.  If a written petition for a hearing is not filed with the Inspectional Services Department within seven days after the notice of violation has been served, or if after a hearing the notice of violation has been sustained in full or in any part, each day's failure to comply with the notice of violation within the time allotted as issued or modified shall constitute an additional offense, including any days prior to the filing of a written petition, and any days subsequent to the issuance of the written decision by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, or a designee. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.150 - Penalties. 
A.  Failure to Obtain License. If an owner of a lot or responsible party stores or maintains a dumpster without first obtaining a license, the Commissioner of Inspectional Services may issue a violation pursuant to the process described in section 8.25.130, not to exceed three hundred dollars. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services may also seek an injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction prohibiting the operation of the establishment or dumpster until a license is secured. 
B.  Failure to Comply With Terms of License. If a licensee fails to comply with the terms of a license, the Commissioner of Inspectional Services may issue a violation pursuant to the process described in section 8.25.030, not to exceed three hundred dollars. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services may also suspend the license, after an administrative hearing, and seek an injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction prohibiting the operation of the establishment or dumpster until the licensee proves to the court its compliance with the license. If a licensee fails to comply with the terms of the license three times in the preceding twelve-month period, the Commissioner of Inspectional Services or a designee may suspend, cancel, or revoke the license after an administrative hearing. In the event of suspension or cancellation of the license, other municipal agencies issuing licenses and permits will be so notified. 
C.  Failure to Comply with Notice of Violation. Any person who fails to comply with any notice of violation or other order issued pursuant to this chapter by the Inspectional Services Department, or duly appointed agents or representatives, shall be issued a violation pursuant to the process described in section 8.25.130, not to exceed three hundred dollars. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.  Interference After Inspection Warrant Presented. Any owner of a lot or responsible party who refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the structure, site, operation or premises where inspection is sought under this chapter after an inspection warrant has been obtained and presented in accordance with section 8.25.120, shall be issued a violation pursuant to the process described in section 8.25.130, not to exceed three hundred dollars. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
E.  Fines. All fines and penalties assessed and collected under this chapter may be enforced pursuant to G.L. c. 40, Section 21D. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.160 - Severability. 
If any section provided for under this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, that decision shall not affect any other portion of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared severable. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.170 - Regulatory authority. 
The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations necessary to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.180 - Delegation of authority. 
The Commissioner of Inspectional Services may delegate enforcement of this chapter to any City department authorized to enforce public safety, health, or environmental laws and regulations, including but not limited to any enforcement officer with the Department of Public Works, the Traffic, Parking, and Transportation Department, the License Commission, or the Police Department. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
8.25.190 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 2010. 
(Ord. 1329, 9/14/2009)  
Chapter 8.28 - RESTRICTIONS ON YOUTH ACCESS AND SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS AND ON SMOKING IN WORKPLACES AND PUBLIC PLACES 
 
8.28.010 - Declaration of Legislative Findings 
The City Council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are to protect public health, safety and general welfare by: 
A.  Preventing access to tobacco products by people under twenty-one years of age; 
B.  Creating a permitting process for tobacco sales to facilitate enforcement of this chapter; 
C.  Prohibiting smoking in workplaces and most other public places. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.020 - Definitions for Youth Access and Sale of Tobacco Products 
For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Blunt wrap. Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed or intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers. 
Cambridge Public Health Department. The entity that provides public health services for the City of Cambridge, pursuant to Chapter 147 of the Acts of 1996. 
Characterizing Flavor. A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or component part thereof, including but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because of the use of additives or flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma or because of the provision of ingredient information. 
Cigar. Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco with or without a tip or mouthpiece not otherwise defined as a cigarette under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 64C, Section 1, Paragraph 1. 
City. The City of Cambridge. 
Commercial Roll-Your-Own (RYO) machine. A mechanical device, by whatever manufacturer made and by whatever name known, located in a business or used for sale or distribution of tobacco that is designed to roll and wrap tobacco into products. RYO machines located in a private home, used for personal consumption, are not commercial roll-your-own machines. 
Component Part. Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent. 
Constituent. Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacture or packing of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke constituent. 
Distinguishable. Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste. 
E-Cigarette. Any electronic nicotine delivery product composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that provides a vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of solid nicotine or any liquid. This term shall include such devices whether they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any other product name. 
Flavored Tobacco Product. Any tobacco product or component part thereof that contains a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor. A public statement or claim made or disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence that the tobacco product is flavored. 
Health Care Institution. An individual, partnership, association, corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under M.G.L. c. 112. Health care institution includes hospitals, stand-alone clinics, in-store clinics, health centers, pharmacies, drug stores and doctors' and dentists' offices. 
Inspectional Services Department. The City which is responsible for enforcement of state laws and related City ordinances which pertain to the State Building Code, local zoning laws and certain articles of the State Sanitary Code. 
Nicotine Delivery Product. Any manufactured article or product made wholly or in part of a tobacco substitute or otherwise containing nicotine that is expected or intended for human consumption, but not including a tobacco substitute prescribed by a licensed medical provider or a product that has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco use cessation or harm reduction product or for other medical purposes and which is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. Nicotine delivery products include, but are not limited to, e-cigarettes. 
Person. A person, employer, employee, retail store manager or owner, or the owner or operator of any establishment engaged in the sale of tobacco products. 
Retail Tobacco Store. An establishment which is not required to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons under the age of eighteen is prohibited at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued by the City public health department. 
Self Service Display. Any display of tobacco products which is so located such that said products are accessible to customers without assistance from an employee or store personnel. 
Vending Machine. Any automated, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses cigarettes or any other tobacco product. 
Tobacco Product. Cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, nicotine delivery product, snuff or tobacco in any of its forms. 
Youth. Any individual who is under the age of twenty-one years. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.030 - Youth Access and Sale of Tobacco Products. 
A.  Prohibition Against Sale of Tobacco to Youths. 
1.  No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products to be sold to a youth or, not being the youth's parent or guardian, no person shall give tobacco products to a youth. 
2.  No person shall sell or permit the sale of tobacco products unless the location at which the tobacco products are available for purchase is posted with a notice which is clearly visible to anyone purchasing such products and which states: "The City of Cambridge, by Chapter 8.28 of the Cambridge Municipal Code, prohibits the sale of tobacco products to any person under the age of twenty-one years." Said notice shall be available from the City public health department. 
3.  Each retailer shall verify by means of photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that no person purchasing the product is younger than twenty-one years of age. No such verification is required for any person over the age of twenty-six. 
B.  Prohibition Against the Sale of Tobacco Products by Health Care Institutions. No health care institution located in the City shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products. Additionally, no retail establishment that operates or has a health care institution within it, such as a pharmacy or drug store, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products. 
C.  Tobacco sales permit. 
1.  No person shall sell tobacco products within the City without first obtaining a tobacco sales permit issued by the inspectional services department. 
2.  As part of the application process, the applicant will be provided with instructions on compliance with G.L.c.270 section 6 (sales of tobacco to minors and penalties for violation thereof), a copy of this ordinance prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to youths and compliance with this chapter. 
3.  Each applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant has read said instructions and that the applicant is responsible for instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco sales regarding the laws. 
4.  The fee for a tobacco sales permit shall be determined by the Commissioner of inspectional services. All such permits shall be renewed annually on July 1. 
5.  A separate permit is needed for each location. 
6.  Each tobacco sales permit shall be displayed on the premises in a conspicuous place. 
D.  Free distribution. No person shall, in or upon any part of the streets, parks, public grounds, public buildings or other publicly owned places within the City, distribute free of charge any products containing tobacco or any coupons or vouchers for free tobacco products, to any person for any promotional or other commercial purposes. 
E.  Packaging. Sale or distribution of single cigarettes or any tobacco product in any form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited. No manufacturer, distributor or retailer may sell or cause to be sold, or distribute or cause to be distributed, any cigarette package that contains fewer than twenty cigarettes. 
F.  Self Service Displays. All self-service displays of tobacco products are prohibited. The only exception is self service displays that are located in facilities where the retailer ensures that no person younger than twenty-one years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any time. 
G.  Tobacco Products Vending Machines. No person shall distribute or sell tobacco products by the use of a vending machine. 
H.  Cigar Sales Regulated. 
1.  No retailer, retail establishment, or other individual or entity shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed a cigar unless the cigar is contained in an original package of at least four cigars. This section shall not apply to: 
a.  The sale or distribution of any cigar having a retail price of more than two dollars and fifty cents. 
b.  A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside the boundaries of the City. 
c.  Retail tobacco stores. 
I.  Prohibition on the Sale of Blunt Wraps. 
No person shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in the City. 
J.  Commercial Roll-Your-Own Machines. 
All commercial roll-your-own machines are prohibited. 
K.  Sale of Flavored Tobacco Prohibited. 
No retailer, or other individual or entity shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed or offer for sale any flavored tobacco to a consumer. This provision shall not apply to a retail tobacco store. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.040. - Enforcement and penalties: 
A.  Noncriminal Disposition. The penalty for each violation of 8.28.030 paragraph A shall be a fine of one hundred dollars for the first offense, two hundred dollars for the second offense and three hundred dollars for the third and each subsequent offense within a twenty-four month period. The permit holder is responsible for payment of the fine. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall inure to the City. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be enforcing officers: Police Officers; and employees of the License Commission, the Cambridge Public Health Department and Inspectional Services Department or their designees. 
B.  The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall suspend for seven days a tobacco sales permit granted pursuant to this ordinance upon determination that a permit holder has committed two violations within twenty-four months, calculated from the date of the first offense. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall suspend a tobacco sales permit for thirty days for a third or subsequent offense within the same twenty-four month period. The Commissioner of Inspectional services shall provide notice of the intent to suspend a tobacco sales permit, which notice shall contain the reasons therefore and establish a time and date for a hearing, which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date of said notice. The permit holder shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the Commissioner's decision and the reasons therefore, in writing. All tobacco products shall be removed from the premises upon suspension or revocation of the tobacco sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco products shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
C.  Any permit holder who does not have an appeal pending and does not pay a fine within twenty-one days may be subject to the revocation of the tobacco sales permit granted pursuant to this chapter. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall provide notice of the intent to revoke a tobacco sales permit, which notice shall contain the reasons therefore and establish a time and date for a hearing, which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date of said notice. The permit holder shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the Commissioner's decision and the reasons therefore, in writing. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services, after a hearing, may revoke the tobacco sales permit until the fine is paid. All tobacco products shall be removed from the premises upon suspension or revocation of the tobacco sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco products shall constitute a separate violation of this ordinance. 
D.  A violation of any provision of this chapter other than 8.28.030 paragraph A shall be subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars which may be enforced by Noncriminal Disposition as stated in 8.28.040. Section A. Every day in which a person engages in conduct prohibited by this chapter shall constitute a single and separate violation. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall inure to the City. 
E.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the Public Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.050 - Definitions for Prohibition of Smoking in Workplaces. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, in addition to the definitions in 8.28.020 above, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this paragraph: 
Agent or Business Agent. An individual who has been designated by the owner or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge of said establishment. 
Employee. Any individual person who performs services for an employer. 
Employer. An individual person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, or other organized group of individuals, including the City of Cambridge or any agency thereof, which utilizes the services of one or more individual employees, with or without compensation. 
Enclosed Area. A space bounded by walls (with or without windows) from the floor to the ceiling and enclosed by doors. An enclosed area may include, but is not limited to, offices, rooms, and halls. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind including, but not limited to an owner, operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any building, establishment, business, or restaurant or retail store, or the agents or designees of any of the foregoing. 
Private Club. A not-for-profit establishment created and organized pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 180 as a charitable corporation with a defined membership. A private club is not a place of public accommodation but rather distinctly private. Criteria used to determine whether a club is distinctly private include, but are not limited to, those factors identified in 204 CMR 10.02. If a private club holds an alcoholic beverage license, said license shall be a "club license" or a "war veterans club license" as defined by M.G.L. Ch. 138. Sec. 12 and by the Massachusetts Alcohol Beverage Control Commission. Said license is subject to the terms set forth by the local licensing authority. 
Smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, nicotine delivery product, snuff or tobacco in any manner or in any form. 
Workplace. Any area or structure, whether enclosed or unenclosed, under the control of an employer at which one or more employees perform services for their employer. Workplace includes, but is not limited to, hallways, stairwells, lobbies, elevators, restrooms facilities, work areas, construction sites, temporary offices such as trailers, and vehicles. Workplace shall not include any space specifically and clearly designated by the employer, and approved by the Public Health Department, in the case of all non-construction related workplaces and Inspectional Services Department for any projects involving a building permit, as an outdoor smoking area for employees only. 
( Ord. 1390 , 3/20/2017; Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.060 - Prohibition of Smoking in Workplaces. 
A.  Smoking is prohibited in all workplaces, including private clubs. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any employer or other person having control of premises upon which smoking is prohibited by this chapter, or the agent or designee of such person, to permit a violation of this chapter. 
C.  The Cambridge Public Health Department may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.070 - Prohibition of Smoking in Workplaces Enforcement and Penalties. 
A.  Any establishment who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount of one hundred dollars for a first offense, two hundred dollars for a second offense and three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent offense within a twenty-four month period from the first offense. Any private individual who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars. Each day a violation occurs will be considered a separate offense. 
B.  As an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, violations of this Section II. of this chapter may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL c.40, s.21D. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall inure to the City of Cambridge. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be enforcing officers: Police Officers; and employees of the License Commission, the Public Health Department and Inspectional Services Department or their designees. 
C.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may request that the Cambridge Public Health Department initiate an investigation. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.080 - Definitions for Prohibition on Smoking in Public Places. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, in addition to the definitions in 8.28.020 and 8.28.050, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this paragraph: 
Health Care Facility. Any office or institution providing individual care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions including but not limited to rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, offices of any surgeon, chiropractor, physical therapist, physician, dentist and all specialists within these professions. 
Mall. Any enclosed public walkway or hall area which serves to connect retail stores or offices. 
Municipal Facility. Any building or facility owned, leased, operated or occupied by the municipality, including school buildings and grounds. 
Municipal Vehicle. Any vehicle owned or leased by the municipality, and operated or occupied by employees, agents or contractors of the municipality. 
Public park restricted area. Any public outdoor parks of less than 15,000 square feet, fenced-in tot lots, and all public open space including athletic fields in use during City-permitted events, to which the public is invited and permitted. See section 8.28.085 for a complete listing of public park restricted areas within the City. 
Public place. An enclosed indoor area on public or private property where the public is invited or permitted, including but not limited to the following facilities: healthcare facilities, malls, municipal facilities, public transportation vehicles, retail food stores, retail stores, educational facilities, libraries, museums, theaters, banks, Laundromats, indoor sports arenas, auditoriums, all enclosed areas of inns/hotels/motels, including all guest rooms, auditoriums and any rooms or halls used for a public meeting, public areas of banks and automatic banking lobbies, common areas of residential buildings, public restrooms, lobbies, staircases, waiting rooms, halls, exits, entrance ways, elevators accessible to the public and licensed child-care locations. 
Public transportation vehicle. Buses, taxis, and other means of transportation available to the general public while such means of transportation is operating within the boundaries of the city including indoor platforms by which such means of transportation may be accessed. 
Retail food store. Any establishment selling food to the public for off premise consumption. Retail food store shall not include restaurants as defined in 8.28.110. 
Retail store. Any establishment selling goods, articles or personal services to the public, including such places as barbershops, hair salons, nail salons and tanning salons. 
Smoke shop. Retail stores where the primary business is the sale of tobacco products; 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.085 - List of Public Park Restricted Areas. 
Park Name 	Smoking Status 
Ahern Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Alberico Park 	Allowed 
Alden Park 	Allowed 
Anderson Courts 	Allowed 
Bergin Park 	Allowed 
Cambridge Common 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Centanni Way 	Allowed 
Charles Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Clarendon Avenue Playground 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Clement G. Morgan Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Cooper Park 	Not allowed 
Corporal Burns Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Costa Lopez Taylor Park 	Allowed 
Dana Park Not 	allowed at tot lot 
Danehy Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
David Nunes Park 	Allowed 
Donnelly Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Elm/Hampshire Plaza 	Not allowed 
Father Callanan Playground 	Allowed 
Flagstaff Park 	Allowed 
Fort Washington Park 	Allowed 
Franklin Street Park 	Not allowed 
Fresh Pond Reservation 	Allowed 
Front Park 	Allowed 
Fulmore Park 	Allowed 
Gannett/Warren Pals Park 	Not allowed 
Garden Street Glen/Roethlisberger Memorial Park 	Allowed 
Gibbons Park 	Allowed 
Glacken Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Gold Star Mothers Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Greene Rose Heritage Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Hastings Square 	Allowed 
Hoyt Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Hurley Park 	Not allowed 
Joan Lorentz Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Kingsley Park 	Allowed 
Larch Road Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Lechmere Canal Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Lindstrom Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Linear Park 	Allowed 
Longfellow Park 	Allowed 
Lopez Street Park 	Not allowed 
Lowell School Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Maple Avenue Park 	Not allowed 
Market Street Park 	Not allowed 
McMath Park 	Allowed 
New Riverside Neighborhood Park 	Allowed 
Pacific Street Open Space 	Allowed 
Paine Park 	Not allowed 
Pine Street Park 	Not allowed 
Rafferty Park 	Allowed 
Raymond Park/Corcoran Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Reverend Williams Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Rindge Field 	Allowed 
Riverside Press Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Russell/Samp Field/Comeau Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Sacramento Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Sennott Park 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Silva Park 	Not allowed 
Squirrel Brand Park 	Not allowed 
St. Peter's Field 	Not allowed at tot lot 
Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr. Municipal Golf Course 	Allowed 
Tobin Field 	Allowed 
Wilder-Lee Park 	Not allowed 
William G. Maher Park 	Allowed 
Winthrop Square 	Allowed 
 
Plaza Name 	Smoking Status 
Bishop Allen Plaza 	Allowed 
Brattle Square 	Allowed 
Carl Barron Plaza 	Allowed 
Dawes Park 	Allowed 
Dolan Square 	Allowed 
Eliot Street Plaza 	Allowed 
Harvard Square 	Allowed 
Lafayette Square 	Allowed 
Mt. Auburn Veterans Memorial Plaza 	Allowed 
Point Park 	Allowed 
Porter Square 	Allowed 
Quincy Square 	Allowed 
Sullivan Square 	Allowed 
Vellucci Plaza 	Allowed 
Western Ave. and River St. 	Allowed 
Zimmerman Square 	Allowed 
 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.090 - Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places. 
A.  Smoking prohibited. No person shall smoke nor shall any person be permitted to smoke in any public place, municipal vehicle, or public park restricted area. 
B.  Election for coverage by private facilities. 
The owner, manager, or other person in charge of a building or facility not prohibited from allowing smoking by this ordinance or other laws may elect to prohibit smoking. 
C.  Posting notice of prohibition. 
Every person having control of premises upon which smoking is prohibited by and under the authority of this ordinance shall conspicuously display upon the premises "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). 
D.  Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of 8.28.090A of this chapter, smoking may be permitted in the following places and/or circumstances: 
1.  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care facility or health care facility; 
2.  University dormitory rooms occupied by one or more students, all of whom are smokers, who have requested in writing to be placed in rooms where smoking is permitted by the university. 
3.  Private or semiprivate rooms of nursing homes and long term care facilities, which is separately ventilated, occupied by one or more patients, all of whom have requested in writing to be placed in rooms where smoking is permitted; 
4.  Smoke shops provided such establishments prohibit entry to persons under the age of eighteen at all times, and that such establishments conspicuously post signs at all entrances that warn patrons of the dangers of environmental tobacco smoke; 
5.  Performers upon the stage provided that the smoking is part of a theatrical production; 
6.  Religious ceremonies where smoking is part of the ritual; 
7.  The Middlesex County Jail/House of Corrections or places of incarceration/detention. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.100. - Violations and Penalties. 
A.  Any establishment who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount of one hundred dollars for a first offense, for a second offense and three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent offense within a twenty-four month period from the first offense. Any private individual who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars. Each day a violation occurs will be considered a separate offense. 
B.  As an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, violations of this Section III of this ordinance may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL c.40, s. 21D. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall inure to the City. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be enforcing officers: Police Officers; and employees of the License Commission, the Public Health Department and Inspectional Services Department or their designees. 
C.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may request that the Cambridge Public Health Department initiate an investigation. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.110 - Definitions for Prohibition on Smoking in Restaurants. 
For purposes of this ordinance, in addition to the definitions in 8.28.020, 8.28.050 and 8.28.080 above, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this paragraph: 
License Commission. Composed of three commissioners under Chapter 95 of the Special Act of 1922; said commission regulates and issues licenses for restaurants, entertainment facilities and clubs within the City of Cambridge. 
Restaurant. Any eating or entertainment establishment which possesses a common victualer license under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140 including but not limited to any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich shop, private and public school cafeteria, which gives or offer food for sale to the public, guests, or employees for on-premises consumption. Restaurant premises shall include all outdoor and sidewalk seating areas. This includes those establishments that possess a common victualer license and/or an alcohol license as approved by the License Commission prior to 1986 and which are also approved by the License Commission pursuant to any other law. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.120 - Prohibition of Smoking in Restaurants. 
A.  Smoking Prohibited. No person shall smoke (including using e-cigarettes), nor shall any person be permitted to smoke (including using e-cigarettes) in any restaurant, except that e-cigarette, hookah and water pipe use shall be permitted in any restaurant outdoor seating area other than on public sidewalk seating areas. 
B.  Posting notice of prohibition. Every person having control of premises upon which smoking is prohibited by and under the authority of this ordinance shall conspicuously display at the entry(s) of the premises and upon the premises "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.130. - Violations and Penalties. 
A.  Any person who violates this chapter by: 
(1)  allowing smoking in a nonsmoking area or; 
(2)  allowing a youth into an area restricted to twenty-one and older shall be subject to a fine in an amount of one hundred dollars for a first offense, two hundred dollars for a second offense, three hundred dollars for a third offense or subsequent offense within a twenty-four-month period from the first offense. Each day a violation occurs will be considered a separate offense. 
B.  As an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, violations of section 8.28.120 may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL c.40, s.21D. Any fines imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall inure to the city. For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall be enforcing officers: Police Officers; and employees of the License Commission, the Public Health Department and Inspectional Services Department or their designees. 
C.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section may request that the Cambridge Public Health Department initiate an investigation. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.140 - Invalidity of Provisions. 
In the event that any one or more of the phrases, sentences, clauses, or paragraphs contained in this section shall be declared invalid by the final and unappealable order, decree or judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, this section shall be construed as if it did not contain such phrases, sentences, clauses, or paragraphs. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.150 - Conflict with Other Laws and Regulations. 
Not withstanding the provisions of the foregoing ordinance, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by such fire, health or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
8.28.160 - Effective Date of January 29, 2015 Amendments: 
The amendments to this ordinance adopted by the City Council on January 29, 2015 shall take effect on June 1, 2015, so as to allow the City to notify the affected businesses and members of the public of the amendments prior to the effective date of June 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 1364, Repealed & Replaced, 01/29/2015)  
Chapter 8.29 - REGULATION OF THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS THROUGH VENDING MACHINES 
 
8.29.010 - Declaration of legislative findings. 
The City Council finds that the vast majority of smokers begin smoking in their teens or preteens. The health hazards posed by cigarettes and other tobacco products are well documented and the sale of tobacco in any form to persons under the age of eighteen is prohibited in this Commonwealth. However, cigarette vending machines in public places have provided unsupervised minors with easy access to cigarettes, in contravention of the policy in this Commonwealth. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the ability of unsupervised minors to obtain cigarettes and other tobacco products in violation of the law will be significantly reduced by regulating vending machines which dispense such products. 
(Ord. 1154 (part), 1993)  
8.29.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or other legal entity. 
B.  "Public place" means any area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted. 
C.  "Sales" means the giving, selling, delivering, dispensing, issuing, offering to give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue, or cause or hiring any person to give, sell, deliver, dispense, issue or offer to give, sell deliver, dispense or issue. 
D.  "Tobacco products" means any substance which contains tobacco, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, smoking tobacco and smokeless tobacco. 
E.  "Vending machine" means any self-service device offered for public use, which, upon insertion of a coin, coins, token, paper currency, or by other means, dispenses tobacco products. 
(Ord. 1154 (part), 1993)  
8.29.030 - Sales of tobacco products through vending machines. 
All sales of tobacco products by vending machines within the City shall be prohibited unless: 
A.  The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain view and control of a responsible employee, so that all purchases are observable and controllable as if the tobacco products were sold over the counter; and 
B.  The vending machine must not be located in a coatroom, restroom, unmonitored hallway, outer waiting area, or similar unmonitored area and must be inaccessible to the public when the establishment is closed; and 
C.  The vending machine is equipped with a lock-out device approved by the Health Commissioner. The device shall lock out sales from vending machines unless any employee releases the locking mechanism. The release mechanism must not allow continuous operation of the vending machine and must not be accessible to customers. Vending machines shall be posted with a sign stating that the machine is equipped with a lock-out device and identifying the person(s) to contact to purchase tobacco products from the machine; and 
D.  All tobacco products vending machines must display a conspicuous sign stating that it is illegal for minors to purchase cigarettes; and 
E.  Or, unless the use of the premises is restricted to persons over the age of eighteen. 
(Ord. 1154 (part), 1993)  
8.29.040 - Evaluation of effectiveness. 
A.  The City Manager, with the License Commission, the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals and the Substance Abuse Task Force shall devise a program to evaluate the effectiveness of this chapter, with regard to its goal of reducing the access of minors to tobacco products, and shall report back to the City Council as to its effectiveness within one year after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such report to include, among other things, the number of cigarette vending machines in the City. 
B.  During the one-year evaluation, there shall be an aggressive community education campaign geared to minors and those who sell cigarettes. 
(Ord. 1154 (part), 1993)  
8.29.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, § 21D. For purposes of this section, the following officials shall be enforcing persons: police officers, staff inspectors from the Cambridge License Commission and inspectors from the Inspectional Service Department. 
B.  The penalty for the first violation shall be one hundred dollars; for the second violation, two hundred dollars; and for all subsequent violations, three hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1154 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 8.30 - PREVENTION OF AIDS/HIV INFECTION 
 
8.30.010 - Declaration of public health crisis. 
The spread of AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) and HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) infection have created a public health crisis; while there is no known cure for the virus, its spread through intimate sexual contact can be limited through the availability of affordable, high quality latex condoms in places of public accommodation. 
(Ord. 1109 (part), 1990)  
8.30.020 - Requirement of vending machines which dispense condoms. 
A.  The following premises, which are licensed by the Cambridge License Commission, shall contain coin-operated machines which dispense affordable, high-quality latex condoms: hotels and motels, bars, restaurants and movie theaters. In addition, all hospitals, health clinics and health facilities and all municipal buildings, not including schools, shall maintain such vending machines. 
B.  The condom vending machines shall be located in a publicly accessible place, or in at least one male and one female restroom, and shall display a sticker prepared by the City of Cambridge AIDS Task Force and approved by the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals which will provide important referral and information telephone numbers. 
(Ord. 1109 (part), 1990)  
8.30.030 - List of vending machine operators. 
The License Commission and the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals shall maintain a list of vending machine operators who agree to install and maintain the vending machines in continuous working order at no cost to the owners or lessees of the premises. 
(Ord. 1109 (part), 1990)  
8.30.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to any food or beverage seller whose establishment is not required to have a restroom. 
B.  The License Commission shall exempt from the provisions of this chapter any hotel, motel, bar, restaurant or movie theater which files a written request for exemption. 
C.  The Commissioner of Health and Hospitals shall exempt from the provisions of this chapter any hospital, health clinic or other health facility which files a written request for exemption. 
(Ord. 1109 (part), 1990)  
8.30.050 - Annual report to City Manager. 
A.  The License Commission shall determine whether hotels, motels, bars, restaurants and movie theaters comply with this chapter, and report its findings annually to the City Manager for any necessary action. 
B.  The Commissioner of Health and Hospitals shall determine whether hospitals, health clinics, other health facilities and required municipal buildings comply with this chapter, and report his or her findings annually to the City Manager for any necessary action. 
(Ord. 1109 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 8.32 - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
8.32.010 - Intent—Applicability. 
This chapter is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of those persons who purchase, lease or rent alarm systems, devices or services. It is further intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these alarm systems, devices or services and to insure that police department personnel will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding to false alarms. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to alarm systems owned and/or operated by agencies within the City government. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-15)  
8.32.020 - Chief of Police—Authority to establish administrative rules. 
The Chief of Police may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-16)  
8.32.030 - Connection with Police Department—Approval required—Fee. 
A.  Alarm systems shall be connected to the communications console in the Police Department by obtaining prior written approval from the Chief which shall be granted upon receipt of a fifty-dollar fee for the benefit of direct communication to the police console number which shall be a separate number from the emergency 911 line. 
B.  In accordance with the normal bidding practices in effect in the City, the Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to request bids from alarm companies to furnish, at no cost to the City, a communications console and the necessary telephone lines which are compatible to the receipt of alarm signals from alarm systems whose lines are connected to the police department. Each bid shall set forth the annual fee each alarm user will be required to pay the alarm company for services rendered with respect to the communications console. Services shall be set forth in the form of a written contract between the alarm company and the alarm user. 
C.  Any alarm user may contract with any alarm company of his choice for the sale, installation and or servicing of the alarm system to be installed on his premises. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-17)  
8.32.040 - Alarm user's responsibilities. 
A.  Every alarm user shall submit to the Chief of Police the name and telephone number of at least two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can open the premises in which the alarm system is located. 
B.  All alarm users must notify the police department, in advance of any testing of equipment. Failure to notify the Police Department in advance of a testing of equipment shall constitute a false alarm and be subject to the assessment schedule contained in this chapter. 
C.  All alarm systems which use an audible bell or horn shall be equipped with an automatic shut off device which will deactivate the alarm system within ten minutes. All alarm users with an audible bell or horn must comply with this section within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-18)  
8.32.050 - False alarms—Assessment schedule. 
Any alarm system which has two or more false alarms within a calendar year shall be subject to assessment as provided in this chapter: 
A.  After the Police Department has recorded two separate false alarms from an alarm user within a calendar year, the police chief shall notify the alarm user, in writing and by certified mail, of such facts, and require the user to submit within ten working days of receipt of such notice a report describing the users efforts to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of the false alarms. This notice, by certified mail from the Chief of Police or his designee, shall contain the dates and times of each alleged false alarm. 
B.  In the event that the Chief of Police or his designee determine that a report submitted in accordance with subsection A of this section is unsatisfactory, or that the alarm user has failed to show by the report that he has taken or will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the police chief or his designee shall order that the use of the alarm system be discontinued for a period of thirty days. 
C.  1.  Any user of an alarm system which transmits a third false alarm signal shall be assessed a fine of: 
a.  Twenty dollars for the third false alarm in a calendar year; 
b.  Fifty dollars for the fourth false alarm in a calendar year; 
c.  One hundred dollars each for all subsequent false alarms. 
2.  All fines assessed under this chapter shall be made payable to the City Treasurer for deposit in the general fund. 
D.  If the alarm user submits a report as required by subsection A of this section, the Chief of Police or his designee shall determine if the action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms. If it is determined that the action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, then the Chief of Police shall notify the alarm user, in writing, that no assessment will be made at that time. If no assessment is made at that time, the alarm user will be subject to assessment procedures on the next false alarm signal transmitted. 
E.  Upon failure of the user of an alarm system to pay two consecutive fines assessed under this chapter, within sixty days of the assessment, the Police Chief shall order that the user discontinue the use of the alarm system for not more than six months. 
F.  Proof that a false alarm was caused by an act of God or by the actions of the telephone company shall constitute affirmative defense to assessment of the particular false alarm. 
G.  The provisions of this section concerning false alarms pertains to all alarm users except municipal, county and state agencies. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-19)  
8.32.060 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Any alarm user who is aggrieved by a decision of the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 8.32.050 of this chapter may within five working days of notice of the Chief's decision, appeal his case, in writing, to the Chief for further consideration. 
B.  All decisions made by the Chief of Police after the appeals procedure, are final. 
C.  The only grounds for appealing a decision of the Chief are: 
1.  Proof of a false alarm assessment under subsection C of Section 8.32.050 of this chapter; and 
2.  Written verification from the alarm user and the alarm company, that all necessary steps have been taken to upgrade, improve and insure the accuracy of the alarm system. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-20)  
8.32.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
The following acts and omissions shall constitute violation of this chapter punishable by fine up to fifty dollars: 
A.  Failure to obey an order of the Police Chief to discontinue use of an alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of appeal; 
B.  Failure to disconnect an automatic dialing device from any Police Department telephone lines within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
C.  Interconnection of an automatic dialing device to any police department telephone lines after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
D.  Failure to pay two or more consecutive fines assessed under subsection C of Section 8.32.050 of this chapter within sixty days from the date of assessment; 
E.  Failure to comply with the requirements set forth in subsections A, B and C of Section 8.32.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 962 (part), 1981: prior code § 15-21)  
Chapter 8.36 - PRIVATE FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
8.36.010 - Connection to municipal system—Fee. 
Private fire alarm systems may be connected to the City fire alarm system by obtaining prior written approval from the City Electrician. Detailed plans of the interior fire alarm system must be submitted to the City Electrician and the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and must be approved by them. The fee for direct connection to the municipal system shall be four hundred dollars per installation and four hundred dollars per year (or part thereof) thereafter, payable on August 1st of each year. 
(Ord. 1000 (part), 1983: prior code § 9-34(a)) 
(Ord. 1290, Amended, 09/12/2005)  
8.36.020 - Owner's responsibility. 
A.  All wires and other material necessary for connection to the property shall be supplied by the owner to the City Electrician for connection to the nearest utility pole or manhole, as designated by the City Electrician. The owner is responsible for making the connection from that point to his building. 
B.  The owner shall maintain all wires and other equipment on his property. If faults develop in any part of the interior system, the City Electrician, after notifying the owner, may disconnect any or all of the interior system from the municipal system, until necessary repairs are made. Wiring from the utility pole or manhole to the building shall be maintained by the owner. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 1000 (part), 1983: prior code § 9-34(b))  
8.36.030 - Testing and maintenance. 
A.  If any person requests that his private fire alarm system be disconnected for the purpose of testing or maintenance of the alarm system, the charge will be as follows: 
1.  Between eight a.m. and four p.m., Monday through Friday, no charge; 
2.  Between four p.m. and midnight, Monday through Friday, one and one-half times the salary for a four-hour period of the employee performing the work; 
3.  Between midnight and eight a.m., Monday through Friday, twice the salary for a four-hour period of the employee performing the work; 
4.  Any time Saturday or Sunday, twice the salary for a four-hour period of the employee performing the work. 
B.  All requests for disconnecting the alarm system for the purpose of testing or maintenance must be made at least twenty-four hours in advance. Failure to do so will result in a charge of twenty-five dollars, except that up to two disconnections within a five-day period, required by emergency repairs, shall be exempt from such charge. 
(Ord. 1000 (part), 1983: prior code § 9-34(c))  
8.36.040 - Private fire alarm companies—Connection to municipal system—Fee. 
Private fire alarm companies which are connected to the municipal system by leased telephone lines shall be charged twenty-five dollars per year per assigned box alarm number. The alarm company will be solely responsible for maintenance of these lines and all related equipment, including equipment which is located in the City fire alarm headquarters. 
(Ord. 1000 (part), 1983: prior code § 9-34(d))  
8.36.050 - Administrative rulemaking authority. 
The City Electrician may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for implementation of this section. 
(Ord. 1000 (part), 1983: prior code § 9-34(e))  
8.36.060 - Exemptions from chapter provisions. 
All churches within the City shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1000 (part), 1983: prior code § 9-34(f))  
Chapter 8.40 - JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE 
 
8.40.010 - Junk motor vehicle defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a "junk motor vehicle" means any automobile or truck, which is worn out, discarded, inoperative or unregistered and which is ready for dismantling or destruction, or which has been stored for salvage or for stripping in order to use parts thereof. Any part of such a vehicle shall be considered a junk motor vehicle under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-15(b))  
8.40.020 - Storage—License required. 
No person as owner or as one in control of any premises in the City shall keep ungaraged upon such premises any junk motor vehicle as defined in Section 8.40.010 of this chapter without being licensed to do so under this chapter or under the provisions of Chapter 140, Section 59 of the General Laws. 
(Prior code § 12-15(a))  
8.40.030 - Application—Issuance standards. 
A license to keep a junk motor vehicle or vehicles ungaraged in any area of the City shall be requested by filing an application in writing to the Board of License Comissioners, which Board may issue the license in accordance with those standards and upon such conditions as are set forth in Section 8.40.040 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-15(c))  
8.40.040 - Application—Hearing—Notification procedures—Renewal. 
The Board of License Commissioners shall hold a public hearing upon the request for a license, notice of which shall be published in a local newspaper at least seven days before the date of the hearing. Seven days notice shall be given to abutting property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested. The applicant for the license shall pay the cost of mailing and publication of such notice. If after the public hearing the Board of License Commissioners determines that the keeping of the vehicle or vehicles will not create a threat to public health and safety, will not constitute a public nuisance, or will not depreciate property values in the surrounding area, the Board may grant a one year license upon such conditions as the Board deems conducive to the health, safety and general well-being of the citizens of Cambridge. Renewal of such license shall be granted pursuant to the procedure set forth in Sections 8.40.030 and 8.40.040 of this chapter. A fee of fifty dollars shall be charged for the issuance of such license. 
(Prior code § 12-15(d))  
8.40.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars. Each day of violation constitutes a separate and distinct offense. No prosecution shall be initiated to recover such fine until an alleged violator has been given notice of this chapter and a reasonable opportunity to apply for a license. 
(Prior code § 12-15(e))  
Chapter 8.44 - RENT CONTROL* 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 926, 929, 932, 941 and 945. 
 
8.44.010 - Findings of fact. 
A serious public emergency continues to exist in the City with respect to the housing of a substantial number of citizens, as declared by Chapter 36 of the Acts of 1976, for the reasons stated in the Act. The emergency has worsened since 1976 because of the removal of a substantial number of rental housing units from the market, by condominium conversion, demolition and other causes. As a result, more than two thousand or over ten percent of the controlled rental units in the City have been removed from the housing market since 1970, and the vacancy rate has fallen below one percent. In order to carry out the purposes of the Act, and to continue to provide a sufficient supply of decent, affordable rental housing accommodations especially for families of low and moderate income and for elderly people on fixed incomes, it is necessary for the City Council, in the exercise of its powers under Section 6 of the Home Rule Amendment and under Section 5(c) of the Act, to regulate the removal of controlled rental housing units from the market. 
(Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(a))  
8.44.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Act" means Chapter 36 of the Acts of 1976, as amended from time to time. 
B.  "Board" means the Rent Control Board established by Section 5 of the Act. 
C.  "Controlled rental unit" means any unit included in the definition under Section 3(b) of the Act. 
D.  "Removal from the market," as applied to a controlled rental unit, means and includes but is not limited to: 
1.  Occupy as an owner of a unit which is a condominium unit, if the most recent occupant was a tenant, even if the prospective owner-occupant is the tenant, unless the prospective owner-occupant is the current tenant of the unit who has continuously occupied it as a tenant since before August 10, 1979, and intends in good faith to occupy it indefinitely as its owner; or 
2.  Demolish, but no unit has been removed from the market by demolition until its physical destruction has begun; or 
3.  Rehabilitate, repair or improve, other than as required by the laws of the Commonwealth or the City, in such a way as to prevent residential occupancy during the course of the rehabilitation, repair or improvement. This provision shall not apply to rehabilitation, financed at least in part by community development block grant funds, of a building owned by a nonprofit corproation and intended for owner-occupancy by low and moderate income persons; or 
4.  Convert to a cooperative as the term is used in Section 3(b)(4) of the Act, all or part of any building which contains any controlled rental unit; 
5.  Cause a unit, not the primary residence of a legal unit owner, to be vacant for one hundred twenty days or more by refusing to rent or to offer for rent such unit in good faith or, when a unit is cited as unfit for human habitation, by failure to perform repairs required to restore such unit to habitable condition. The existence of a vacancy for one hundred twenty days or more, without a showing of good cause, shall constitute removal from the market; 
6.  Prior to April 1, 1995, record a master deed pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.183A or file articles or organization pursuant to G.L. c.156B or c.157, or advertising, offering for sale or selling a unit as a condominium or cooperative unit; 
7.  "Removal from the market" does not include occupancy of a noncondominium unit by the owner of the building in which it is located or by any member of his/her immediate family; or a condominium unit which the owner occupied before the tenant occupied it; or a condominium unit as to which unit it can be shown with respect to its initial sale after the recording of the master deed that a purchase and sale agreement has been entered into prior to August 10, 1979, a cancelled check being conclusive proof of the transaction, or a unit deed recorded in the Middlesex Registry of Deeds prior to August 10, 1979, whether or not the unit was being used for rental housing on August 13, 1979. No condominium unit once legally occupied by the unit owner shall ever again be subject to this chapter for any reason. 
(Ord. 1161, 1994; Ord. 1159 §§ 1, 2, 1994; Ord. 1095, 1990; Ord. 1093, 1989; Ord. 1014 § 1, 1984; Ord. 980 § 2, 1982; Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(b))  
8.44.030 - Applicability of chapter provisions. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to all controlled rental units which have not been removed from the market before August 13, 1979. This section shall take effect immediately, but cease to be effective if the Board files its certificate with the City Clerk that: 
1.  The vacancy rate in the total supply of controlled rental units exceeds four percent; or 
2.  The total number of rental units in the City excluding public housing units, exceeds that number as of January 1, 1970. 
B.  If such a certificate ceases to be correct, the Board shall withdraw it by filing a certificate, and this section shall then again be effective until one of the above conditions again prevails. 
(Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(e))  
8.44.040 - Removal of controlled rental unit—Permit required—Hearing. 
A.  No owner or other person shall remove from the market any controlled rental unit, unless the Board after a hearing grants a permit. The Board may issue orders and promulgate regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, and to prescribe the procedure for applications, notice, hearings and the granting and withdrawal of permits. A permit to remove from the market a unit in a building converted or proposed to be converted to a condominium may be granted to the owner of the building before the sale of a unit. 
B.  One year after the date of a notice of ruling, the Board shall review and confirm that the circumstances and conditions which led the Board to grant any removal permit under this chapter, except for a condominium unit legally occupied by the unit owner, continue to warrant such permit. If, after a hearing, the Board finds that the circumstances and conditions no longer warrant the permit, the Board shall immediately treat the unit as a controlled rental unit and shall initiate whatever action is permitted and appropriate under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1014 § 2, 1984; Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(c))  
8.44.050 - Permit—Criteria considerations. 
In deciding whether to grant a permit under this chapter, the Board shall consider: 
A.  The benefits to the persons sought to be protected by the Act and by this chapter; 
B.  The hardships imposed on the tenants residing in the unit proposed to be removed, including any mitigating provisions made by the applicant; and 
C.  Any aggravation of the shortage of decent rental housing accommodations, especially for families of low and moderate income and elderly people on fixed incomes, which may result from the removal. 
(Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(d))  
8.44.060 - Limited equity cooperative ownership. 
A.  As used in this section, "Administrator" means the Assistant City Manager for Community Development or his or her designee. Notwithstanding the considerations of Section 8.44.050 of this chapter, the Board may grant a permit for conversions to limited equity cooperatives only if the Administrator files with the Board an agreement executed by the Administrator and the cooperative housing corporation which shall contain the following provisions: 
1.  All cooperative documents and all amendments or modifications of the cooperative documents shall be valid only if executed by the Administrator and the articles of incorporation shall so provide. The cooperative documents include the articles of incorporation, the bylaws, occupancy agreements, transfer agreements and management plan. Each transfer shall be reported to the Administrator and all documents effecting the transfer shall be executed by the Administrator. The Administrator shall execute documents only if each of the provisions of this section are met. 
2.  a.  The resale price of the cooperator's membership which includes the right to occupy the unit shall not exceed the transfer value plus the amount of principal amortized by the corporation on its blanket mortgage attributed to the unit and paid by the member involved, less any amounts due to the corporation under the occupancy agreement and less the cost of all deferred maintenance and repairs deemed necessary by the corporation to put the dwelling in a suitable condition for another occupant. 
b.  The transfer value is the sum of: 
i.  The share value paid by the former occupant of the unit (not including the amount of any subsidies) adjusted from the date of the stock payment to the Consumer Price Index for Housing for the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area. 
ii.  The value of improvements approved by the corporation and installed by the member in his unit, including a fair value of labor denoted by a member or others as conclusively established by the Administrator at the time the labor is donated. 
3.  Residents of at least eighty percent of the units in the building as of the date of the articles of incorporation shall sign commitments to become resident shareholders of the limited equity housing corporation. 
4.  A majority of the current residents must be low and moderate income persons as defined by the current income limits set forth in regulations of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, under Section 235 of the National Housing Act or its successor or comparable index as determined by the Administrator. 
5.  Current residents who do not become shareholders shall have the right to remain in their units as tenants of the cooperative corporation. Controlled rental units shall remain subject to the Act and to this section and no permits shall issue for controlled rental units while occupied by non-shareholding tenants. If a controlled rental unit is vacated, that unit may be converted to a cooperative subject to the provisions of this subsection and to the cooperative documents. 
6.  Residents of the City who are low and moderate income persons, as defined in subsection D of this section, shall be given priority when turnover or vacant units occur. 
7.  There shall be no discrimination on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, sex, age, ancestory or marital status with respect to any aspect of the operation of the cooperative. 
8.  Family size per unit shall conform to Chapter II of the State Sanitary Code or other comparable index as determined by the Administrator. 
9.  Buildings shall have at least six units. 
10.  In addition to other remedies, the City may recover in damages twice the amount of any net gain on resale which exceeds the amount allowed by subsection B of this section, and this provision may not be waived in any manner. 
B.  The total number of units for which such permits may be granted shall not exceed one hundred. 
C.  The Board shall revoke any permit granted pursuant to this section whenever it or the Administrator determines that any of the provisions of Subsections A1, A2, A5, A6, A7 or A9 of this section have been materially violated or invalidated and the unit shall then again be subject to the Act and to this chapter, notwithstanding the last sentence of subsection D6 of Section 8.44.020 of this chapter, or any other provisions. 
(Ord. 1001, 1983: Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(d1/2))  
8.44.070 - Unlawful acts by developers. 
After August 1, 1981, no owner of a building for which a condominium master deed has been recorded shall directly or indirectly sell, offer for sale, or agree to sell any controlled rental unit therein, unless the board has granted a removal permit for that unit, or unless the sale or offer is to, or the agreement is with, a current tenant of the unit who holds an exemption certificate. The board shall issue an exemption certificate to any person who files with it an affidavit in a form prescribed by the board, stating that he is a current tenant of the unit, that he occupied it as a tenant before August 10, 1979, and that he intends in good faith to occupy it indefinitely as its owner. No person shall file a false affidavit under this subsection. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent an owner of a building or any portion thereof from conveying his entire interest in the building in good faith to one purchaser, who shall then be subject to the provisions of this subsection to the same extent as the original owner. 
(Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(c1/2))  
8.44.080 - Equitable relief. 
The Board or any person aggrieved by a failure to comply with this chapter may enforce its provisions in a civil action for injunctive or declaratory relief. 
(Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(g))  
8.44.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. The removal of each unit shall constitute a separate violation. 
B.  Where, after a hearing, the Board finds there are repeated and/or flagrant violations of this chapter, the Board shall recommend to the City Council or to the Cambridge Housing Authority that the public interest can best be served by taking the unit(s) by power of eminent domain in order to restore the unit(s) to serve as housing for people with low and moderate incomes. 
(Ord. 1014 § 3, 1984; Ord. 966 (part), 1981: prior code Ch. 23 § 1(f))  
Chapter 8.48 - PROTECTION OF THE STRATOSPHERIC OZONE LAYER 
 
8.48.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined as follows: 
A.  "Chlorofluorocarbon" means a family of substances containing carbon, fluorine and chlorine, having no hydrogen atoms and no double bonds. 
B.  "CFC" is an abbreviation of the word "Chlorofluorocarbon." 
C.  "Commissioner of Health and Hospitals" means the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals for the City. 
D.  "Halon" means a family of substances containing carbon, fluorine and bromine, having no hydrogen atoms and no double bonds. 
E.  "Manufactured substances" means any organic or inorganic chemical substances of a particular molecular identity, or any mixture, that has been manufactured for commercial purposes. 
F.  "Ozone depleting substances" means those manufactured substances with a potential to destroy ozone in the stratosphere listed in Section 8.48.030 of this chapter. 
G.  "Person" means any individual, corporation, government agency, partnership, firm, joint stock company, trust, association or any other public or private entity engaged in business or in providing a service in the City. 
H.  "Recovery" means the process of employing available control technology designed to collect, capture, control and store manufactured substances, including CFCs, which may cause or contribute to stratospheric ozone depletion. 
I.  "Refrigerator" means any device using any ozone-depleting substances for the purpose of the refrigeration of goods. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.020 - Periodic review of this chapter. 
Many prevalent uses of ozone-depleting chemicals are not restricted by this chapter because workable substitutes and technologies are not currently available. However, emerging technologies are quickly changing this situation. Therefore, this chapter shall be reviewed by the City Council first at two years and then at four years after its passage with the intention of strengthening this chapter. Reviews shall include but not be limited to the following topics: strengthening current restrictions, identifying new restrictions, and developing a plan for the disposal of ozone-depleting substances. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.030 - Reporting requirements. 
A.  Within ninety days after the passage of this chapter, any person producing, selling, offering for sale or using in manufacturing any of the substances listed in this section, shall file a report with the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals setting forth the amount, by weight, of any and all substances so listed, and any and all products containing said substances which were produced, used in manufacturing and sold by said person during the calendar year 1989. Not less than annually thereafter, said persons shall file a report with the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals setting forth the amount of any and all substances so listed, and any and all of said products, which were produced, used in manufacturing and sold by said person during the twelve-month period since the filing date of the previous report, until said person ceases production, use and sale of all substances so listed and all of said products. All such reports shall be signed and attested by a responsible corporate officer. 
B.  Substances subject to reporting requirements include: CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113, CFC-114, CFC-115, HCFC-22, Halon-1211, Halon-1301, Halon-2402, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.040 - Specific restrictions on uses of ozone-depleting substances. 
A.  Restrictions on the Use of CFCs in Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Units. 
1.  Effective January 1, 1991, no person shall perform repair service on any air conditioner or on any refrigerator unless such person uses equipment for recovery and recycling of CFC coolant contained in said air conditioner or refrigerator. 
2.  Effective January 1, 1991, all persons retaining automobiles on their premises for the purpose of reselling said automobiles in parts shall use recovery and recycling equipment to recover CFC coolant from each automobile within three business days after said automobile arrives on the premises. Persons affected by this restriction shall not allow CFC coolant to be released into the atmosphere. 
3.  All equipment for recovery and recycling of CFC coolant required by this chapter shall be approved by Underwriters Laboratory or a similar institution. 
B.  Restrictions on the Sale and Use of CFC Refrigerants. Effective January 1, 1991, no person shall sell or offer for sale CFC coolant suitable for use in any air conditioner or refrigerator in quantities smaller than fifteen pounds or to persons not owning recycling or recovery equipment described in Section 8.48.040(A). 
C.  Restrictions on the Disposal of CFCs in Air Conditioners and Refrigerators. 
1.  Effective January 1, 1991, no person shall allow CFC coolants in air conditioners or refrigerators to be released into the atmosphere nor shall any person dispose of any air conditioner or refrigerator containing any CFC coolant unless said air conditioner or refrigerator has been recovered in the fashion described in Section 8.48.040(A). 
2.  Effective January 1, 1991, the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals shall publish a policy for recovery of CFC coolant in air conditioners and refrigerators intended to be disposed of by waste haulers. 
D.  Restrictions on the Use of CFCs in Miscellaneous Consumer Products. Effective at the passage of this chapter, no person shall sell, offer for sale or use CFC plastic party streamers, CFC propelled noise horns or CFC cleaning solutions for consumer electronics and photographic equipment. 
E.  Phase Out of CFC-113, Methyl Chloroform and Carbon Tetrachloride. 
1.  Effective January 1, 1992, no person shall produce, sell, offer for sale or use in manufacturing, CFC-113, methyl chloroform or carbon tetrachloride in annual quantities greater than fifty percent of the total amount of CFC-113, methyl chloroform and carbon tetrachloride used during the calendar year 1989. 
2.  Effective January 1, 1994, no person shall offer for sale or use in manufacturing, CFC-113, methyl chloroform or carbon tetrachloride. 
3.  Medical applications for which no safe non-ozone depleting alternatives are available shall be exempt from Section 8.48.040(E). When safe non-ozone depleting alternatives become available, all persons using CFC-113, methyl chloroform or carbon tetrachloride under this exemption shall show good faith in converting to safe non-ozone depleting substances and products. 
F.  Restrictions on the Use of Halons in Fire Extinguishers. 
1.  Effective January 1, 1991, no person shall sell or offer for sale, fire extinguishers for consumer applications which contain halons or other ozone-depleting substances. 
2.  Effective January 1, 1991, no person shall use fire extinguishers that contain halons or other ozone-depleting substances for the purpose of testing or training except where required by law. 
G.  Restriction on the Manufacture and Use of Plastic Foam Insulation Product. Effective January 1, 1992, no person shall manufacture or use in the repair or construction of buildings any plastic foam or foam insulation product that contains any ozone-depleting substance. 
H.  Restrictions on the Disposal of Foam Insulation Products. Effective January 1, 1992, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, renovate or demolish any building or structure which requires the removal of existing insulation that contains any ozone-depleting substance without recovering or properly disposing of such insulation consistent with any procedures adopted by the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals, and all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations. 
I.  Ban on the Manufacture of Ozone-depleting Substances. Effective January 1, 1992, no person shall produce any ozone-depleting substance. 
(Ord. 1114 (part), 1991; Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.050 - Warning labels required. 
A.  Effective January 1, 1991, no container in which CFCs, halons or other ozone-depleting substances are stored or transported, no product containing such substances excepting products using CFCs as coolants, nor any product manufactured with a process that uses said substance shall be sold or offered for sale unless it bears a label stating the following: 
Contains (or manufactured with) [name of substance], a substance which harms public health and the environment by destroying stratospheric ozone in the atmosphere. 
B.  Effective January 1, 1991, no product using CFCs as coolants shall be sold or offered for sale unless it bears a label stating the following: 
The coolant system of this product contains (name of substance), a substance which, if released into the atmosphere, harms the public health by destroying stratospheric ozone. Please prevent the release of CFC coolant into the atmosphere by servicing this product with approved coolant recapture and recovery equipment. 
C.  Said labels should be affixed on the face of said container or product in the form of a removable sticker not smaller than three inches by five inches, with the lettering and background in contrasting colors. In addition, the consumer information packet with regard to each product offered for sale shall include warnings about the dangers of ozone-depleting substances in accordance with directives of the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals. 
(Ord. 1114 (part), 1991; Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates Sections 8.48.030 or 8.48.040 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Noncriminal Disposition. 
1.  Whoever violates Sections 8.48.030 or 8.48.040 of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L., c. 40, § 21D. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals shall be the enforcing officer, except that the Commissioner may delegate his enforcing authority to one or more designated Health Enforcement Officers. The penalty for each violation will be twenty-five dollars, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  Any citizen may file a written complaint with the Commissioner regarding an alleged violation of this chapter. The Commissioner shall investigate such complaint within thirty days of its receipt, and shall take necessary enforcement action. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.070 - Technical assistance. 
The Commissioner of Health and Hospitals will produce, or commission to be produced, a document, available to all persons, for the purpose of assisting any persons affected by this chapter. This document will be available within six months of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter and will include, but not be limited to, information describing commercially available alternatives to ozone-depleting substances and available technologies to assist in the implementation of safe alternatives. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.080 - Safe substitutes. 
To the extent that safer substitutes for particular uses have been designated by an authoritative body, substances listed or covered under M.G.L. c. 111F (the Massachusetts Right to Know Law) shall not be used as replacements for the substances prohibited by this chapter. For the purpose of this section an authoritative body shall include but not be limited to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, the Massachusetts Toxics Use Reduction Institute, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or sub-bodies of such agencies. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
8.48.090 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter shall be held to be invalid, either on its face or as applied, the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the other sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter, and the application thereof; and to that end the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this chapter shall be deemed severable. 
(Ord. 1101 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 8.52 - PROMOTION OF RECYCLING OF USED MOTOR OIL 
 
8.52.010 - Annual reporting by retailers of automotive lubricating oil. 
A.  Any person engaged in the retail sale of automotive lubricating oil shall file an annual report with the Cambridge License Commission. This report shall detail: 
1.  The total amount of automotive lubricating oil sold at each retail outlet during the previous calendar year; 
2.  The total amount of used motor oil accepted from the public at each retail outlet during the previous calendar year; and 
3.  A statement of how the accumulated used motor oil was recycled and/or otherwise handled. 
B.  The first such annual report shall be filed within one hundred eighty days of the passage of this chapter. Subsequent annual reports shall be filed by January 31st of each year and shall provide the required information for the calendar year ending on the preceding December 31st. The License Commission shall provide the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection with copies of these annual reports. 
C.  Any person who fails to file a report as required by this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars for each day such violation occurs. The fines collected pursuant to this section shall be appropriated to the Cambridge License Commission to support the implementation of this section. 
D.  Upon request by the Oil Recycling Committee, the License Commission shall provide the Committee with copies of the annual reports filed by retailers pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 1100 (part), 1990)  
8.52.020 - Oil Recycling Committee. 
A.  Establishment. There is hereby established in the City an Oil Recycling Committee, to meet initially within forty-five days after enactment of this chapter and to serve for up to eighteen months after the initial meeting. 
B.  Members. The Committee shall consist of nine members. Six members shall be appointed by the City Manager. Of these six persons, two shall be representatives of the public familiar with environment affairs; one shall be a representative of the retailers of automotive lubricating oils in the City; and three shall be from the public at large. If possible, one of the public-at-large members shall be a person with a knowledge of automotive engineering and one shall be a representative of an electric utility company. A seventh member shall be the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals or his or her designee. An eighth member shall be the Commissioner of Public Works or his or her designee. A ninth member shall be the Chairman of the License Commission or his or her designee. Six of the committee members shall be residents of the City. 
C.  Reporting. The Committee shall file interim reports to the City Council and the general public every six months and shall file a final report within eighteen months of the first regular meeting of the Committee. 
D.  Term. The members shall serve until the filing of the Committee's final report. Any member so appointed may be removed at the discretion of the City Manager, who may fill any vacancies on the Committee. The members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. 1100 (part), 1990)  
8.52.030 - Committee's powers and duties. 
A.  The Committee shall investigate and shall make recommendations to the City Council and the general public concerning the following matters: 
1.  The type of local program which should be established by the City to ensure that its residents have an opportunity to recycle their used motor oil. Such investigation shall include a consideration of at least two options: 
a.  Local enforcement of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 21, Section 52A, and 
b.  Establishment of a municipal used oil collection program funded wholly or in part by the retailers of automotive lubricating oils in the City. 
2.  The feasibility and advisability of a pilot program involving the procurement and use of re-refined and/or synthetic lubricating oils in vehicles owned and operated by the City. 
3.  The feasibility and advisability of encouraging Cambridge Electric Light Company to establish a recycling program utilizing used motor oil as a fuel supplement. 
4.  Ways in which the municipalities of Cambridge, Arlington, Belmont, Lexington, Lincoln, Medford, Somerville, Waltham, Watertown and Weston can cooperatively encourage the recycling of used motor oil. 
5.  Whether there is a need for the Committee to continue to function after the expiration of the initial eighteen-month period. 
6.  Any other issues concerning used oil recycling which the Committee may deem in the best interest of the City to consider. 
B.  Reports of the Committee shall include specific recommendations for an ongoing process of public education, information and involvement as a central element of any actions to be taken. 
(Ord. 1100 (part), 1990)  
8.52.040 - Committee's meetings, officers and staff. 
A.  Meetings. The Committee shall hold regular meetings and shall designate the time and place thereof. Notice of such meetings shall be forwarded to the City Clerk and shall be published in a local newspaper at least one week prior to the meeting. A simple majority shall constitute a quorum. 
B.  Officers. The Committee shall from time to time designate a chairman from among its members. The chairman, or a member designated by him or her, shall preside at Committee meetings, and the chairman or a majority of the members shall have the power to call emergency meetings. The Committee shall elect such officers, subcommittees and task forces from among its members as they may from time to time deem necessary. 
C.  Staff. The committee may utilize, by and with the approval of the City Manager, such assistants and experts as it deems necessary to carry out its functions and duties. 
(Ord. 1100 (part), 1990)  
8.52.050 - Illegal disposal of used motor oil. 
A.  No person shall dispose of used motor oil by abandoning it on any public or private property or by discarding it for disposal on the ground, in a sewer or storm drain, or in any commercial or residential rubbish or garbage; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the disposal of empty used oil containers in commercial or residential rubbish or garbage. 
B.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars for the first offense, not more than two hundred dollars for the second offense, and not more than three hundred dollars for each subsequent offense. 
C.  Noncriminal Disposition. Whoever violates any provision of this section may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, s. 21D. For purposes of this section the Commissioner of Health and Hospitals shall be the enforcing officer, except that the Commissioner may delegate his enforcing authority to designated Health Enforcement Officers. The penalty for each violation will be twenty-five dollars, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
D.  Injunctive Relief. The City may seek injunctive relief in the Superior Court for violations of this section. 
(Ord. 1100 (part), 1990)  
8.52.060 - Severability. 
If any part or provision of this Chapter or the application thereof to any person, entity or circumstances shall be adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision or application which is directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this Chapter or the application thereof to other persons, entities or circumstances. 
(Ord. 1100 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 8.56 - PROMOTION OF NONRESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE REDUCTION 
 
8.56.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter deals with the problem of nonresidential waste, which constitutes almost half of the City's solid waste stream. The general objective of the Chapter is to encourage the management of solid waste in accordance with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan, which places source reduction and recycling ahead of incineration and landfilling as disposal options. With this objective in mind, the Chapter established an Advisory Committee on Environmentally Desirable Practices to develop and promote source reduction, recycling and other environmentally desirable methods to be used by Cambridge institutions in dealing with their solid waste. 
(Ord. 1102 (part), 1990)  
8.56.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Advisory Committee" or "Committee" means the Advisory Committee on Environmentally Desirable Practices established by Section 8.56.030. 
B.  "Environmentally desirable practice" means a practice that meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  Any practice which reduces the solid waste generated in Cambridge, through source reduction, recycling or other methods; 
2.  Any practice which creates or encourages the creation of new markets or demand for recycled packaging or products; 
3.  Any practice which encourages consumers to reduce their personal generation of solid waste; 
4.  Any practice which presents an alternative to single use, disposable products or encourages the reuse of such items. 
The intent of this Chapter is that these practices should be relatively easy to implement, inexpensive and permanent in nature. 
C.  "Recycled packaging or products" means packaging or products made of materials that are currently being collected within the City by the City or by an approved agent of the City for recycling in a municipal, State or private program. 
(Ord. 1102 (part), 1990)  
8.56.030 - Advisory Committee on Environmentally Desirable Practices. 
A.  There is established in Cambridge an Advisory Committee on Environmentally Desirable Practices. The Committee will consist of twelve members, of whom ten will be appointed by the City Manager. Of the ten persons to be appointed: 
1.  Five shall represent the community of for-profit and nonprofit institutions in Cambridge; and 
2.  Five shall be citizens who have demonstrated interest in municipal recycling and waste management. 
Three of five Committee members representing the community shall be Cambridge residents and three of five Committee members representing the institutional community shall either work or live in Cambridge. 
B.  In addition to the ten appointed members, the Committee shall include: 
1.  The Commissioner of Public Works or his designee; and 
2.  The Chairman or a member of the Cambridge Consumer Advisory Council. 
C.  The appointed members of the Committee shall serve for terms of two years, and an individual may serve for more than one term. The initial appointment of one member of the institutional community and one citizen recycler shall be for one year in order to stagger subsequent appointments. The City Manager may fill vacancies on the Committee. Committee members shall serve without compensation. 
D.  The Committee shall hold regular meetings, shall inform the City Clerk of the time and place of such meetings, and shall publish notice of such meetings in a local newspaper at least one week prior to the meeting. A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. 
E.  The City Manager shall provide the Committee sufficient administrative personnel and funding to carry out its responsibilities, which will be evaluated annually. 
(Ord. 1149, 1993: Ord. 1108, 1990)  
8.56.040 - Powers and duties of the Committee. 
The powers and duties of the Committee shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Monitor and record trends and practices in packaging, recycling, the solid waste industry and solid waste management as they relate to the City; 
B.  Help to create and institutionalize municipal and other recycling options available to businesses and institutions in the City; 
C.  Establish an environmental practices recognition program to be administered by the Advisory Committee or a subcommittee thereof; 
D.  Prepare an annual report and present it to the City Council and City Manager. This report shall include a summary of data gathered about waste management practices of Cambridge businesses and institutions and about currently available waste reduction options. The report shall also recommend policies and/or programs, that if adopted by the City, would result in further reduction and better management of the nonresidential waste stream. 
(Ord. 1102 (part), 1990)  
8.56.050 - Environmental practices recognition program. 
The advisory committee shall establish an environmental practices recognition program that shall acknowledge and assist Cambridge institutions undertaking beneficial solid waste management practices. As part of this program, the Advisory Committee shall: 
A.  Establish a list of environmentally desirable practices related to solid waste management. The environmentally desirable practices list should include, but should not necessarily be limited to, packaging reduction programs, in-house and other recycling programs, use of packaging or products composed of recycled material, institution-specific waste reduction programs, and environmental education efforts. The list should include practices that can be adopted by the diverse types of institutions found in Cambridge; 
B.  Establish a system for honoring, rewarding and otherwise bringing to the public attention those Cambridge institutions that have adopted environmentally desirable practices; 
C.  Undertake any and all educational efforts that the Advisory Committee deems necessary to promote understanding and awareness of environmentally desirable practices; 
D.  Review and recommend a fee structure for nonresidential waste hauling by the City. This structure may provide partial fee relief for those institutions that adopt specified environmentally desirable practices, as well as ensuring cost recovery for the City. 
E.  Report each year to the City Council and the City Manager describing the operation of the program, and the institutions honored. This report will also provide accounts of the positive contributions and successes of Cambridge institutions to the program. The format of the report shall be suitable for general distribution to promote the program. 
(Ord. 1102 (part), 1990)  
8.56.060 - Timetable. 
The Advisory Committee shall convene within three months after passage of this chapter. Within nine months of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the Advisory Committee shall have actively begun its monitoring and data collection functions. Within one year of enactment of this chapter, the Committee shall have defined a set of environmentally desirable practices and shall have publicly inaugurated the environmental practices recognition program. 
(Ord. 1102 (part), 1990)  
8.56.070 - Effect on other actions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or prejudice any action by any branch or agency of the City government at any time to protect the environment or conserve natural resources. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or prejudice any future regulatory action by the City if a regulatory approach is deemed necessary to attain the goals of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1102 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 8.60 - ENFORCEMENT OF STATE SANITARY CODE 
 
8.60.010 - Declaration of emergency. 
A.  A serious public emergency exists in the City with respect to residential premises which are in violation of the State Sanitary Code, causing many citizens to live in unsafe conditions. The legal remedies available to the Inspectional Services Department in enforcing this code, as well as other applicable State laws and regulations, are insufficient to encourage timely repair of rental properties. Owners often avoid repairing substandard properties, thereby endangering the lives, safety and property of tenants, and severely limiting the ability of many people to remain in their homes safely. 
B.  In order to provide the Inspectional Services Department with the remedies necessary to effectively carry out its mandate under State law, to guarantee tenants of the City housing which complies with the State Sanitary Code and other applicable laws and regulations, and to encourage owners to maintain the buildings they own in compliance with this code, laws and regulations, the Cambridge City Council, in the exercise of its powers under Section 6 of the Home Rule Amendment, enacts the ordinance codified in this chapter under which administrative citations are issued to owners who violate the State Sanitary Code. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Administrative citation" means a notice issued to an owner by the Inspectional Services Department, pursuant to this chapter, which provides a statement of the terms under which the owner may be fined for failure to remedy violations of the State Sanitary Code and a statement of the owner's right to appeal the issuance of the administrative citation and/or fine. 
B.  "Dwelling" means every building or shelter including, but not limited to, roominghouses and temporary housing used or intended for human habitation and every other structure or condition located within the same lot line whose existence causes or is likely to effect noncompliance with the provisions of 105 CMR 410.000. 
C.  "Dwelling unit" means the room or group of rooms within a dwelling used or intended for use by one family or household for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. Dwelling unit shall also mean a condominium unit. 
D.  "Inspectional Services Department" means the legally designated health authority for the City, authorized by Chapter 84 of the Acts and Resolves of 1983, to enforce the State Sanitary Code through the inspection of rental units for violations of the code and the implementation of mechanisms to ensure compliance with repair orders. 
E.  "Occupant" means every person over one year of age living or sleeping in a dwelling or dwelling unit. 
F.  "Owner" means every person who, alone or severally with others: 
1.  Has legal title to any rental unit, or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park; or 
2.  Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, rental unit, mobile dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; or 
3.  Is a mortgagee in possession; or 
4.  Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts; 
5.  Is any officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium; 
6.  Is a bank or other lending institution in possession as a result of foreclosure; or 
7.  Is any person who operates a roominghouse. 
The term "owner" includes landlords and lessors. 
G.  "State Sanitary Code" means the State Sanitary Code, Code of Massachusetts Regulations codified at 105 CMR 400.00 through 419.00, adopted under the authority of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 111, Sections 3 and 127A, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.030 - Administrative citations— Issuance. 
A.  Whenever the Inspectional Services Department finds any violation of any provision of the State Sanitary Code it shall issue, in addition to its order to make repairs, an administrative citation against the owner according to the procedures set out in this chapter. 
B.  The administrative citation shall incorporate by reference the order to make repairs and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of the inspection; 
2.  The amount of fine which shall be assessed against the owner if the violation or violations are not remedied within the time set out in the order to make repairs as well as the rate at which the fine shall escalate pursuant to subsection B of Section 8.60.080 of this chapter; 
3.  The manner in which the owner may pay any fine assessed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
4.  A description of the owner's appeal rights with respect to the issuance of the administrative citation and of any fine. 
C.  The administrative citation shall be served on the owner, along with any orders to make repairs, in accordance with the provisions of the State Sanitary Code. 
D.  A copy of the administrative citation shall also be served on the occupants of the dwelling or dwelling unit in which violations have been found and shall be posted in the common areas of the dwelling. If violations of the State Sanitary Code are found in the common areas of any dwelling, a copy of the administrative citation shall be served on each and every tenant of the dwelling. 
E.  The Inspectional Services Department shall send a copy of the administrative citation to the mortgagee of the property. The City shall request that the mortgagee seek to cure, through all applicable provisions of its mortgage, except through foreclosure or increase in interest rates, any and all violations of Article II of the State Sanitary Code of which it has been so notified. 
F.  A copy of the administrative citation shall be retained by the Inspectional Services Department and be available for public inspection and copying. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.040 - Repairs and inspection. 
A.  An owner shall make any and all repairs necessary to remedy any violations found by the Inspectional Services Department within the time stated on the order to make repairs, unless he or she requests a hearing pursuant to the hearing regulations of the State Sanitary Code. 
B.  The Inspectional Services Department shall, within five days after the dates for compliance specified in an order to repair issued pursuant to 105 CMR 410.830, make an on-site inspection to determine whether there has been compliance with its order. This inspection shall be made within twenty-four hours of the dates for compliance specified in an order, however, if one or more of the violations or conditions cited in the order to repair are determined to be conditions which may endanger the health or safety, and well-being of the occupant(s) as defined in 105 CMR 410.750. An inspection under 105 CMR 410.830 shall comply with the requirements of 105 CMR 410.822. 
C.  If, upon reinspection, it is determined that the owner has remedied the violations cited in the order to make repairs, the administrative citation shall note this finding and shall be filed with the Inspectional Services Department. 
D.  Copies of the administrative citation indicating that the violation has been remedied and no fine has been assessed shall be served on the same individuals who received notice of the initial administrative citation. This notice shall be served within five days of the reinspection. 
E.  If, upon reinspection, it is determined that the owner has failed to remedy the violations cited, this shall be noted on the administrative citation and a fine shall be assessed against the owner in accordance with the terms of Section 8.60.060 of this chapter. 
F.  Copies of the administrative citation noting the assessment of a fine for failure to remedy the violations cited shall be served on the same individuals who received notice of the initial administrative citation within five days of the fine being assessed against the owner. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.050 - Extensions of time for making repairs. 
A.  An owner who has made a good-faith effort to remedy any violations cited in an order to make repairs and an administrative citation may apply to the Inspectional Services Department for an extension of the time set for making repairs by requesting a hearing under the hearing provisions of the State Sanitary Code. 
B.  A good-faith effort shall be found to exist only if the owner provides evidence that the repairs cannot be completed within the required time. Such evidence shall be in the form of at least two written estimates from outside professionals, one of which the owner has accepted in writing, stating when the repairs will be made. 
C.  In any case where an extension has been granted for the remedying of any violation, a new date shall be set by the Inspectional Services Department by which the owner shall remedy the violation and a reinspection shall take place in accordance with subsections C through F of Section 8.60.040 of this chapter. 
D.  No extensions shall be granted in any case where an owner has received a fine for the same or similar violations in the same unit within the twelve-month period immediately preceding issuance of the current administrative citation, except where the owner has been granted an extension pursuant to this Section 8.60.050 for any such current administrative citation. 
E.  In no event shall the time frame for repairs, including any extensions, be greater than ninety days from the date of issuance of the order to make repairs except where the owner has been granted an extension pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.060 - Fines for failure to repair. 
A.  If an owner fails to remedy a violation cited in an order to make repairs within the allotted time, or fails to remedy the violation within the time set out in any extension granted under Section 8.60.050 of this chapter, or fails to file a timely appeal, a fine shall be assessed against the owner. 
B.  Notice of the assessment of a fine shall be served on the owner in accordance with the notice provisions of the State Sanitary Code. 
C.  Notice of the fine shall be served on the same individuals who received notice of the initial administrative citation. 
D.  The amount of the fine shall be set according to the following schedule: 
1.  One hundred dollars per day for each violation referred to in 105 CMR 410.830(A) and required to be corrected within twenty-four hours; or 
2.  Ten dollars per day for each violation referred to in 105 CMR 401.830(B) and required to be repaired in an amount of time determined by the Inspectional Service Department but, in any event, no more than thirty days. 
E.  If a court with either civil or criminal jurisdiction determines that an extension of time for making repairs is appropriate and so orders pursuant to Section 8.60.050, then during the time of the extension, no fines or other penalties under this chapter shall accrue. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.070 - Appeals of fines. 
A.  An owner or occupant who is aggrieved by the issuance of a fine or by the failure of the Inspectional Services Department to fine an owner pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the Inspectional Services Department according to the following procedures: 
1.  An appeal shall be filed within ten days of the date of the action appealed from; 
2.  The appeal shall be in writing and shall state, in detail, the grounds for the appeal. 
B.  The filing of a timely appeal shall stay the effect of the fine but shall not stay the owner's obligation to repair any violations cited. 
C.  A hearing shall be held on the appeal following the same procedures available in an appeal of the issuance of an order to make repairs which are set out in 105 CMR 410.850 and 410.860, except that any appeal to court shall be governed by the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 30A. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or impair the right to appeal the issuance of an order to make repairs. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.080 - Failure to pay fines. 
A.  Notice of a fine which has been issued pursuant to Section 8.60.060 of this chapter shall be served on the owner and on the occupants who receive notice of the initial administrative citation. 
B.  In addition, the owner shall be given notice that the fine shall automatically double if any violation cited in the administrative citation is not remedied within two weeks of service of the notice of the fine and shall automatically triple if any violation is not remedied within one month of service of the notice of the fine. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the failure of the City to take such enforcement action, may seek injunctive relief in the District or Superior Court pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapters 214 and 218, Section 19C to require action by the City in accordance with its enforcement obligations under this section. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.090 - Effect of fine in subsequent court actions. 
A copy of the administrative citation indicating that a fine has been issued as a result of the owner's failure to remedy a violation cited in the administrative citation shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 111, Section 127A et seq. and Chapter 239, Section 8A in any legal action by or against the owner. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.100 - Revenues generated. 
Each fiscal year the City Manager shall determine an accounting of the revenues generated by the implementation of this chapter in excess of the cost of administration and shall make a recommendation in the budget presented to the City Council for an appropriation of funds to the appropriate city department or agency so that such revenues will be directed toward the repair or rehabilitation of deteriorated dwellings or dwelling units in the City. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.110 - Regulations. 
The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall promulgate regulations consistent with the terms of this chapter and any applicable state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.120 - Construction of provisions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 111, Section 127A, et seq. governing the authority and conduct of the Inspectional Services Department or with any other law or regulation governing the rights and obligations of owners and tenants in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
8.60.130 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any section or sections are declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall not affect the validity of any remaining section or sections. 
(Ord. 1141 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 8.61 - ASBESTOS PROTECTION 
 
8.61.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  "Adequately Wet" means sufficiently mixed or penetrated with water to completely prevent the release of particulate material into the ambient air. 
b.  "Asbestos-contaminated soil" means soil which has been shown by certified laboratory analysis to contain at least one percent (1%) (normalized area) asbestos, using the Protocol for Screening Soil and Sediment Samples for Asbestos Content, most currently used by the U.S. EPA Region I laboratory and soil within thirty-five (35) feet of a sampling location in which asbestos has been detected on property shown to contain soil with at least one percent (1%) asbestos as defined above and soil the Commissioner reasonably expects may contain at least one percent (1%) asbestos based on data from an approved Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan. 
c.  "Asbestos" or "Asbestiform" means the following hydrated minerals: chrysotile (fibrous serpentine), crocidolite (fibrous riebeckite), amosite (fibrous cummingtonite-grunerite), fibrous tremolite, fibrous actinolite, and fibrous anthophyllite. 
d.  "City" means the City of Cambridge. 
e.  "Commissioner" means the City of Cambridge Commissioner of Health or his/her designee. 
f.  "Responsible party" means the owner of the property in question or an agent assigned by the owner. 
g.  "Soil-disturbing activities" means excavation, grading, tilling, or any other such activity that may cause release of fugitive dust. Disturbance shall not include direct-push or vibratory installation or extraction of piles, sheet pile, or wells, but shall include any excavation in the vicinity of such direct-push or vibratory installation, e.g. for the construction of pile caps. Disturbance also shall not include drilling of boreholes twelve (12) inches in diameter or less by hollow stem auger or similar method for the purpose of environmental evaluation or remediation.  
8.61.020 - Jurisdiction. 
Any property found by the Commissioner to contain asbestos-contaminated soil or documented to the Commissioner's satisfaction to have been the site of past industrial asbestos on-site handling, disposal, processing or manufacturing, shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.  
8.61.030 - Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan. 
a.  Such a property, once determined to be subject to the provisions of this ordinance and prior to any soil disturbing activity, will require an Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan to be submitted for approval to the Commissioner at the Cambridge Public Health Department. 
b.  If no soil-disturbing activity is anticipated in asbestos-contaminated soil, the property will not be required to submit an Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan. However, all properties with asbestos-contaminated soil will receive a Notice of Asbestos-Contaminated Soil which will be maintained as a public record by the City's Inspectional Services Department and Public Health Department. 
For such properties on which no soil-disturbing activity is anticipated, no further action will then be required. Any subsequent soil-disturbing activity contemplated by the responsible party will make that property subject to the provisions detailed in this ordinance and will require the responsible party to submit an Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan as described herein. Each property where it is proven to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that asbestos-contaminated soil no longer exists shall have its Notice of Asbestos-Contaminated Soil rescinded. 
c.  The minimum requirement for an Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan is composite sampling to a depth of at least three (3) feet, or to the maximum depth of proposed soil-disturbing activities, using thirty-five (35) foot on-center sample locations distributed across the site in all areas where soil disturbing activities are proposed or anticipated. The Commissioner must approve the Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan before sampling at the site begins. Once completed, the data generated under the sampling plan will be submitted to the Commissioner and maintained by the Commissioner as a public record. Areas of asbestos-contaminated soil which are to be subject to soil-disturbing activities may require further characterization as determined by the Commissioner.  
8.61.040 - Asbestos Soil Management Plan. 
Upon completion of all required asbestos analysis provisions, the responsible party shall undertake precautions to prevent fugitive dust from being generated and/or escaping during any soil-disturbing activities. These measures must be detailed in an Asbestos Soil Management Plan. 
a.  This plan shall be submitted to the Commissioner for prior approval and shall include one or more of the following particulate dust mitigation and assurance measures: 
(i)  assuring that the soil is adequately wet during soil disturbing activities; 
(ii)  erecting wind fences around the area containing asbestos-contaminated soil during the entire time that it is being disturbed; 
(iii)  conducting hourly air monitoring for particulate dust and continuous air monitoring for airborne asbestos around the perimeter of the soil-disturbing activity; 
(iv)  covering the site with a layer of clean fill, which must be of sufficient depth such that the proposed disturbance of the soil would occur in and affect only that clean fill layer; 
(v)  erecting a permanent or temporary structure maintained at partial vacuum sufficient to contain all fugitive dust, with off gas from the evacuation system treated with HEPA filtration; 
b.  Each Asbestos Soil Management Plan will include a contingency plan for immediate work stoppage in the event that dust standards established in the Asbestos Soil Management Plan are exceeded in any two hourly field tests over a 24-hour period. Each Asbestos Soil Management Plan will also include a contingency plan for work stoppage in the event that the airborne asbestos standard established in the Asbestos Soil Management Plan is exceeded after continuous daily testing has been completed, no later than 24 hours after the cumulative daily samples have been collected. Work may recommence when containment measures deemed sufficient by the Commissioner to prevent further exeedences have been implemented. Any further exceedences will result in immediate work stoppage. 
c.  Prior to the final decision on the Asbestos Soil Management Plan, the Commissioner shall make available for public review for a period of 20 calendar days all data resulting from the Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan, the proposed Asbestos Soil Management Plan, and the Commissioner's draft decision. The applicant shall provide written notice of the availability of the documents to abutters and to any person who otherwise requests notice and shall provide copies of the soil sampling results, proposed Asbestos Soil Management Plan, and Commissioner's draft decision upon request. A copy of the documents shall be available for public viewing at the Commissioner's office and the main branch of the Cambridge Public Library. Public comments shall be submitted in writing to the Commissioner and must be received by the Commissioner prior to the end of the 20-calendar day period in order to be considered. 
Mitigation measures (a) (iv) and/or (a) (v) must be include in the soil management plan if any of the following conditions are present: 
(a)  the level of contamination is serious, i.e. at least one 5% asbestos sample and a mass of asbestos greater than 20,000 pounds; 
(b)  the proposed soil disturbance is extensive, i.e. 20,000 ft. footprint or greater; 
(c)  the proposed soil disturbance is in close proximity to residential areas or children's play areas, i.e. within 500 feet.  
8.61.050 - Access to Property. 
The Commissioner or his/her independent consultants shall have reasonable access to the property subject to this ordinance in order to assure that provisions of this ordinance and the Asbestos Soil Management Plan are being followed to the Commissioner's satisfaction. Affected parties, abutters, and interested residents or their designees (hereafter "observers") may have access to the property to observe testing and soil management activities and to conduct independent testing and analysis provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  the observer has obtained consent from the property owner in writing; 
b.  the observer shall comply with the property owner's health and safety plan and all operational protocols established for the property; 
c.  the observer shall possess appropriate OSHA certification; and 
d.  the observer shall not interfere with the efficient, expeditious, and safe conduct of work on the property.  
8.61.060 - Exemptions. 
The following activities may be granted exemptions by the Commissioner from the requirements of this ordinance: 
a.  emergency repair of underground utilities; 
b.  maintenance of underground utilities; 
c.  soil-disturbing activity on residential property with no documented history of on-site industrial asbestos handling, disposal, processing or manufacturing.  
8.61.070 - Fees. 
A fee may be imposed on each responsible party by the Commissioner to offset the City's costs associated with the review of the Asbestos Soil Sampling Plan and the Asbestos Soil Management Plan, as well as the cost of the on-site compliance checks.  
8.61.080 - Coordination with City Departments. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that the Inspectional Services Department and the Community Development Department collaborate with the Commissioner and each other to ensure that the public health and safety is protected. To that end the Departments shall cooperate, share information and develop a coordinated protocol for implementing this ordinance. In addition, no building permit shall be issued for a site without prior approval of the Asbestos Soil Management Plan by the Commissioner.  
8.61.090 - Enforcement and Penalties. 
a.  Any violation of this ordinance is punishable by a fine of up to $300. Each day that a violation continues may constitute a separate violation, and each one thousand square feet of total lot size at which a violation occurs may constitute a separate violation. This penalty may be enforced through criminal proceedings or non-criminally, by ticketing, as provided in General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D. The Commissioner shall be the enforcing officer. 
b.  Activities in violation of this ordinance may be declared a nuisance. The Commissioner may, in order to remedy a violation of this ordinance, issue an immediate cease-work order as appropriate. In addition, the Commissioner may commence an action in court for the immediate abatement of any nuisance arising under this ordinance. 
c.  Any ten citizens may seek injunctive relief in the Superior Court pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 214, Section 7A to require action by the responsible party in accordance with the provisions of that statute.  
8.61.100 - Regulations. 
The Commissioner may promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord 1232, Added, 11/01/1999)  
Chapter 8.64 - NURSING HOMES 
 
8.64.010 - Definitions 
"Effective temperature" refers to any set of temperature and humidity conditions that gives the same sensation of comfort as the stated temperature at 50% relative hunidity. 
"Nursing home" any institution or facility providing nursing care which is licensed under General Laws Chapter 111, Section 71. 
(Ord. 1183, Amended, 03/17/1997, 8.64.010)  
8.64.020 - Air Conditioning Required 
Every nursing home in Cambridge shall be provided with cooling facilities capable of maintaining an effective temperature of between 68 degrees F. in all bed rooms and common rooms therein. 
The owner or operator of the nursing home shall be responsible for using the cooling facilities in such a way as to maintain an effective temperature of between 68 degrees F. and 78 degrees F. in all bedrooms and common rooms therein; provided, however, that, if the nursing home has individual air conditioning units in the bedrooms, each occupant shall have the right to regulate the unit in his or her bedroom.  
8.64.030 - Enforcement - Penalty 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, and whose violation continues for seven or more days, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding $300 for each offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative penalty, any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, and whose violation continues for seven or more days, may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D. For the purpose of this section, the following officials shall be enforcing persons: police officers and inspectional services inspectors. The penalty for each violation shall be $50. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1183, added, 03/17/1997, nursing homes)  
8.64.040 - Effective Date 
Chapter 8.64 shall take effect on July 1, 1997.  
Chapter 8.66 - TREE PROTECTION 
 
8.66.010 - Short Title 
This Chapter may be cited as the Tree Protection Ordinance of the City of Cambridge. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.020 - Statement of Purpose 
The City Council hereby finds that the preservation of existing trees and the promotion of new tree planting is a public purpose that protects the public health, welfare, environment and aesthetics of the City of Cambridge and its citizens. 
The urban forest serves a wide variety of functions, which promote the health, safety and welfare of residents. These functions include: 
(a)  conserving energy, by providing shade and evaporative cooling through transpiration; 
(b)  improving local and global air quality by absorbing carbon dioxide and ozone, absorbing particulate matter, and producing oxygen; 
(c)  reducing wind speed and directing air flow; 
(d)  reducing noise pollution; 
(e)  providing habitat for birds, small mammals, and other wildlife; 
(f)  reducing storm runoff and the potential for soil erosion; 
(g)  increasing real property values; and 
(h)  enhancing visual and aesthetic qualities that attract visitors and businesses. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.030 - Definitions 
Building. A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, built, erected and framed of a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter or persons, animals or property. 
Certified arborist. An arborist certified by the Massachusetts Arborists' Association or the International Society of Arboriculture, or any successor of either organization. 
City Arborist. The City Arborist appointed by the City Manager, or any other Certified Arborist designated by the Commissioner of Public Works and approved by the City Manager to exercise any of the authority granted to the City Arborist pursuant to this Chapter. 
DBH (Diameter at Breast Height). The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of four (4) feet above the ground. 
Lot. A parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or streets, which is designated by its owner to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
Mitigation Plan. A document to be included within any Tree Study submitted for a project where any Significant Trees are proposed to be removed from a lot, stating (i) why any Significant Trees are proposed to be removed from a lot, (ii) a description of the Replacement Trees proposed to replace the Significant Trees to be removed or the value of which is proposed to be paid to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund, (iii) an estimate from a local nursery for the cost of purchasing, planting, watering and maintaining said Replacement Trees for a period of not less than five years or the value of which is proposed to be paid to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund, and (iv) certification from a Certified Arborist that the proposed Replacement Trees and cost estimates for purchasing, planting, watering and maintaining said Trees are appropriate and reasonable. 
Owner. For purposes of this Chapter, an owner shall be defined as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, Title 17 of the Cambridge Municipal Code. 
Replacement Trees. A tree or trees to be planted on a lot to replace any Significant Trees to be removed from the lot, or whose equivalent value is proposed to be paid to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund instead of planting Replacement Trees on the lot. The total DBH of Replacement Trees, or equivalent value, as applicable, shall be equal to or exceed the total DBH of the Significant Trees to be removed from the lot. 
Significant Trees. Any tree or trees larger that 8" DBH which is on a lot or which has been removed from the lot within one year prior to the submission of a Tree Study to the City Arborist. 
Tree Protection Plan. This plan may be either a separate drawing or part of a landscape plan, and shall include the following information: 
a)  Drawings of tree protection measures and (i) their location on the lot, including Tree Save Areas, and the location, height and DBH of Significant Trees and an indication of which Significant Trees would remain on the site, or (ii) in the event that any Significant Trees are proposed to be removed, the location of those Significant Trees, and the location, height and DBH of Replacement Trees which are proposed to be planted on the lot if feasible, or (iii) in the event that Replacement Trees are not proposed to be planted on the lot, the total sum, as identified in the Mitigation Plan, to be paid to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund, shall be required to be submitted together with the Tree Protection Plan; 
b)  A schedule for planting the proposed Replacement Trees and a representation that such trees will be inspected and, if necessary, treated by a Certified Arborist once a year for five years; and 
c)  Such other information as is required by the City Arborist pursuant to applicable regulations. 
Tree Save Area. The area surrounding a tree which must remain undisturbed so as to prevent damage to the tree. 
Tree Study. The information submitted to the City Arborist, which shall include a Tree Survey, a Tree Protection Plan, and, if applicable, a Mitigation Plan. 
Tree Survey. A plan showing the location, type, height and DBH of all trees on a lot. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.040 - Applicability 
This Chapter shall apply to all trees located on lots specified in the following section §8.66.050. This Chapter shall not apply to any project of the Affordable Housing Trust or otherwise for the construction of low and moderate-income housing meeting the standards established pursuant to any City, State or Federal housing program designed to assist low and moderate-income households. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.050 - Procedure for Large Projects 
a.  In any project which requires a special permit under §§ 4.26.l - 4.26.3, §19.20, §11.12.1, §11.12.2, or §11.12.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, the application for the special permit shall include a Tree Study, which shall first have been submitted to the City Arborist not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the submission of the application for a special permit. The Tree Study shall be reviewed by the City Arborist, who shall certify that he has reviewed it, indicating whether it is complete and complies with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder. The City Arborist shall refer the Tree Study with his certification and recommendations to the Planning Board, to assist the Planning Board in establishing any conditions that may be required as a result of the findings of the Tree Study in connection with the issuance of a special permit. 
b.  Regarding any project which includes a building of 25,000 square feet or more and which is subject to the provisions of § 19.50 of the Zoning Ordinance, the materials submitted to the Inspectional Services Department with the application for a building permit shall include a Tree Study, together with a certification from the City Arborist that the applicant has submitted the Tree Study for review to the City Arborist not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the submission of the application for a building permit, and that the Tree Study is complete and complies with the applicable provisions of this Chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder. The owner of the lot shall be required to commit to comply with all provisions of the Tree Study and the applicable provisions of this Chapter and regulations promulgated hereunder in the application for a building permit. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.060 - Tree Replacement 
If Significant Trees are to be removed from a lot in connection with the development of a project subject to the provisions of this Chapter, upon approval of any project subject to the provisions of §8.66.050(a) of this Chapter by grant of a special permit from the Planning Board, or submission to the Inspectional Services Department of certification from the City Arborist under the provisions of §8.66.050(b) of this Chapter, the owner of the lot shall either plan Replacement Trees on the same lot in accordance with the schedule set forth in the Tree Study, or he shall pay the estimated cost of Replacement Trees and associated costs for the maintenance of said trees pursuant to the Mitigation Plan, if applicable, to the City to be deposited into the Tree Replacement Fund. In addition, the owner of the lot shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit, post and file a bond with the City Clerk in the amount of the total costs set forth in the Mitigation Plan, but in no event less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), with one or more sureties conditioned to the faithful observance of the conditions and specifications of the Tree Protection Plan and, if applicable, the Mitigation Plan. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.070 - Tree Replacement Fund 
There is hereby established a Tree Replacement Fund which shall be held by the City Treasurer in an account and administered in accordance with applicable provisions of the General Laws. Any payments into the Tree Replacement Fund required by §8.66.060 shall be deposited in said Fund, and shall be used solely for the purpose of buying, planting and maintaining trees in the City. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.080 - Regulations 
The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the authority to promulgate regulations to accomplish any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.090 - Enforcement 
(a)  Notice of Violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be notified by the City Arborist of the specific violation by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. The notice shall set forth the nature of the violation and a reasonable time period within which compliance must be had. 
(b)  Stop Work Order 
(1)  Upon notice from the City Arborist that work on any lot on which a Significant Tree is located is being performed contrary to any applicable Mitigation Plan or Tree Protection Plan or any provision of this Chapter, such work shall be immediately stopped by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services or his designee. The stop work order shall be in writing, and shall be given to the owner of the lot involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. 
(2)  Any person who shall continue any work in or about said lot after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $300.00. Each day during which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Injunctive Relief. Whenever there exists reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating any applicable Mitigation Plan or Tree Protection Plan or any provision of this Chapter, the City may institute a civil action for a mandatory or prohibiting injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction ordering the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. 
(d)  Failure to Replace Trees or Make Payment. Each failure to replace a Significant Tree or make a payment into the Tree Replacement Fund or to post and maintain a bond in accordance with §8.66.060 shall constitute a separate violation of this Chapter for which there shall be a fine in the amount of $300.00. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Alternative Penalty. As an alternative to any fine stated in this §8.66.090, citations may be issued pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D, assessing a fine of $300.00 for each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue. The Commissioner of Public Works or his designee, the City Arborist, employees of the Department of Public Works and Police Officers shall be the authorized enforcement personnel. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.100 - Severability 
The provisions of this Chapter are severable. If any section, provision or portion of this Chapter is determined to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be valid 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
8.66.110 - Effective Date 
This ordinance shall take effect only upon ordination of the companion zoning amendment and any other zoning amendments necessary to effectuate the provisions of this Tree Ordinance. 
(1277, Added, 08/02/2004)  
Chapter 8.67 - BUILDING ENERGY USE 
 
8.67.010 - Definitions. 
1.  Benchmarking information shall mean information generated by the benchmarking tool, as herein defined including descriptive information about the physical property and its operational characteristics. The information shall include, but need not be limited to: 
(a)  Property address; 
(b)  Primary use type; 
(c)  Gross floor area; 
(d)  Site Energy Use Intensity (EUI) as defined in this section; 
(e)  Weather normalized source EUI; 
(f)  Annual greenhouse gas emissions; 
(g)  Water use; 
(h)  The energy performance score that compares the energy use of the building to that of similar buildings, where available; and 
(i)  Compliance or noncompliance with this section. 
2.  Benchmarking tools shall mean the internet-based tool developed and maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of buildings nationwide. 
3.  Covered property shall mean a parcel, as described in public records or as determined by the department, containing any of the following: 
(a)  One or more non-residential building(s) where such building(s) singly or together contain twenty five thousand to forty nine thousand nine hundred ninety nine and ninety nine hundredths square feet ("small non-residential covered property"); 
(b)  One or more non-residential building(s), where such building(s) singly or together contain fifty thousand or more square feet ("large non-residential covered property"); and 
(c)  One or more residential building(s) that singly or together contain 50 or more residential dwelling units whether they are rental dwelling units or dwelling units owned as condominiums, cooperatives or otherwise ("residential covered property"). 
4.  Department means the City of Cambridge Community Development Department. 
5.  Dwelling unit shall mean a single residential unit consisting of one or more habitable rooms, occupied or arranged to be occupied as a residential unit separate from all other residential units within a building, and used primarily for residential purposes and not primarily for professional or commercial purposes. 
6.  Energy shall mean electricity, natural gas, steam, hot or chilled water, heating oil, or other product for use in a building, or renewable on-site electricity generation, for purposes of providing heating, cooling, lighting, water heating, or for powering or fueling other end-uses in the building and related facilities. 
7.  Energy performance score shall mean the numeric rating generated by the Energy Star Portfolio Manager tool or equivalent tool adopted by the department that compares the energy usage of the building to that of similar buildings. 
8.  Energy Star shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency program related to improving energy efficiency in buildings and products. 
9.  "Energy Star Portfolio Manager" shall mean the tool developed and maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to track and assess the relative energy performance of buildings nationwide. 
10.  Energy use intensity (EUI) shall mean the kBTUs (1,000 British thermal units) used per square foot of gross floor area. 
11.  Gross square feet shall mean the gross floor area of the property as per the City Assessors' records. 
12.  Municipal property shall mean a property with one or more buildings that is ten thousand gross square feet or more that is owned by the City. 
13.  Owner shall mean: 
(a)  An individual or entity having title to a covered property; 
(b)  An agent authorized to act on behalf of the owner of a covered property; 
(c)  The net lessee in the case of a property subject to a net lease with a term of at least forty-nine years, inclusive of all renewal options; 
(d)  The board of managers or trustees in the case of a condominium; and/or 
(e)  The board of directors or trustees in the case of a cooperative apartment corporation. 
14.  Qualified benchmarker is an entity that meets the department's qualifications for inputting benchmarking information into the benchmarking tool. 
15.  Residential property shall mean a property containing one or more dwelling units. 
16.  Site energy shall mean the amount of heat and electricity consumed by a covered property or municipal property as reflected in utility bills or other documentation of actual energy use. 
17.  Source energy shall mean all the energy used in delivering energy to a covered property, including power generation and transmission and distribution losses, to perform a specific function, such as but not limited to space conditioning, lighting, or water heating. 
18.  Tenant shall mean a person or entity leasing, occupying or holding possession of a covered property or municipal property. 
19.  Utility shall mean an entity that distributes and sells energy for covered properties or municipal properties. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.020 - Purpose. 
To encourage efficient use of energy and to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases, this section requires owners of covered properties and municipal properties to annually measure and disclose energy usage to the department. Furthermore, this section will authorize the department to collect energy usage data to enable more effective energy and climate protection planning by the City and others and to provide information to the real estate marketplace to enable its members to make decisions that foster better energy performance. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.030 - Applicability. 
1.  This section is applicable to the following: 
(a)  All municipal properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(12) of this chapter; and 
(b)  All Covered Properties as defined in Section 8.67.010(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.040 - Benchmarking Required for Municipal Properties. 
No later than December 31, 2014, and no later than May 1 every year thereafter, the total energy consumed by each municipal property, along with all other descriptive information required by the benchmarking tool, shall be entered into the benchmarking tool for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.050 - Benchmarking Required for Covered Properties. 
1.  Owners shall annually input the total energy consumed by each covered property, along with all other descriptive information required by the benchmarking tool, into the benchmarking tool for the previous calendar year. The owner shall input this information according to the following schedule: 
(a)  A large non-residential covered property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1 thereafter; 
(b)  A residential covered property by May 1, 2015 and by every May 1 thereafter; 
(c)  A small non-residential covered property by May 1, 2016 and by every May 1 thereafter; and 
(d)  A new covered property that has not accumulated twelve months of energy use data by the first applicable date following occupancy for inputting energy use into the benchmarking tool shall comply with this chapter in the following year. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.060 - Notification of Covered Properties. 
Between September 1 and December 1 of each year, the City shall notify owners of covered properties of their obligation to input energy use into the benchmarking tool. By January 15 of each year, the City shall post the list of the addresses of covered properties on a public website. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.070 - Qualifications of Benchmarks. 
The department may establish certification and/or licensing requirements for the users of benchmarking tools. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.080 - Disclosure and Publication of Benchmarking Information. 
1.  Owners shall annually provide benchmarking information to the department, in such form as established by the department, by the date provided by the schedule in Section 8.67.050(1). 
2.  The department shall make available to the public on the internet benchmarking information for the previous calendar year: 
a.  No later than December 31, 2014 and by September 1 of each year thereafter for municipal properties; and 
b.  No later than September 1, 2015 and by September 1 of each year thereafter for covered properties. Benchmarking information received by the department for the first year a covered property is required to input the total energy consumed and other descriptive information as required by the benchmarking tool into the benchmarking tool pursuant to Section 8.67.050 will be not be published except to disclose whether or not the covered property is in compliance with this chapter. 
3.  The department shall make available to the public and update at least annually, the following information: 
(a)  Summary statistics on energy consumption for municipal properties and covered properties derived from aggregation of benchmarking information for both; 
(b)  Summary statistics on overall compliance with this chapter including an assessment of accuracy; 
(c)  For each municipal property and covered property: 
(i)  The status of compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(ii)  Annual summary statistics for the municipal property or covered property, including EUI, annual greenhouse gas emissions, water use per square foot, and an energy performance score where available; and 
(iii)  A comparison of benchmarking information across calendar years for any years such municipal property or covered property has input the total energy consumed and other descriptive information for such properties as required by the benchmarking tool into the benchmarking tool. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.090 - Provisions of Benchmarking Information by Tenants to the Owner. 
1.  Each tenant located in a covered property shall, within thirty days of a request by the owner and in a form to be determined by the department, provide all information that cannot otherwise be acquired by the owner and that is needed to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Failure to provide information to an owner may result in penalties as provided under Section 8.67.130. 
2.  Where the owner is unable to input the total energy consumed by the covered property as well as all other descriptive information for such covered property as required by the benchmarking tool into the benchmarking tool due to the failure of any or all tenants to report the information required by Section 8.67.090(1), the owner shall input alternate values as established by the department prior to the implementation of this chapter, into the benchmarking tool. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.100 - Assessing Results. 
By December 31, 2018, the department shall review the effect of this chapter on improving energy performance for covered buildings. If energy performance for covered buildings has not improved significantly, the department shall make recommendations to the City Manager as to whether amendments to this chapter or other measures are necessary to improve building energy performance for covered buildings. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.110 - Maintenance of Records. 
1.  Owners shall maintain records as the department determines is necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to energy and water bills and other documents received from tenants and/or utilities. Such records shall be preserved by owners for a period of three years. At the request of the department, such records shall be made available for inspection and audit by the department. 
2.  At the time any occupied covered building is transferred, the buyer and seller shall arrange for the seller to provide to the buyer all information necessary for the buyer to report benchmarking information for the entire year in a timely manner. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any seller to fail to so provide any such information. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.120 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any entity or person to fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter or misrepresent any material fact in a document required to be prepared or disclosed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.130 - Enforcement and Administration. 
1.  The Assistant City Manager for Community Development and his or her designee shall be the Chief Enforcement Officer of this chapter. 
2.  The Assistant City Manager for Community Development may promulgate regulations relative to the administration of the requirements of this chapter as necessary. 
3.  If any person or entity violates any provision of this chapter, the following enforcement measures may be taken: 
(a)  For the first violation, a written warning may be issued; and 
(b)  For any subsequent violation, the department may issue a fine of up to three hundred per day pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.24 herein. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.140 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
8.67.150 - Effective Date. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be effective immediately upon passage. 
(Ord. 1360, 07/28/2014)  
Chapter 8.68 - BRING YOUR OWN BAG 
 
8.68.010 - Short Title. 
This Chapter may be cited as the "Bring Your Own Bag Ordinance" of the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.020 - Declaration of findings and policy—Scope. 
The City Council hereby finds that the reduction in the use of disposable checkout bags by retail establishments in the City is a public purpose that protects the marine environment, advances solid waste reduction, reduces greenhouse gas emissions, and protects waterways. This chapter seeks to reduce the number of plastic and paper bags that are being burned, used, discarded and littered, and to promote the use of reusable checkout bags by retail establishments located in the City. This chapter seeks to ensure that customers using reusable checkout bags are made aware of the need to keep those bags sanitized between uses in order to protect against the transmission of food-borne illnesses. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.030 - Definitions. 
A.  The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
1.  Department means the City's Department of Public Works. 
2.  Commissioner means the City's Commissioner of Public Works. 
3.  Checkout bag means a carryout bag with handles provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale. A checkout bag shall not include: 
a.  Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are placed by a consumer to deliver such items to the point of sale or check-out area of a retail establishment; 
b.  Laundry or dry-cleaner bags; or 
c.  Newspaper bags; 
d.  Bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish, whether prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture. 
4.  Recyclable paper bag means a paper bag that is 100 percent recyclable and contains at least forty percent post-consumer recycled content, and displays the words "recyclable" and "made from forty percent post-consumer recycled content" in a visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
5.  Reusable bag means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is polyester, polypropylene, cotton or other durable material, or durable plastic that is at least three millimeters in thickness. 
6.  Compostable plastic bag means a plastic checkout bag that is capable of meeting the standards set forth in the test parameters of ASTMD6400 and approved by the commissioner. Said bags must be capable of undergoing biological decomposition in a compost site such that the material breaks down into carbon dioxide, water, inorganic compounds and biomass at a rate consistent with known compostable materials. 
7.  Retail establishment means any commercial enterprise, defined as the following, whether for or not for profit, including, but not limited to restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, seasonal and temporary businesses, jewelry stores, and household goods stores; however, this does not include bazaars operated by nonprofit organizations or religious institutions. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.040 - Requirements. 
A.  If a retail establishment provides checkout bags to customers, such bags shall be either a recyclable paper bag or a reusable bag. Public information advising customers to sanitize reusable bags to prevent food-borne illness must be prominently displayed or communicated upon sale. 
B.  The Commissioner shall have the authority to promulgate regulations to accomplish any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Charges. 
1.  Retail establishments which provide recyclable paper bags or compostable plastic bags shall charge for each such bag provided not less than an amount established by regulations promulgated by the commissioner. The checkout bag charge shall be retained by the retail establishment. 
2.  Any charge for a checkout bag shall be separately stated on a receipt provided to the customer at the time of sale and shall be identified as the "checkout bag charge" thereon. 
D.  Each Retail Establishment as defined in Section 8.67.030, above, shall comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.050 - Effective Date. 
This chapter shall take effect one year from the date of enactment. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.060 - Exemption. 
A.  The Commissioner may exempt a retail establishment from the requirements of this chapter for a period of two years upon a finding by the Commissioner that the requirements of this chapter would cause undue hardship to a retail establishment. Any exemption granted by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall expire after two years. A retail establishment may re-apply when the exemption expires. An "undue hardship" shall only be found in: 
1.  Circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment such that there are no reasonable alternatives to bags that are not recyclable paper bags or reusable bags, or 
2.  Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right, or 
3.  Circumstances where a retail establishment requires additional time in order to draw down an existing inventory of single-use plastic check out bags. Any retail establishment receiving an exemption shall file with the commissioner monthly reports on inventory reduction and remaining stocks. 
B.  Any retail establishment shall apply for an exemption to the Commissioner using forms provided by the department, and shall allow the Commissioner, or his or her designee, access to all information supporting its application. 
C.  The Commissioner may approve the exemption request, in whole or in part, with or without conditions. 
D.  The Commissioner by regulation, may establish a fee for exemption requests. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Fine. Any retail establishment who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a fine of not more than three hundred dollars and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, §21D. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner of the Department of Public Works, the Executive Director of the License Commission, the Executive Director of Inspectional Services Department and the Commissioner of the Health Commission, or their designees shall be the enforcing persons. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
8.68.080 - Severability. 
It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the City Council that if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. 1366, 03/30/2015)  
Chapter 8.69 - RUNNING BAMBOO ORDINANCE 
 
8.69.010 - Short Title. 
This Chapter may be cited as the Running Bamboo Ordinance of the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.020 - Statement of Purpose. 
A.  The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to preserve and protect private and City owned property and City owned rights of way from the damaging spread of Running Bamboo and to protect indigenous biodiversity threatened by Running Bamboo. 
B.  Running Bamboo that encroaches beyond the Running Bamboo Owner's property and/or spreads rhizomes and new shoots pose a risk of substantial damage to the structures and property of abutting parcels. As Running Bamboo threatens to be destructive to the natural environment and to the enjoyment of public and private property including structures and paved surfaces in the City of Cambridge, the City Council hereby declares it necessary to require the control of Running Bamboo plants. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Commissioner. The Commissioner of Public Works or his or her designee. 
B.  Running Bamboo. Any monopodial (running) tropical or semi-tropical bamboo grasses or bamboo species ("Bamboo"). In addition, for purposes of this ordinance, any species of Bamboo that is found to have encroached, spread, invaded, or intruded ("Encroached" or "Encroachment") upon any property other than the property on which it was originally planted, including City owned property or a City owned right of way, shall be presumed to be Running Bamboo, and subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
C.  Running Bamboo Owner. Any property owner, whether a person, firm, trust, corporation or other legal entity, at whose property Running Bamboo is found will be considered a Running Bamboo Owner, except any property owner who has provided satisfactory evidence to the Commissioner that the property owner did not plant the Running Bamboo on his or her property, and upon discovery of the Encroachment of Running Bamboo onto his or her property from an abutting property, informed the owner of such abutting property, by delivery of a written notice by certified mail within a year of the Encroachment occurring, of an objection to the Encroachment of the Running Bamboo, and provides a copy of such written notice to the Commissioner within 5 days of mailing to the abutting property owner. If a property owner has provided such evidence to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, said property owner shall not be considered a Running Bamboo Owner with respect to the abutting property so noticed, but may be considered a Running Bamboo Owner with respect to any other abutting properties, and shall be required to comply with the provisions of Chapter 8.69.050 with respect to any such other abutting properties. 
The Commissioner may, but is not required to, consider the following as additional evidence to determine whether a property owner is a Running Bamboo Owner: 
1.  Photographic evidence that the Running Bamboo began on the Running Bamboo Owner's property and encroached onto the neighboring property; 
2.  the absence of an adequate Running Bamboo barrier system on the Running Bamboo Owner's property; 
3.  other evidence provided to the Commissioner demonstrating that the Running Bamboo was not planted on the owner's property. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.040 - Applicability. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, Running Bamboo found growing upon a property shall constitute evidence that the Running Bamboo was planted and/or grown by and is on the property with the consent of the owner upon whose property the Running Bamboo is growing unless otherwise demonstrated as per section 8.69.030 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.050 - Requirements. 
A.  All Running Bamboo Owners shall confine Running Bamboo in a manner that will prevent the Running Bamboo from any Encroachment onto any private or City owned property or City owned right of way. The following shall constitute an adequate barrier system confining the Running Bamboo: 
1.  A seamless barrier composed of high density polypropylene, or polyethylene, or a metal barrier with sealed, overlapping and reinforced seams, or an impermeable joint free concrete barrier. The barrier must extend at least 36 inches below the ground surface, and the barrier must extend at least 2 inches above the ground surface for the entire length of the installation, and the installation must extend such that the possibility of flanking the barrier system is not possible, or 
2.  The placement of the Running Bamboo in a fully enclosed above ground pot or planter, or 
3.  As otherwise determined to be an adequate barrier system by the Commissioner. 
B.  Running Bamboo Owners who have Running Bamboo planted or present within four feet of the boundary line of the Running Bamboo Owner's property must install and maintain a barrier preventing the spread of the Running Bamboo beyond the Running Bamboo Owner's property. 
C.  The Commissioner shall have the authority to promulgate regulations to accomplish any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.060 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement Officials: The Commissioner or his or her designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Any Running Bamboo Owner that is found to have violated the provisions of this Chapter may be subject to penalties pursuant to 8.69.070 of this Chapter. 
C.  In the event Running Bamboo Encroaches onto City owned property or any City owned right of way, the Commissioner shall notify the Running Bamboo Owner in writing of such Encroachment and/or other violation of this Chapter, which order shall: 
(1)  Provide notice of the requirement to prevent Running Bamboo from Encroaching onto City owned property or a City owned right of way; 
(2)  Specify the nature and location of the violation; 
(3)  when applicable, order that the Running Bamboo Owner remove all portions of the Running Bamboo from the City property or the City owned right of way, and construct an adequate barrier system to prevent any further Encroachment, and 
(4)  State that the failure to comply with the notice and order will lead to the Running Bamboo Owner being held liable to the City for the cost of removal of the Encroachment, fines that may be imposed pursuant to § 8.69.070, and the City's cost to install a barrier pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
D.  The Commissioner's order shall be sent to the Running Bamboo Owner by first class and certified mail, return receipt requested. 
E.  Where applicable, the Running Bamboo Owner must obtain and comply with all federal, state, and local permits, licenses and other requirements necessary to remove the Running Bamboo from any City property or the City right of way. 
F.  If the Running Bamboo Owner fails to remove the Running Bamboo as directed in the order sent pursuant to this Section, the City may remove the Running Bamboo that has Encroached onto City owned property or onto a City owned right of way. The City may also construct a barrier designed to contain the Running Bamboo and prevent further intrusion. The cost of the removal of the Running Bamboo and the installation of a barrier shall be charged to the Running Bamboo Owner. The City shall not be liable to the Running Bamboo Owner for damages caused as a result of the Running Bamboo removal and the Running Bamboo Owner shall be liable for any and all damages to City owned property or rights of way or property owned by any third party, and expenses related thereto. 
G.  If the City causes Running Bamboo to be removed from City owned property or from a City owned right of way, or causes a barrier to be installed, a statement of cost thereof shall be mailed to the Running Bamboo Owner by first class and certified mail, return receipt requested with a demand for immediate payment to the City for all such costs. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.070 - Penalty. 
Any Running Bamboo Owner that is in violation of this Chapter may be fined $100.00 per day for each day that the Running Bamboo remains unconfined on the Running Bamboo Owner's property, or is in violation of any other provisions of this chapter. Any such penalty or penalties may be enforced through non-criminal disposition as provided by G.L. c. 40, §21D. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
8.69.080 - Severability. 
The provisions of this Chapter are severable. If any section, provision or portion of this Chapter is determined to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be valid. 
(Ord. 1395, 6-26-2017)  
Chapter 8.70 - PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF POLYSTYRENE BASED DISPOSABLE FOOD CONTAINERS 
 
8.70.010 - Title. 
This Chapter may be cited as the "Prohibition on the Use of Polystyrene Based Disposable Food Containers Ordinance" of the City of Cambridge. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.020 - Declaration of findings and policy—Scope. 
The City Council hereby finds that the reduction in the use of polystyrene food containers in the City of Cambridge (the "City") is a public purpose that advances solid waste reduction and the health of its citizens. Polystyrene food containers are expensive and impractical to recycle and are not biodegradable. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.030 - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
1.  "Department" means the City's Department of Public Works. 
2.  "Commissioner" means the City's Commissioner of Public Works. 
3.  "Disposable Food Service Container" means single-use disposable products for serving or transporting prepared, ready-to-consume food or beverages. This includes but is not limited to plates, cups, bowls, trays and hinged or lidded containers. This definition includes single-use disposable items such as straws, cup lids, or utensils and it includes single-use disposable packaging for unprepared foods. 
4.  "Food Establishment" means an operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. Food Establishment shall include any fixed or mobile place, structure or vehicle whether permanent, transient, or temporary, private, public, or non-profit, routinely serving the public; or any other eating and drinking establishment or place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service to the public on the premises or elsewhere. School cafeterias are included in this ordinance. 
5.  "Polystyrene" means expanded polystyrene which is a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). The term "polystyrene" shall include clear or solid polystyrene which is known as "oriented polystyrene." 
6.  "Prepared Food" means any food or beverage prepared for consumption on the food establishment's premises, using any cooking or food preparation technique. This does not include any raw uncooked meat, fish or eggs unless provided for consumption without further food preparation. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.040 - Requirements. 
Except as provided herein, food establishments are prohibited from dispensing prepared food to customers in disposable food service containers made from polystyrene. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.050 - Effective date. 
The chapter shall take effect one year from the date of enactment. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.060 - Exemption. 
A.  The Commissioner may exempt a food establishment from the requirements of this chapter for a period of up to six months, upon a finding by the Commissioner that the requirements of this chapter would cause undue hardship to a food establishment. The Commissioner may approve one additional six-month period upon the showing of a continued undue hardship. An "undue hardship" shall only be found in: 
1.  Circumstances or situations unique to the particular food establishment such that there are no reasonable alternatives to polystyrene disposable food service containers, or 
2.  Circumstances or situations unique to the food establishment such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right, or 
3.  Circumstances where a Food Establishment requires additional time in order to draw down an existing inventory of polystyrene disposable food service containers. Any food establishment receiving an exemption shall file with the Commissioner monthly reports on inventory reduction and remaining stocks. 
B.  Any food establishment shall apply for an exemption to the Commissioner using forms provided by the Department, and shall allow the Commissioner, or his or her designee, access to all information supporting its application. 
C.  The Commissioner may approve the exemption request, in whole or in part, with or without conditions. 
D.  The Commissioner, by regulation, may establish a fee for exemption requests. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Fine. Any food establishment who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be liable for a fine of not more than three hundred dollars and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Whoever violates any provision of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, §21D. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner of the Department of Public Works, the Executive Director of the License Commission, the Executive Director of the Inspectional Services Department and the Commissioner of the Health Commission, or their designees shall be enforcing persons. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
8.70.080 - Severability. 
It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the City Council that if any provision of this chapter be declared to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this chapter shall remain valid and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 1374, 10/19/2015)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Vandalism, destruction of property and other related offenses. 
A.  No person shall wilfully and maliciously, intentionally and without right: 
1.  Break down, injure, remove or destroy a monument erected for, or tree marked for, the purpose of designating the boundaries of a town or of a tract or lot of land, or a milestone, mileboard or guideboard erected upon a public way or railroad, or deface or alter the description of any such stone or board; 
2.  Mar or deface a building or signboard, or extinguish a light, or break, destroy or remove a lamp, lamp post, railing or post erected on a bridge, sidewalk, public way, court or passage; 
3.  Deface or otherwise injure, remove, interfere with or destroy any traffic regulating sign, light signal, marking or device lawfully erected or placed under public authority on any public way; 
4.  Or wantonly and without cause, destroy, deface, mar or injure a schoolhouse, church or other building erected or used for purposes of education or religious instruction, or for the general diffusion of knowledge, or an outbuilding, fence, well or appurtenance of such schoolhouse, church or building, or furniture, apparatus or other property belonging thereto or connected therewith; 
5.  Or wantonly and without cause, destroy, deface, mar or injure any playground apparatus or equipment located in a public park or playground; 
6.  Destroy, injure, deface or mar a dwelling house or other building, whether upon the inside or outside; 
7.  Mar or injure the wells, wainscoting or any other part of a courthouse, or any other building or room used for county business or any building belonging to the Commonwealth or any building belonging to the City or the appurtenances thereof, by cutting, writing or otherwise; 
8.  Maliciously remove, display, destroy, deface, mar or injure any monument, tablet or other device erected to mark an historic place or to commemorate an historic event. 
B.  Whoever violates any provision of this section in the presence of a police officer authorized to serve criminal process and the identity of such person is unknown to the officer, such person may be arrested by such officer and detained in a safe place without a warrant until his identity is ascertained. Reasonable diligence shall be exercised by the arresting officer in ascertaining the identify of the offender and when identified he shall be released from arrest unless a warrant was issued against him. If the offender is known to the police officer, he shall seek a complaint in court against such offender. 
C.  The organization(s) responsible for the distribution of posters or flyers with an intention that they be posted in violation of this section shall be responsible for the immediate removal of such posters or flyers and the names of organization(s) named on illegally posted posters or flyers shall be forwarded to the appropriate area businessmen's association so that the association may notify such organization that such acts are prohibited by City ordinance. 
D.  Upon conviction under this section, it is shown that the act committed was a first offense, and if the person makes restitution to the party injured, the justice of the district court may continue the case without finding. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 964, 1981: prior code § 13-20)  
9.04.020 - Injuring or destroying public or private property. 
A.  No person shall, without proper authority, paint on, write on, or otherwise injure, deface, destroy or vandalize any public building or any public or private property. 
B.  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1049 § 1, 1987: prior code § 13-2)  
9.04.030 - Trespassing on public property. 
A.  No person shall trespass on the roof of a public building or within a school building after regular school hours without the prior permission of a duly authorized public official. 
B.  At least two signs shall be posted on all public buildings with not less than one inch letters, not more than ten feet, and not less than six feet from the ground, black letters on white background as follows: 
City of Cambridge 
No Trespassing and 
No Defacing of this public building. 
Violators will be prosecuted to the 
full extent of the law. 
   City Manager 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars for the first offense, not more than two hundred dollars for the second offense and not more than three hundred dollars for subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. 1049 § 2, 1987: prior code § 13-3)  
9.04.040 - Construction of fences—Dangerous materials. 
No person shall erect or maintain anywhere in the City a fence equipped with or having razor wire or razor ribbon. Nor shall any person erect or maintain a fence equipped with or having barbed wire, spikes or other dangerous materials, or any electric charge sufficient to cause shock, within ten feet of the ground level. 
(Ord. 1009, 1984: prior code § 13-17A)  
9.04.050 - Defacing public property. 
A.  No person shall post or attach, or directly or indirectly cause to be posted or attached in any manner, any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on public property including emergency response motor vehicles except by permission of the City Manager or his designee. 
B.  Any handbill or sign found posted or otherwise affixed on any public property contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the Police Department or the Department of Public Works or the Inspectional Services Department. 
C.  The person or persons responsible for causing the unlawful posting of any notice described herein will be liable for the cost of removal and for the penalties described below. Persons liable under this section include, but are not limited to, any individual, corporation, partnership or other organization whose advertisement, message or information appears on the unlawfully posted notice. 
D.  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars. Each illegally posted notice, advertisement, poster or sign shall be considered a separate violation of this section, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of this section occurs or continues. 
E.  As an alternative to the penalty set forth in subsection D, whoever violates any provision of this section shall be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L., c. 40, §21D. For purposes of this section, the following officials shall be enforcing persons: Cambridge Police Officers and designated staff of the Cambridge Department of Public Works and the Inspectional Services Department. 
Then noncriminal penalty for the first violation of this section shall be twenty-five dollars; for the second violation, one hundred dollars; and for the third and all subsequent violations, two hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1367, 05/18/2015; Ord. 1138, 1992)  
9.04.051 - Attaching Commercial Notices to Private Property Not Allowed. 
A.  No person shall post or attach, or directly cause to be posted or attached in any manner, any commercial handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any private property including without limitations motor vehicles without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
B.  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars. Each illegally posted notice, advertisement, poster or sign shall be considered a separate violation of this section, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of this section occurs or continues. 
C.  As an alternative to the penalty set forth in subsection B, whoever violates any provision of this section shall be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided for in G.L. c. 40, §21D. For purposes of this section, the following officials shall be enforcing persons: Cambridge Police Officers and designated staff of the Cambridge Department of Public Works and the Inspectional Services Department. 
The noncriminal penalty for the first violation of this section shall be twenty-five dollars; for the second violation, one hundred dollars; and for the third and all subsequent violations, two hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1367, 05/18/2015)  
9.04.060 - Sale of certain paints and markers. 
A.  No person shall, within the City, sell, display, expose or keep for sale any aerosol spray paint can, or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and which has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface in excess of one-half inch, unless at the point of display or sale there is posted a sign with letters not less than one and one-half inches in height bearing the following words: 
Sale of spray paint and broad indelible markers to persons under eighteen and the unlawful purchase or possession of paints and such markers by persons under eighteen is punishable by a three hundred dollar fine, nor shall any person sell or deliver any aerosol spray paint, or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and which has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface in excess of one-half inch to any person under eighteen years of age or to any person of whatever age who refuses to submit for inspection if requested a driver's license, liquor purchase identification or other identification to establish the age of such person, nor shall any person being under the age of eighteen purchase, conceal or remove from the premises such items; providing, that nothing in this section shall prevent the parent, guardian, employer or teacher of such a minor person from delivering such items to a minor intending the same to be lawfully used. 
B.  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1049 § 3, 1987: prior code § 13-21)  
9.04.070 - Throwing objects in streets or on bridges. 
No person shall play ball or throw a stone or other missile in any street, or upon or from any bridge. 
(Prior code § 13-16)  
9.04.080 - Skateboarding Prohibited on City Property 
A.  "Skateboard" is defined for purposes of this ordinance as a non-motorized vehicle consisting of a long footboard between two sets of wheels, with steering controlled by weight distribution. 
B.  "Skateboarding" is defined as one or more people being on a skateboard while the skateboard is moving. 
C.  Skateboarding is hereby prohibited on City property, except that skateboarding shall be permitted in city-owned and designated skateboard parks or other areas designated by the City. 
D.  Each violator of this ordinance may be fined up to fifty ($50.00) dollars for each offense. Enforcement of this section may be by non-criminal disposition as provided by M.G.L. c.40, §21D. Police officers shall be the enforcement personnel. 
(1278, Added, 08/02/2004)  
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Disorderly conduct—Profanity and insulting language. 
No person shall behave himself in a rude or disorderly manner, or use any indecent, profane or insulting language in any street or public place. No person shall make or cause to be made, any unnecessary noise or noises in any public street, private way or park, so as to cause any inconvenience or discomfort for the inhabitants of the City. 
(Prior code § 13-5)  
9.08.020 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in certain public places. 
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 of the General Laws while on, in or upon any public way, or upon any way to which the public has a right to access, or any place to which the public has access as invitees or licensees, park or playground, or private place without the consent of the owner or person in control thereof. Whoever violates this section may be arrested without a warrant by an officer authorized to serve criminal process. All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this section shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or persons arrested or summoned into court, at which time they shall be returned to the person or persons entitled to lawful possession. Anyone found guilty of the violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not over fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 933, 1980: Ord. 825, 1973: prior code § 13-19)  
9.08.030 - Gaming. 
No person shall expose, in or upon any street, public ground or common, any table or device of any kind, by or upon which any game of hazard or chance can be played; nor shall any person play any such game at such table or device, in or upon any street, public ground or common. 
(Prior code § 13-6)  
9.08.040 - Peeping and spying. 
No person other than an officer of the law acting in the performance of his legal duty shall enter upon the premises of any person with the intention of peeping into a dwelling or spying upon any person therein. 
(Prior code § 13-7)  
9.08.050 - Nude swimming or bathing. 
No person in a nude state shall swim or bathe in any waters within the City, so as to be exposed to the view of passengers or other persons in any street or house within the City. 
(Prior code § 13-8)  
9.08.060 - Loitering in streets. 
No person shall saunter or loiter in a street in such a manner as to obstruct or endanger travelers or in a manner likely to cause a breach of the peace or incite to riot; but nothing in this section shall be construed to curtail, abridge or limit the right of any person to exercise the right of peaceful persuasion guaranteed by Section 24 of Chapter 149 of the General Laws or to curtail, abridge or limit the intendment of any statute of the Commonwealth. 
(Prior code § 13-9)  
Chapter 9.16 - WEAPONS 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Firearm discharge prohibited—Exception. 
No person shall, except in the performance of some legal duty, discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm, within the City limits. 
(Prior code § 13-15)  
9.16.020 - Handgun transactions—Council findings. 
The City Council finds and declares that: 
A.  Handguns play a major role in the commission of homicide, aggravated assault, armed robbery and accidental injury and death; 
B.  Handguns should therefore not be readily available within the City; 
C.  In order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, to preserve peace and good order, and to maintain the internal police of the City, it is necessary to regulate certain handgun transactions. 
(Ord. 1036 (part), 1986: prior code § 13-15A(a))  
9.16.030 - Handgun transactions—Handgun defined. 
As used in this section and Sections 9.16.020, 9.16.040 and 9.16.050 of this chapter, "handgun" means any firearm, as defined in Section 121 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws, of which the length of barrel is less than ten inches. 
(Ord. 1036 (part), 1986: prior code § 13-15A(b))  
9.16.040 - Handgun transactions—Prohibited—Penalty. 
Any person who sells, rents or leases a handgun shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars. Each such sale, rental or lease shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1036 (part), 1986: prior code § 13-15A(c))  
9.16.050 - Handgun transactions—Exemptions from provisions. 
This section and Sections 9.16.020, 9.16.040 and 9.16.050 of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any person who holds a license to sell, rent or lease firearms from the Chief of Police under section 121 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws, if the license was first issued on or before May 15, 1986; or 
B.  Any person to whom any licensed mentioned in subsection A of this section is transferred; or 
C.  Any person or circumstances mentioned in Section 128A of Chapter 140 of the General laws. 
(Ord. 1036 (part), 1986: prior code § 13-15A(d))  
9.16.060 - Bows, arrows and air gun discharge prohibited. 
No person shall shoot with or use a bow and arrow or air gun in a street, or upon or from any bridge. 
(Prior code § 13-12)  
9.16.070 - Clubs and bludgeons prohibited. 
No person shall have in his possession a club or bludgeon, on any street, with intent to use the same in a sport, sham-fight or strife, or to intimidate any person or horse. 
(Prior code § 13-13)  
9.16.080 - Toy pistols, slingshots and other weapons. 
No person shall have in his possession a toy pistol, crotch, rubber sling or other device for throwing missiles of any kind, with intent to use it to the injury of persons or property, or to the annoyance or discomfort of any person, upon the street. 
(Prior code § 13-17)  
9.16.090 - Replica firearms. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
1.  "Chief" means the Chief of the Cambridge Police Department or his designee. 
2.  "Department" means the Cambridge Police Department. 
3.  "Market" means to display for sale. 
4.  "Replica firearm" means any toy, imitation or facsimile pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle, air rifle, B-B gun, pellet gun, machine gun or other similar simulated weapon which because of its color, size, shape or other characteristics, can reasonably be perceived to be a real firearm from which a shot or bullet can be fired and which, pursuant to subsection D of this section, has been determined to pose a threat to public safety. 
5.  "Sell" means to exchange or deliver: 
a.  For money or its equivalent, or 
b.  As a promotion or an inducement to buy. 
B.  Regulation. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person or entity shall sell or market any replica firearm in the City. 
C.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sale of replica firearms shall be permitted if the sale of such replica firearms is solely for purposes of or for transportation in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce. 
D.  Enforcement. 
1.  The Chief shall identify those replica firearms which he deems to pose a threat to public safety and shall make a list thereof. Such list shall include, where available, the following information: the product name, the manufacturer and the model number. The Chief shall post the list in the Department and shall make available copies thereof to the general public. The Chief shall update the list from time to time as he deems warranted. Any individual may provide information to the Chief regarding replica firearms to be added to the list. 
2.  Any person who observes the sale or marketing of a replica firearm which he believes to be a violation of this section may register a written or oral complaint with the Department. A Cambridge police officer, in response to each complaint, shall investigate the complaint forthwith in person and determine whether there is such a violation. 
3.  Any Cambridge police officer who observes the sale or marketing of a replica firearm which he believes to be a violation of this section shall investigate forthwith and determine whether there is such a violation. 
4.  If a Cambridge police officer determines that there is a violation of this section, he shall order the individual or entity to remove immediately from sale or marketing all the replica firearms found to be in violation. In addition, the Department shall impose the following penalties on the individual or entity violating this section: 
a.  A written citation or warning for the first violation; 
b.  A one hundred dollar fine for the second violation; and 
c.  A two hundred dollar fine for the third and any subsequent violations. 
5.  For purposes of penalties to be imposed under this section, if a Cambridge police officer determines that a sale or marketing of replica firearms has occurred, that determination shall constitute one violation, regardless of the number of replica firearms involved. A Cambridge police officer shall return, unannounced, to the site of the violation within the thirty day period following the determination of a violation to ensure that the individual or entity has not resumed the sale or marketing of replica firearms. 
E.  Appeal Procedure. Any individual who is aggrieved by an action taken by a Cambridge police officer under this section may, within ten days of such action, file an appeal, in writing, to the Chief. After notice to such individual, the Chief shall hold a hearing, after which he shall issue a decision in which he affirms, annuls or modifies an action taken by a Cambridge police officer, giving his reasons therefor. The Chief shall send the decision to the individual by first class mail within ten days after the hearing. The decision shall be a final administrative decision. The individual shall have thirty days from the date of the written decision to seek judicial review in the Third District Court of Eastern Middlesex County. 
(Ord. 1078 § 1, 1989: prior code § 13-17b)  
9.16.100 - Machetes. 
A.  Findings. The City Council determines that the sale of machetes in Cambridge undermines the health, safety and welfare of the public. The easy availability of machetes for purchase in the City increases the risk of harm to Cambridge citizens. 
B.  Definition. "Machete," as used herein, means a large heavy knife with a broad blade designed for use as a weapon and for cutting vegetation. 
C.  Sale Prohibited. No person shall sell, transfer, or offer for sale or transfer, a machete. 
D.  Penalty. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of up to three hundred dollars. Each sale or transfer shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1163, 1995)  
9.16.110 - Weapons. 
A.  Findings. Violent incidents perpetrated by and upon young people in Cambridge have brought to light the relatively each access to and widespread availability of weapons or instruments that can be used as weapons. The City Council determines that reasonable measures are needed to prohibit the sale of items whose primary purpose is for use as weapons again people. State law prohibits the manufacture and sale of certain types of knives, but does not address other dangerous instruments of concern. 
B.  Sale Prohibited. No person shall sell or expose for sale, exchange, give or loan to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any of the following: 
1.  springback knife; 
2.  fixed or locking blade knife; 
3.  dirk or dagger; 
4.  ice pick; 
5.  tool or implement having a point similar to an ice pick and a shaft; or a 
6.  straight-edged razor or razor blade fitted with a handle. 
C.  Exemption. The work-related use of any of the instruments detailed in Section B of this ordinance shall not be deemed to be a violation this ordinance. 
D.  Penalty. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of up to three hundred dollars. This ordinance may be enforced by police officers pursuant to the non-criminal ticketing procedure in General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D. Each sale or transfer shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1191, added, 09/08/1997, weapons)  
Chapter 9.18 - SALE, POSSESSION AND USE OF LASER POINTERS 
Sections: 
 
9.18.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definition shall apply: 
"Laser pointer" means any devise that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye. 
"Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, organization or other legal entity. 
"Public space" means a place to which the public has a right to access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, place of amusement, park or playground. 
"School premises" means the buildings, grounds, or facilities, or any portion thereof, owned, occupied, or under the custody or control of public or private institutions for the primary purpose of providing educational and recreational instruction to students.  
9.18.020 - Sales to Minors Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell or offer for sale or cause any person to give, sell or offer to sell a laser pointer to any individual eighteen years of age and younger.  
9.18.030 - Sales Restricted. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale laser pointers by means of a self service display unless such display is located within 10 feet of the check out counter and in plain view of the cashier or person on duty and in charge of the establishment. 
(b)  No person shall display laser pointers in any manner or post a sign advertising the availability of laser pointers unless a notice has been posted to it indicating that the sale or giving or laser pointers to persons eighteen years of age or younger is a violation of this ordinance.  
9.18.040 - Possession Restricted. 
(a)  No person twenty years of age and younger shall possess a laser pointer on school premises; and 
(b)  No person eighteen years of age and younger shall possess a laser pointer while in a public space; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall preclude: 
(1)  the possession on school premises of a laser pointer by a person twenty years of age or younger for a valid instructional, school-related or employment purpose, where such laser pointer is used under the supervision of a school staff person, other authorized instructor, or parent; or 
(2)  the possession in a public space of a laser pointer by a person eighteen years of age and younger, during such person's hours of employment, for a valid employment purpose where such laser pointer is used under the supervision of the employer or its agent.  
9.18.050 - Harassment by Laser Beams Prohibited. 
No person shall focus, point or shine a laser beam directly or indirectly on another person or moving vehicle in such a manner as is intended to harass or annoy said person or any person operating a moving vehicle.  
9.18.060 - Penalty. 
Any person found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be fined $300.00 per offense. Enforcement of this ordinance shall be by non-criminal disposition as provided by in M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the Police Department shall be the enforcing department. 
Violations of Sections 9.18.020 and 9.18.030 occurring at a place of business shall be the responsibility of the business owner.  
9.18.070 - Effective Date. 
This ordinance shall take effect upon its passage. 
(Ord. 1223, Added, 05/17/1999)  
Chapter 9.20 - VIOLATION—PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Violation—Penalty. 
Unless otherwise specified, any person who violates any provision of this title shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense. 
(Ord. 1017, 1984: prior code § 13-18)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - City traffic regulations adopted by reference. 
The traffic regulations code established by the Department of Traffic and Parking, effective August 4, 1966, is adopted and by this reference made a part of this code with the same force and effect as though set out in full in this chapter. At least three copies of the traffic regulations are on file and open to public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code § 18-1)  
Chapter 10.08 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Vehicles left more than seventy-two hours—Permission required. 
No person shall abandon an automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle for more than seventy-two hours upon a public or private way or on any property without the permission of the owner or lessee of the property. Any person who wishes to junk such a vehicle must contract with a private disposal agency. 
(Prior code § 17-73(e))  
10.08.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall be prosecuted in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 90, Section 22B. 
(Prior code § 17-80(a))  
Chapter 10.12 - PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Resident parking stickers—Issuance authority. 
Resident parking stickers issued by the Cambridge Traffic Director pursuant to St. 1961, c. 455 § 3(a), as amended by St. 1972, c. 340 and St. 1981, c. 166, and pursuant to Cambridge Traffic Regulations, Article XVI, Section 16.3(c) and 16.4(b) are intended only for the personal use of the persons to whom they are issued. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 1985: prior code § 18-2)  
10.12.020 - Resident parking stickers— Transferability restrictions. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, give, trade or otherwise transfer his or her resident parking sticker to another person or affix such sticker to a motor vehicle not his own, or alter such sticker. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 1985: prior code § 18-2)  
10.12.030 - Resident parking visitor permits—Issuance authority. 
Resident parking visitor permits issued by the Cambridge Traffic Director, pursuant to the statutes and regulations set out in Section 10.12.010 of this chapter, are intended only for the personal use of guests who are actually visiting the household to which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 1985: prior code § 18-2)  
10.12.040 - Resident parking visitor permits—Transferability restrictions. 
No person shall sell or offer for sale a resident parking visitor permit to anyone, or alter such permit. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 1985: prior code § 18-2)  
10.12.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars for each offense. 
(Ord. 1024 (part), 1985: prior code § 18-2)  
Chapter 10.16 - COMMERCIAL PARKING SPACE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Definitions 
"Commercial Parking space" means a parking space available for use by the general public at any time for a fee. The term shall not include 
(i)  parking spaces which are owned or operated by a commercial entity whose primary business is other than the operation of parking facilities, for the exclusive use of its lessees, employees, patrons, customers, clients, patients, guests or residents but which are not available for use by the general public; 
(ii)  parking spaces restricted for the use of the residents of a specific residential building or group of buildings; 
(iii)  spaces located on public streets; or 
(iv)  spaces located at a park-and-ride facility operated in conjunction with the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
"Commercial Parking Control Committee" (CPCC) means the committee established by this Chapter to decide whether to issue Commercial Parking Permits. Decision of the CPCC are binding on the Director. 
"Controlled Parking Facility Permit" (CPFP) means a permit issued by the Director prior to the effective date of this Chapter, which authorized the construction operation of a parking space or the construction, operation, or modification of a parking facility. 
"Determination of Exclusion" means a determination made by the director prior to the effective date of this Chapter that a parking facility or a parking space did not require a CPFP. 
"Director" means Director of the Cambridge Department of Traffic, Parking, and Transportation. 
"Existing Commercial Parking Permit" means 
(i)  a permit or approval issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter pursuant to the Procedures, Criteria, and Memorandum of Agreement dated November 15, l984; 
(ii)  a Controlled Parking Facility Permit that expressly authorizes use of the parking facility for Commercial Parking Spaces; or 
(iii)  a letter from the Director confirming the number of spaces at a specified location that were in existence and being used as Commercial Parking Spaces as of October 15, 1973. 
"Memorandum of Agreement" or "1996 MOA" means the Memorandum of Agreement between the City and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts acting through its Department of Environmental Protection, dated July 17, 1996. 
"New Commercial Parking Permit" means a permit issued under this Chapter, authorizing the use of a designated number of parking spaces at a specified location as Commercial Parking Spaces. 
"Parking Facility" means any lot, garage, building or structure or combination or portion thereof, on or in which motor vehicles are parked. 
"Person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, executor, administrator, guardian, trustee, agent, organization, any state, regional or political subdivision, agency, department, authority or board, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
(Ord. 1192, Added, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.020 - Building, operation or expansion of commercial parking facilities 
No person shall operate a Commercial Parking Space in Cambridge, or modify an existing Parking Facility so as to increase the number of Commercial Parking Spaces therein, unless said person shall have first obtained a Controlled Parking Facility Permit, a determination of Exclusion, an Existing Commercial Parking Permit, or a New Commercial Parking Permit authorizing each such Commercial Parking Space. 
(Ord. 1192, Added, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.030 - Commercial parking control committee 
All applications for New Commercial Parking Permits shall be reviewed by the Commercial Parking Control Committee (CPCC or Committee) consisting of five Cambridge residents with appropriate experience, appointed by the City Manager for staggered terms of three (3) years. Effective immediately, the members of the Interim Parking Control Committee shall be the initial members of the CPCC, and they shall be assigned staggered terms ranging from one (1) to three (3) years by the City Manager. No person shall be appointed to the Committee who has a financial interest in commercial parking in Cambridge. The Committee shall maintain complete and accurate records of all applications for New Commercial Parking Permits. In carrying out its duties, the Committee may consult with and seek the assistance of other appropriate departments and agencies in the city, state and federal governments such as the Community Development Department, the License Commission, the Inspectional Services Department, the Department of Traffic, Parking and Transportation, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(Ord. 1192, Added, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.040 - Procedure for obtaining a commercial parking permit 
(a)  An application for a New Commercial Parking Permit shall be submitted to the Director on a form available at the Cambridge Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department. Upon receipt of such application, the Director shall promptly transmit copies thereof to the CPCC. The CPCC shall hold hearings at least twice in each calendar year provided an application pending and permits may be issued consistently with Section 10.16.060. The CPCC shall establish a deadline for receipt of application prior to each hearing. All applications received by the dealing established by the CPCC shall receive consideration, provided that permits may be issued pursuant to Section 10.16.060. Applications not considered due to the restriction on the CPCC's ability to issue permits pursuant to Section 10.16.060 shall be considered in the order received at such time as the CPCC may issue permits. 
(b)  The CPCC will publish in at least one local weekly newspaper a notice of the hearing. The notice shall set forth a specific hearing date not less than fourteen days from the date of publication, as well as the time and place of such hearing; said notice shall indicate that a copy of the application(s) is available for public inspection at the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department. 
(c)  Every application for a New commercial Parking Permit shall include the following information: 
l.  Name and address of owner. 
2.  Address of proposed Commercial Parking Space or Parking Facility. 
3.  Type of facility (e.g., parking lot or garage). 
4.  Type of construction proposed (new or modification) and estimated dates for start of construction and opening of facility (or availability of spaces). 
5.  Number of existing parking spaces and categories of use for each space at the facility, including non-commercial spaces. Use categories include: general public, customers, patients, clients, students, employees, residents, guests. 
6.  Number of proposed parking spaces and categories of use for each space. 
7.  Calculations of parking space requirements according to the appropriate section fo the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance. 
8.  Detailed information on how use of the spaces will be controlled for each category of use. 
9.  A plan, approved in writing by the City Manager's Designee for regulation and control of air pollution from motor vehicles. Such plan shall describe traffic mitigation and parking and transportation demand management measure which will be implemented at the subject parking facility or elsewhere in Cambridge to minimize air pollution, single-occupant vehicle trips, and/or vehicle miles of travel to be generated by the proposed Commercial Parking Space(s). 
10.  A detailed description of the need for the proposed Commercial Parking Spaces and the type of development and patrons which the spaces and associated facility, if any, will serve. 
11.  A site plan and floor plans of the proposed parking facility, showing the facility location, any bicycle parking required by the Zoning Ordinance, the space layout, and the entry and exit points. 
12.  A detailed statement of any public policy considerations which support the application. 
Six  copies of every application shall be submitted, with the above information, to the Commercial Parking control Committee, c/o the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, City Hall Annex, 57 Inman Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. 
(d)  The Committee shall be required to process any applications already on file with the Director at the time of the adoption of this Chapter in the order of the filing of said pending applications. All amendments to pending applications applications shall be deemed to relate back to the original date of filing. 
(e)  At least 14 days before the hearing, the Commercial Parking control Committee or its designee shall send to each applicant which has submitted a complete application an analysis of the application in regard to the criteria set out above. this analysis will highlight any further ifnormation required in order to make a full assessment of the application. Any applicant who has filed an incomplete application shall be so notified at that time. An application shall be deemed incomplete if it is not accompanied by all the information required by Section 10.16.040 (c). 
(f)  within thirty (30) days after the hearing, the Commercial Parking control Committee shall approve or disapprove the application after full consideration of all the facts contained inthe application. In evaluating applications and making the determinations, the CPCC shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the applicant requests ten or fewer Commercial Parking Spaces and wheter the parking facility would have a combined total of twenty or fewer parking spaces if the application is granted; 
(2)  Whether the application includes a written plan to make a good faith effort to hire qualified Cambridge residents as employees and a commitment to consult with the Cambridge Office of Work Force Development; and 
(3)  Whether the project is consistent with the City's established planning and policy goals. 
The CPCC shall request evidence and doocumentation as it deems appropriate for substantiation of compliance with the above criteria. 
(g)  The Director shall approve or disapprove the application in accordance with the Committee's determination. When the decision is made to approve an application, the decision shall 
(i)  state the name, address and total number of authorized parking spaces at the facility; 
(ii)  specify how many spaces are authorized for use as Commercial Parking Spaces; and 
(iii)  describe any conditions upon which the application is approved. A copy of the Director's approval shall be sent to the applicant and the Commissioner, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 
(Ord. 1192, Added, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.050 - Permit term and conditions 
(a)  Each New Commercial Parking Permit shall be conditioned on satisfactory implementation by the permittee of 
(i)  the plan submitted under 10.16.040 (c) (9), as approved by the City Manager's Designee for regulation and control of air pollution from motor vehicles; and 
(ii)  the plan submitted under 10.16.040 (f) (2). 
(b)  Each New Commercial parking Permit shall have a two-year term and shall automatically revert to the City if an occupancy permit, building permit, or operating license has not been issued for the permitted spaces within such two-year term; provided that, for good cause based on a demonstration of the status of the project development and financing therefor, the director in consultation with the City Manager may grant one two-year extension. 
(c)  A New commercial Parking Permit shall automatically terminate and revert to the City as to any Commercial Parking Space(s) that has been used for non-commercial purposes for one year or more. 
(d)  No New or Existing commercial Parking Permit shall be transferrable among private parties for use at another location. Upon termination, expiration, or revocation, a New or Existing Commercial Parking Shall automatically revert to the City for allocation in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 1192, Renumbered, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.060 - Number of commercial parking permits to be issued 
(a)  Until EPA issues its approval to rescind and replace the Cambridge parking freeze regulation set forth at 40 C.F.R. SS52.1128 (b), 52.1135, the Director shall not issue New Commercial Parking Permits in excess of the number allowed pursuant to 10.16.060 (b). 
(b)  The Director, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Chapter, may issue permits for up to seventy-three (73) new Commercial Parking spaces. In addition, the Director may issue New Commercial Parking Permits for the number of Commercial Parking Spaces that have been permanently taken out of service as Commercial Parking Spaces on or after July 17, l996. A Commercial Parking space shall be deemed permanently taken out of service if: 
(i)  the permit or authorization therefor has reverted to the City; 
(ii)  the space has been physically removed from service by reconfiguration of the facility to eliminate the space or by installation of permanent access barriers; 
(iii)  use of the space for commercial purposes is eliminated by use restrictions that are posted and enforced, such as requiring card key access to the facility or validation of the parking ticket by a building tenant; or 
(iv)  authorization to use such space has been revoked or restricted as the result of an enforcement action. Prior to issuing permits pursuant to the second sentence hereof, the City shall notify DEP and EPA. 
(Ord. 1192, Renumbered, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.070 - Enforcement 
(a)  The City may enforce the terms and conditions of any permit or Determination of Exclusion, regardless of when it was issued. 
(b)  If any person, after a hearing before the CPCC, is found to have operated a parking space illegally, whether under the provision of this Chapter, a New or Existing Commercial Parking Permit, a CPFP, or a Determination of Exclusion, such person may be subject to a fine of up to $10 per day per space for every day that the space was illegally operated. In addition, the Director, after such a hearing, may: 
(i)  revoke a permit of a Determination of Exclusion for any space operated in violation of its permit conditions, including the terms of the plans required by 10.l6.040 (c) (9) and (f) (2); or 
(ii)  order closure of those spaces or facilities found to be operating with no required permit or Determination of Exclusion. 
At any hearing held by the CPCC to decide if spaces have improperly been operated as Commercial Parking Spaces, any facility hold a Determination of Exclusion which is found to have any spaces operating in violation of the terms of said Determination shall be presumed to have all of its spaces operating in violation of the terms of its Determination unless the operator demonstrates to the satisfaction of the CPA that a distinct and identifiable portion of the spaces have been operated in accordance with the terms of the Determination. It shall be the responsibility of the CPCC to determine the number of spaces within a facility that are operating in violation of the terms of their Determination of Exclusion, and to impose fines or revoke the Determination. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of any permit or Determination of Exclusion, the Director may issue an administrative order to cease operations at the facility without any requirement of a hearing. 
(Ord. 1192, Renumbered, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.080 - Non-transferability of parking spaces 
Rights to Commercial Parking Spaces that are permanently taken out of service or as to which the permit has expired, terminated, or been revoked may not be transferred between private parties. Such spaces automatically revert to the City. Qualifying spaces may be subject to further allocation by the City. 
(Ord. 1192, Renumbered, 09/08/1997)  
10.16.090 - Parking and transportation demand management plan 
It shall be the responsibility of the City Manager's Designee for regulation and control of air pollution from motor vehicles to review, condition, approve, or deny the plan for traffic mitigation and parking and transportation demand management measures required to be submitted pursuant to Section 10.16.040 (c) (9) of this Chapter. Prior to making its determination, the Designee shall consult with the Director. The Designee shall issue its approval or disapproval in writing, and it may specify conditions for its approval. Such conductions shall be incorporated into the plan and hsall become a condition upon which a new Commercial Parking Permit is granted. 
(Ord. 1192, Renumbered, 09/08/1997)  
Chapter 10.17 - VEHICLE TRIP REDUCTION ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
10.17.010 - Time period of chapter. 
Sections 10.17.040 through 10.17.180 of this chapter shall take effect sixty days after final approval by the City Council. The remaining provisions shall not take effect until, and shall at that time supersede and replace Chapter 10.16, sixty days after final approval by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("U.S. EPA") of a SIP amendment for Massachusetts which (i) contains a program of transportation control measures that are imposed equally on all communities in the Commonwealth such as an employer-based vehicle trip reduction program; and (ii) revokes any provisions of 40 C.F.R. Section 52.1135 that are applicable to Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.020 - Findings. 
The City of Cambridge finds and determines that: 
A.  High levels of vehicle traffic and congestion add to air pollution, noise, and inconvenience and erode the quality of the living and working environment. 
B.  An increasing number of automobile registrations and jobs in the City has resulted in growth of traffic in and around Cambridge. 
C.  While the City has pursued programs to mitigate these conditions, new measures must be implemented by the City and the Commonwealth involving the participation of all sectors of the community on a local and regional bases to make more efficient use of mass transit, bicycling, walking, and other alternatives to trips by single-occupancy vehicles. 
D.  The Clean Air Act amendments of 1990 call for the attainment of compliance with the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for Ozone within the Commonwealth by 1999. 
E.  Attainment of the Ozone Standard will require increased control of vehicle-related air pollution ("transportation control measures") throughout the Commonwealth, as well as the Nation. 
F.  Throughtrips and other traffic over which Cambridge has no control contribute significantly to the degradation of air quality in the region. The degradation of air quality, particularly ozone, is a regional problem which requires global and regional solutions. 
G.  A large portion of vehicle traffic on Cambridge streets is attributable to trips that neither originate nor end in Cambridge ("throughtrips"). The City of Cambridge has virtually no control over these throughtrips. Accordingly, it is imperative that DEP amend the SIP to include transportation control measures applicable equally to all communities in the Commonwealth, including an employer-based vehicle trip reduction program, to achieve reductions in the number of vehicle trips and vehicle miles travelled throughout the region. 
H.  Increasing the use of commuting alternatives and reducing the number of trips by single-occupancy vehicles is beneficial for the City and the Commonwealth in reducing vehicle miles travelled, traffic and associated air pollution, fuel use, noise, and congestion. 
I.  Programs offered through City Departments, employers, institutions, owners of multiple-tenant buildings and complexes and other organizations to encourage the use of mass transit, bicycling walking, and other alternatives to commuting by single-occupancy vehicles are effective and should be expanded on a citywide and regional basis. 
J.  The approach which includes, where consistent with employers' needs, adoption and enforcement of driving disincentives, particularly those applicable to the regular work-day commuter, and best suited to accommodate the diverse needs and capabilities of the governmental, business and institutional communities in the City, and recommended for adoption by DEP for state-wide application is a flexible approach which establishes performance coals and permits government and private employers, institutions, and automobile owners to select from among a variety of measures designed to contribute toward reaching the goals. 
K.  The vehicle trip reduction program recommended for adoption by DEP on a state-wide basis should give credit to those employers which have already made substantial progress in encouraging the use of mass transit, bicycling, walking, and alternative means of commuting and in providing such alternatives. 
L.  Measures to discourage, and provide alternatives to, vehicle trips and trips by single-occupancy vehicles made by residents of and visitors to Cambridge are also necessary to further the goals of the Clean Air Act. 
M.  Some of the measures contained in this chapter will achieve immediate reductions in vehicle miles travelled; others are designed to collect information and otherwise lay the foundation for future actions to reduce vehicle miles travelled and improve air quality. To maximize air quality benefits, some types of transportation control measures must be adopted and applied on a regional basis. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "City" means the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
B.  "Clean fuel" means any fuel or power source used in a vehicle that complies with the applicable standards for clean fuel vehicles contained in Sections 241-245 of the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7581—7595. 
C.  "Clean-fuel vehicle" means a vehicle in a class or category of vehicles which has been certified to meet the applicable clean-fuel vehicle standards as defined by and pursuant to the federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. 
D.  "Fleet" means ten or more vehicles which are (i) owned, leased, controlled or operated by a single person or entity; or (ii) parked at the same location, excluding vehicles held for lease or rental to the general public, vehicles held for sale by dealers, vehicles used for law enforcement or emergency purposes. 
E.  "Ozone standard" means the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for Ozone established pursuant to Section 109 of the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7409. 
F.  "Region" means those communities east of, or through which Route 128 passes. 
G.  "Selected employers" means those employers in Cambridge who voluntarily agree to participate in the pilot survey of employee commuting characteristics set forth in Section 10.17.130. 
H.  "Throughtrips" means vehicle traffic on City of Cambridge streets attributable to trips that neither originate nor end in the City of Cambridge. 
I.  "Transportation control measures" are transportation control strategies aimed at reducing transportation related emissions of pollutants and controlling the growth of future vehicle trips and vehicle miles travelled. 
J.  "VMT" is an abbreviation for vehicle miles travelled. 
K.  "AER" is an abbreviation for automobile efficiency rate, a rate determined as set forth in Section 10.17.130(D). 
L.  "Base AER" is a term for the automobile efficiency rate for the City of Cambridge, more fully described in Section 10.17.130(E). 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.040 - Expanded commuter mobility program. 
In addition to continuing activities currently in progress, the Commuter Mobility Coordinator shall develop and submit to the Assistant City Manager for Community Development and the City Manager a schedule for implementing additional programs including, but not limited to: 
A.  A bicycle commuter program, in conjunction with the Traffic and Parking Department and the Bicycle Advisory Committee involving consultation with Cambridge residents and businesses; 
B.  A program to assist employers in establishing bicycle commuting incentives; 
C.  A feasibility study of the potential use of an in-City paratransit system of jitney services or shuttles to transit locations, areas of major employment, and major commercial/retail destinations; and 
D.  A program for publicizing successes achieved by businesses and institutions in decreasing the number of single-occupancy vehicle commuters to their establishments; 
E.  An education program, including newspaper articles, cable television programs, and public meetings, to inform residents and employees of the need for, and the benefits to be realized from, changes in commuting behavior; 
F.  The beginning of a commuter ride-share program; 
G.  A program to encourage businesses to offer discounts on T passes. 
The City will provide adequate resources to enhance the ability of the commuter mobility program to work to reduce the vehicle miles travelled in Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.050 - Bicycle and pedestrian mobility program. 
The position of Bicycle and Pedestrian Coordinator is created within the Traffic and Parking Department. The City Manager shall, within one month of the effective date of this provision, designate the Bicycle and Pedestrian Coordinator. The Bicycle and Pedestrian Coordinator shall devote at least fifty percent of his/her time to carrying out the tasks required by this provision. The Bicycle and Pedestrian Coordinator shall, in conjunction with the Commuter Mobility Coordinator and the City's existing Bicycle Advisory Committee, (i) design and implement a program to encourage greater use of bicycles as alternatives to single-occupancy vehicles within the city and, (ii) focus the attention of the City on the needs of pedestrians. The program will include, but is not limited to: 
A.  Development of a Cambridge Bicycle Master Plan; 
B.  Development of a Cambridge Pedestrian Master Plan; 
C.  Development and evaluation of recommendations for a regional network of bicycle paths and bicycle priority streets favoring both bicycles and pedestrians; 
D.  Consultation with Cambridge residents, businesses, institutions and property owners; 
E.  Funding of bicycle amenities and storage facilities; 
F.  Funding for pedestrian amenities; and 
G.  Provision of bicycles for use by City police and Traffic and Parking Department. 
The program shall be funded at an initial level of twenty-five thousand dollars annually; these funds shall be in addition to, and not utilized for, the salary of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Coordinator. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.060 - Restrictions on visitor passes. 
A.  Official City Visitor Passes. The Citywide visitor passes that have been distributed to authorized individuals will be invalid thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this provision. The Traffic and Parking Department is authorized to issue stickers to individuals or organizations or who would be authorized to receive a Citywide visitor pass. A list of all recipients of Citywide visitor passes shall be maintained by the Traffic and Parking Department and shall be made available for public inspection upon request. In order to be effective, a sticker must be affixed to a vehicle and must display the vehicle registration number and an expiration date. These stickers shall be easily distinguishable from the stickers issued to City residents. No Official City Visitor Sticker shall be issued that is valid for a time period longer than one year. The names of individuals and organizations shall be available to the public upon request. The list shall be updated by the Department at least quarterly. 
B.  Residential Visitor Passes. To be valid on a given date, the pass must be displayed in the windshield and the date of use must be circled. 
(Ord. 1336, 10/18/2010; Ord. 1146, 1992; Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.070 - Fees for residential parking stickers. 
The fees for residential parking stickers shall be twenty dollars effective with the 2011 permits and twenty-five dollars effective with the 2013 permits and thereafter per permit per household. The Traffic Director shall provide notice to citizens that any person who desires to make a contribution in excess of any amount of the fees required by this section may do so and such contribution shall be appropriated as set forth in Section 10.17.150. 
(Ord. 1336, 10/18/2010; Ord. 1147, 1992)  
10.17.080 - Study of zoning revisions. 
The Cambridge Planning Board (the "Board") shall consider revising the required parking space ratios specified in the City Zoning Ordinance and shall evaluate the effectiveness of such revisions in reducing VMT and traffic congestion and encouraging the increased use of commuting alternatives other than by single-occupant vehicles. The Planning Board shall evaluate the need to reduce the allowed densities to achieve the goal of reduced 
vehicle miles travelled and shall also consider eliminating the exclusion of parking in the calculation of gross floor area. The Board shall also consider the economic impact of such revisions. Consideration shall be given, without limitation, to such potential revisions as reduction of minimum and maximum parking requirements, special provisions for carpools and vanpools, and encouragement of mixed-use developments. 
The Board shall invite testimony from residents, businesses, institutions, and property owners and shall publicly report its recommendations within one year of the effective date of this provision. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.090 - Improved coordination with MBTA. 
The City Manager shall initiate meetings with the General Manager of the MBTA to map out a strategy for close cooperation between the City and the MBTA on increasing public transportation services to and within the City. The management of the MBTA will be asked to work to improve existing services and to look into ways in which the MBTA can be of assistance to the City in exploring possible development of a local para-transit system. There shall be a goal of establishing a working joint committee to implement the needed improvements. 
The Commuter Mobility Staff shall undertake a survey of residents and commuters to identify barriers to use of the MBTA. The Commuter Mobility Staff shall also conduct widely-advertised public forums in neighborhoods throughout the City. Based on the survey and the results of the public meetings, the Commuter Mobility Staff will make recommendations for improving MBTA service. The recommendations will be available to the public for comment. The Commuter Mobility Staff will request that the MBTA hold one or more public meetings to discuss the recommendations. 
The Department of Traffic and Parking and the Commuter Mobility staff shall work with MBTA to (i) improve public transportation schedules and routes; (ii) to improve bus stop signage; and (iii) to review placement of bus stops. The Cambridge Traffic and Parking Department shall also cooperate with the MBTA in an attempt to have the MBTA, at the sites selected by Cambridge, erect bus stop signs that are used in other cities and towns. 
Meetings with representatives of the MBTA should also focus on conversion of buses to clean fuels. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.100 - Regulation of idling buses, trucks, and taxis and automobiles. 
The Police Department shall promptly review and improve its enforcement of the statutory prohibitions against idling by busses, trucks and taxis and automobiles set forth at G.L., ch. 90, § 16A. Within two months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this provision, the Commissioner of the Police Department shall report to the City Manager on the Department's implementation of this provision. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.110 - Taxicab improvements. 
The License Commission, through the Taxicab Advisory Committee shall consult with the taxicab industry, residents, and commercial establishments in the City and prepare recommendations: 
A.  To make taxicabs more accessible for use by multiple passengers with different destinations. The object of this recommendation shall be to decrease single-occupant use of taxicabs by providing monetary incentives for the taxicab drivers and reducing the cost for passengers; and 
B.  About the potential role of taxicabs in a paratransit system for the City; and 
C.  About conversion of taxi fleets to clean fuels; 
D.  for new or relocated taxi stands; and 
E.  For policies or actions that would encourage Cambridge residents to use taxicabs that are licensed in Cambridge instead of taxicabs from other cities. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.120 - Alewife Station and Garage. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development or his designee shall consult with Alewife neighborhood groups, employers, and other interested persons concerning the demand for (i) a commuter rail station at Alewife, (ii) an expansion of the Alewife garage, and (iii) shuttle bus or van service between Alewife Station and nearby employment sites and stores. The Assistant City Manager shall report his findings to the City Council within one year of the effective date of this provision. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.130 - Pilot survey of commuting characteristics of City employees and employees of selected employers. 
A.  The City, in consultation with the Selected Employer Steering Committee, shall develop an Employer Survey Kit which may include an Employee Survey Form, administration plan, and Automobile Efficiency Rate ("AER") (defined below) calculation sheet, designed to elicit commuting data from all City employees and employees of Selected Employers which will permit the calculation of an actual AER for each Selected Employer and City Department and will also provide the statistical basis for determining such other characteristics of commuting patterns as may be useful in designing measures to achieve the goals of the Clean Air Act. The Employer Survey Kit shall be prepared and distributed to City Departments and Selected Employers within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this provision. Each City Department and Selected Employer shall distribute copies of the Employee Survey Form to, and as a goal shall endeavor to collect completed forms from, seventy-five per cent of its employees. Each City Department and Selected Employer shall, no later than three (3) months from the date the Employer Survey Kit is distributed, submit to the Assistant City Manager for Community Development all completed Employee Survey Forms, provided that, any Selected Employer may instead submit a report of the results of the employee survey on a standard AER calculation sheet, signed and certified as to its accuracy by an officer of the Company. A Selected Employer that does not submit the Employee Survey Forms shall retain such forms for a minimum of three years. These forms shall be made available to the Assistant City Manager for Community Development or his designee, upon request. 
B.  The Selected Employer Steering Committee shall: 
1.  Participate with the City in the design of the pilot survey; 
2.  Assist in educating and encouraging participation of the selected employer group; 
3.  Review with the City the results of the pilot survey; and 
4.  Participate in the design of any City-wide employer based vehicle trip reduction program. 
C.  Each City Department and Selected Employer shall cooperate with the Assistant City Manager for Community Development and the Commuter Mobility Staff in providing information about plans and programs being utilized to encourage commuter travel modes other than by single occupancy vehicles. At such time as the City implements or enforces an employer-based vehicle trip reduction program on a city-wide basis, each City Department and Selected Employer which has cooperated with the Community Development Department and the Commuter Mobility Staff and which has complied with paragraph "A" hereof shall be entitled to use the AER reflected in its initial Employer Survey Response as its baseline AER regardless of the extent of improvements in its AER produced as a result of its cooperation with the Community Development Department or its own commuter mobility initiatives. 
D.  The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall make arrangements with the Commuter Mobility Staff to coordinate: (i) participation of the Selected Employers; (ii) preparation and distribution of the Employer Survey Kits; (iii) calculation of the base AER; (iv) review and tabulation of the pilot employer survey responses; (v) recalculation of the base AER based on review and analysis of the pilot employer survey responses. The Assistant City Manager for Community Development shall have the authority to engage the services of technical consultants to assist with these tasks. 
E.  The phrase Automobile Efficiency Rate ("AER") shall mean the figure calculated by dividing the number of employees who report to a worksite within the City of Cambridge between six a.m. and ten a.m. (inclusive Monday through Friday to achieve a five consecutive weekday average) by the number of vehicles used by those employees to reach the worksite during those hours. Bicycles, public transit vehicles, and approved clean-fuel vehicles shall be excluded from the vehicles counted. Motorcycles and light trucks shall be included in the vehicles counted. 
F.  The City shall define and make calculations of a base AER for the City of Cambridge as a whole. Such base AER shall initially be derived from the 1990 Census modal share data and travel statistics, the results of the pilot survey of selected employers, and such other data as may be relevant. Subsequently, the City may develop other AERs for categories such as geographical areas of the City, employer types, employer sizes, and the like, as may be determined through the consultative process provided for in Section 10.17.140. The City may also, through the same consultative process, periodically recalculate the base AER or such other AERs to reflect additional data or changes in data as become available. 
G.  The term "carpool" shall mean a private motor vehicle occupied by two to six employees travelling together for at least seventy-five percent of their commute trip distances. 
H.  The term "commute alternatives" shall mean carpooling, vanpooling, private bus service, use of public transit, bicycling and/or walking. 
I.  The term "employee" shall mean any person hired by a public or private employer, including part-time and seasonal employees, who reports to work at least two days a week during five or more months of the year. 
J.  The term "worksite" shall mean a building or grouping of buildings which are located within the City of Cambridge and are on physically contiguous parcels of land or on parcels separated solely by private or public roadways or rights-of-ways and which are owned, operated, or leased by the same Employer. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.140 - Consultation with employers and residents about employer vehicle trip reduction program. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development or his designee shall consult with Cambridge businesses, institutions, City departments, the Selected Employer Steering Committee, and residents to evaluate recommendations for a regional employer-based vehicle trip reduction program. During this consultation process, issues to be considered shall include: 
A.  Whether different areas of the City should be subject to different AER goals, depending on their proximity to public transit; 
B.  What the annual rate of improvement in the AER goal should be; 
C.  which, if any of the vehicle trip reduction plan elements identified in Section 10.17.170 should be required to be implemented by all employers in the City; 
D.  The definition of base AER and the potential appropriateness and definition of AERs for categories such as geographical areas of the city, employer types, employer sizes, and the like; 
E.  Ways to recognize the uniqueness of employers and their differing needs for employee mobility; 
F.  Appropriate AER or other references to be used in setting goals for Cambridge employers within a regional vehicle trip reduction program; 
G.  Whether employers should be required to achieve a base or other AER goal within a specified time period or whether penalties should only be imposed for an employer's failure to implement its plan; 
H.  Identification and development of mechanisms for transferring and/or sharing use of parking spaces as demand for parking spaces decreases at a given worksite; 
I.  Evaluation of potential impacts on employment and economic impacts on affected employers and on the City of any proposed measures; and 
J.  Whether any categories of employers should be exempt. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.150 - Use of fees. 
One hundred percent of the funds raised through the sale of residential parking stickers shall be used for implementing the tasks and programs specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.160 - Recommendations for a SIP amendment applicable to all communities in the Commonwealth. 
In order to ensure that the vehicle trip reduction measures in the ordinance codified in this chapter achieve their intended effect of reducing vehicle miles traveled and enhancing air quality in the Commonwealth, the City shall include in its submittal to the Metropolitan Planning Organization ("MPO") and DEP recommendations for an amendment to the State Implementation Plan under the federal Clean Air Act applicable equally to all communities in the Commonwealth. These recommendations shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  A proposal for an employer-based vehicle trip reduction program; 
B.  A proposal for measures applicable to new development projects to mitigate the traffic impacts of such projects and reduce vehicle miles travelled to and from such projects; 
C.  A proposal for revising state taxing policies concerning employer-paid transportation and parking subsidies; 
D.  A proposal for evaluating the utility of imposing fees on single-occupant commuter vehicles and/or commuter parking; 
E.  A proposal for achieving appropriate convenient public transportation from the west and north to Cambridge, including but not limited to support of a circumferential transit system; 
F.  Preventing the diversion of traffic oriented toward Cambridge to other areas with more limited transit availability; 
G.  Assuring that Cambridge is not placed at a competitive disadvantage within the region or the Commonwealth; 
H.  Reducing the growth in volume of throughtrips on Cambridge roadways which is outside the control of the City; and 
I.  Improved and extended use of water taxis. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City in its submittal shall note the absence of consensus about the vehicle trip reduction ordinance as originally proposed. The City shall engage in a further consultation process as outlined in Section 10.17.140. The City shall continue to update the State concerning that process. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.170 - Municipal vehicle trip reduction plans. 
Based on its review of the employee survey forms collected pursuant to Section 10.17.130, the Commuter Mobility Staff shall prepare a vehicle trip reduction plan for implementation by City Departments. The plan shall contain a program of measures identical to the program developed after consultation as set forth in Section 10.17.140 which shall be designed to reduce vehicle trips and vehicle miles travelled by municipal employees and thereby improve the City's AER, as computed on the annual AER calculation sheets. The plan may include a variety of measures including, but not limited to: 
A.  Dissemination and periodic updating of information on all available transit service to and from the worksite; 
B.  Advertising, promoting and making available for purchase on the worksite any pass program offered by transit authorities; 
C.  Recommendations to individual employees of employee-specific travel options to reduce VMT; 
D.  Incentives and assistance for bicycle commuting including secure parking facilities, shower/changing facilities, and education and training programs; 
E.  Coordinating, facilitating and providing subsidies for employer-sponsored rideshare programs; 
F.  Preferential parking for carpools and vanpools; 
G.  Transportation allowances; 
H.  Expanding opportunities for alternative work schedules including four-day weeks and flexible schedules to facilitate ridesharing; 
I.  Elimination or reduction of parking subsidies for single-occupant vehicles; 
J.  Shuttle service to transit stops; and/or 
K.  Elimination of employee parking spaces. 
After consultation with the Assistant City Manager for Community Development and the City Manager about the plan, the Commuter MobilIty Staff shall promptly distribute it to City Departments for implementation. The Commuter Mobility Staff shall assist City Departments with implementation of the plan. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.180 - Expansion of local employment opportunities. 
To demonstrate and further its commitment to increase the number of Cambridge residents employed by Cambridge businesses and reduce vehicle miles associated with work commutes, the annual budget for expansion of local employment opportunities shall be increased to two hundred thirty thousand dollars. That budget shall be applied as follows: 
A.  To continue and expand the Cambridge Employment Program within the Community Development Department; 
B.  To sponsor an annual job fair to inform residents of local employment opportunities; 
C.  To sponsor and coordinate educational partnerships between Cambridge employees and schools in Cambridge; and 
D.  To develop a Local Employment Opportunity Plan. 
These functions shall be coordinated and carried out by the Community Development Department in conjunction with the Department of Human Services and under the supervision of the Assistant City Manager for Community Development. The Local Employment Opportunity Plan shall be developed within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this provision 
[THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS, 10.17.190 THROUGH 10.17.220, ONLY TAKE EFFECT AFTER STATE AND FEDERAL ACTION TO ADOPT A REGIONAL OR STATE-WIDE PROGRAM]  
10.17.190 - Further expansion of commuter mobility program. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development, in consultation with the City Manager, shall have authority to hire additional staff to implement the tasks and programs specified in this Chapter. Within three months of the effective date of this provision, at least one additional Commuter Mobility Staff member shall be hired. The Commuter Mobility Coordinator shall develop and promptly implement additional programs including but not limited to: 
A.  A program encouraging the use and sharing of computer ride-sharing information between and among businesses and institutions in the City; 
B.  A program to encourage commercial and retail businesses to offer discounts to patrons with MBTA transit passes; and 
C.  Implementation of an in-city paratransit system, to the extent funds are available, to supplement MBTA services. 
The Commuter Mobility Coordinator shall develop and recommend additional programs, including but not limited to, a residential trip reduction program for apartment and condominium complexes of fifty or more units. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.200 - Restrictions on parking supply. 
A.  Expansion of Parking Regulation. Within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this provision, the Traffic and Parking Department shall submit to the City Manager an updated written inventory of all on-street parking spaces specifying the restrictions applicable to each such parking space. As to any space which has not been restricted or removed from the supply of on-street spaces pursuant to Section 10.16.071 of this title, the Traffic and Parking Department shall prepare a recommendation for restriction of each such space to discourage its use for long-term commuter parking. These restrictions may include, without limitation an absolute prohibition against parking, installation of parking meters, imposition of time restrictions, and/or restrictions for use by residents with permits. The Director of Traffic and Parking shall make the recommendations available for public review and shall schedule one or more public meetings, as appropriate, for public discussion of the recommendations. Within one month after the public meetings, the Traffic and Parking Department shall submit its revised recommendation to the City Manager. After consultation with the City Manager, the Traffic and Parking Department shall promptly implement the recommendations. 
B.  Municipal Parking Rates. The rates for daily and monthly parking at all City-owned off-street parking facilities shall be increased by twenty-five percent over current rates, to be effective within sixty days of the effective date of this provision. 
C.  Exclusive Residential Parking Near MBTA Stations. The Traffic and Parking Department, in consultation with neighborhood groups, residents, commercial establishments, and the City Manager, shall prepare a proposal for establishing exclusive residential parking zones on primarily residential streets located near MBTA stations. The object of the proposal shall be to limit residential parking on targeted streets close to MBTA stations to residents of those neighborhoods by means of appropriate signage and special resident stickers. The Traffic and Parking Department shall convene a public meeting on its proposal within four months of the effective date of this provision. Within one month after such public meeting, and after consultation with the City Manager, the Director of Traffic and Parking shall cause the proposal to be implemented. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.210 - Promotion of clean fuels. 
The Department of Public Works shall study, promote, encourage, and identify incentives for the use of clean fuel in fleets of vehicles operating within the City. The study shall include an evaluation of the use of such fuels as methanol, com- pressed natural gas, and reformulated gasoline based on characteristics of fleets in Cambridge and implementation costs. The study shall also identify reasonably available incentives which could be offered by the City, such as tax credits, to encourage use of clean fuel in fleets of vehicles. The sum of fifteen thousand dollars shall be appropriated for this program. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.220 - Development of traffic policy. 
The Assistant City Manager for Community Development and the Director of the Traffic and Parking Department, or their designees, shall within one year of the effective date of this provision, conduct a study of major highways, city through streets, streets with schools, different types of residential streets, and streets at the borders of the City. Based on that study, they shall prepare a written recommendation of: 
A.  Appropriate speeds and volumes for Cambridge streets; and 
B.  Means of encouraging travel and traffic patterns that reduce VMTs. 
This written recommendation shall be submitted to the City Council for review and appropriate action. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
10.17.230 - Sunset clause. 
The provisions of this chapter shall cease to be effective ninety days after the date the Department of Environmental Protection or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency adopts a final rule or regulation that imposes transportation control measures including parking supply management measures in Cambridge which do not have an equal impact on the Region. The purpose of this sunset clause is to give the City the opportunity to decide whether to continue to implement the numerous provisions of this chapter in the event that the final rule or regulation puts the City at a competitive disadvantage in the region. 
(Ord. 1139 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 10.18 - PARKING AND TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLANNING; PARKING SPACE REGISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
10.18.010 - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate and control atmospheric pollution from motor vehicles by formalizing parking and transportation demand management planning, programs, and coordination which have been ongoing for a number of years. This Chapter will reduce vehicle trips and traffic congestion within the City, thereby promoting public health, safety, and welfare and protecting the environment. This Chapter requires parking and transportation demand management (PTDM) plans for commercial parking facilities and other types of non-residential parking facilities over a specified size as set forth in 10.18.050 and 10.18.070. This Chapter also establishes a process whereby City officials will be able to track the number, use and location of off-street parking spaces in the City. 
(b)  A Parking and Transportation Demand Management Planning Officer will be designated by the City Manager with the responsibility for reviewing, conditioning, approving and/or denying PTDM plans. Any project subject to the requirements of this Chapter shall not be qualified to receive a permit from the Planning Board, a commercial parking permit from the Commercial Parking Control Committee, a special permit or variance from the Board of Zoning Appeal, a building permit from the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, a certificate of occupancy from the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, or an operating license from the License Commission absent written approval of its PTDM plan from the PTDM Planning Officer or evidence of registration of its parking spaces with the Department of Traffic, Parking, and Transportation. 
(1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.020 - Definitions. 
"Commercial Parking Space" means a parking space available for use by the general public at any time for a fee. The term shall not include (i) parking spaces which are owned or operated by a commercial entity whose primary business is other than the operation of parking facilities, for the exclusive use of its lessees, employes, patrons, customers, clients, patients, guests or residents but which are not available for use by the general public; (ii) parking spaces restricted for the use of the residents of a specific residential building or group of buildings; (iii) spaces located on public streets; or (iv) spaces located at a park-and-ride facility operated in conjunction with the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
"Commercial Parking Facility" means a parking facility owned or operated by a commercial entity whose primary business is the operation of a parking facility and at which there are at least five (5) Commercial Parking Spaces. 
"Commercial Parking Permit" means a (i) permit issued under chapter 10.16 of the Cambridge Municipal Code, authorizing the use of a designated number of parking spaces at a specified location as Commercial Parking Spaces; (ii) a permit or approval issued prior to the effective date of this Chapter pursuant to the Procedures, Criteria, and Memorandum of Agreement dated November 15, 1984; (iii) a Controlled Parking Facility Permit that expressly authorizes use of the parking facility for Commercial Parking Spaces; or (iv) a letter from the Director confirming the number of spaces at a specified location that were in existence and being used as Commercial Parking Spaces as of October 15, 1973. 
"Controlled Parking Facility Permit" (CPFP) means a permit issued by the Director prior to the effective date of this Chapter, which authorized the construction or operation of a parking space or the construction, operation, or modification of a parking facility. 
"Determination of Exclusion" means a determination made by the Director that a parking facility or a parking space did not require a controlled parking facility permit. 
"Director" means Director of the Cambridge Department of Traffic, Parking, and Transportation. 
"Effective Date" means November 16, 1998, the original date of final adoption of this Chapter of the Cambridge Municipal Code. 
"Existing Parking Facility" shall mean a parking facility for which (i) a certificate of occupancy was issued by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services; (ii) an operating license was issued by the License Commission; or (iii) the Director issued a letter confirming the number of spaces at that location which spaces were in existence and being used as commercial parking spaces as of October 15, l973 (a "Director's Letter"). 
"New Project" means a project to construct or operate parking spaces within a new facility or an existing parking facility which will cause such facility to have a net increase in the number of spaces for which a certificate of occupancy, operating license, variance, special permit, or Director's Letter has not been issued as of the effective date of this Chapter and which is not a park-and-ride facility operated in conjunction with the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority. 
"Parking Facility" means any lot, garage, building or structure or combination or portion thereof, on or in which motor vehicles are parked, except any such facility used in association with or by a municipal police or fire station, and in the case of university or college campuses, the stock of parking spaces maintained within the City by the university or college which supports university or college activities within the City. 
"Person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, executor, administrator, guardian, trustee, agent, organization, any state, regional or political subdivision, agency, department, authority or board, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. 
"Planning Officer" means the City official responsible for PTDM plan reviews. 
"PTDM" means Parking and Transportation Demand Management. 
"Small Project" means a project to construct or operate five (5) to nineteen (19) non-commercial, non-residential parking spaces within a new facility or an existing parking facility which will cause such Facility to have a net increase in the number of spaces for which a certificate of occupancy, operating license, variance, special permit, or Director's Letter has not been issued as of the effective date of this Chapter. To qualify as a Small Project, the total number of non-commercial, non-residential parking spaces at the parking facility must remain at or below nineteen (19). 
(Ord. 1287, Amended, 09/12/2005; 1252, Amended, 09/24/2001; 1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.030 - PTDM Planning Officer. 
Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Chapter, the City Manager shall designate a Parking and Transportation Demand Management Planning Officer who shall have responsibility for reviewing, conditioning, approving, and/or denying PTDM plans and who shall report to the City Manager. Said officer shall be a Cambridge resident within six months of employment in this position. Prior to rendering his/her determination(s), the Planning Officer shall consult with the PTDM plan applicant, the Director and the Assistant City Manager for Community Development. 
(1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.040 - Registration of All Parking Spaces. 
(a)  No person shall build, expand, or reconfigure a parking facility for non-residential parking spaces resulting in a net increase in the number of parking spaces or a change in the use of such spaces based on the categories of use listed below at paragraphs b(v) and (vi), without first submitting a parking registration form to, and obtaining acceptance from, the Director. 
(b)  The registration form shall be prepared by the Director and shall be available at the offices of the Department of Traffic, Parking and Transportation. The form will require the following information: 
(i)  name and address of parking facility owner; 
(ii)  name and address of parking facility operator; 
(iii)  address of parking facility; 
(iv)  total number of existing parking spaces; 
(v)  number of existing parking spaces in each of the following categories: 
- residential 
- commercial 
- non-commercial 
- customer 
- employee 
- patient 
- student 
- client 
- guest 
(vi)  number of parking spaces proposed to be added to the parking facility in each of the following categories: 
- residential 
- commercial 
- non-commercial 
- customer 
- employee 
- patient 
- student 
- client 
- guest 
(vii)  identification of any existing parking permits for the parking facility; and 
(viii)  explanation of any enforcement actions against the parking facility. 
(c)  The Director shall accept or return a registration form to the registrant with a request for additional information within thirty (30) days after the form was filed. 
(d)  The License Commission shall not issue a license and the Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a parking facility subject to this section without evidence (i) that the registration form has been accepted by the Director; and (ii) if required, that the facility has a PTDM Plan approved by the Planning Officer. 
(1252, Amended, 09/24/2001; 1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.050 - Parking and Transportation Demand Management Plans. 
(a)  No person shall build, expand, or operate a parking facility subject to the Parking and Transportation Demand Management (PTDM) Plan requirements of this Chapter absent a PTDM Plan approved by the Planning Officer. 
(b)  The PTDM requirements of this Chapter shall apply to each of the following: 
(i)  any commercial parking facility for which a certificate of occupancy or operating license, variance or special permit was not obtained prior to the effective date of this chapter; 
(ii)  an existing commercial parking facility at which the number of parking spaces is increased after the effective date of this chapter; 
(iii)  any parking facility at which the use of existing or permitted parking spaces is changed to commercial use after the effective date of this chapter; 
(iv)  any new project to build or create by change of use twenty or more non-residential parking spaces; and 
(v)  any new project to expand an existing parking facility resulting in a total number of non-residential parking spaces of twenty (20) or more. 
(c)  The PTDM Plan shall be designed to minimize the amount of parking demand associated with the project and reduce single-occupant vehicle trips in and around Cambridge. The PTDM Plan shall be based on the following facts, projections and commitments: 
(i)  Facts and Projections: 
- nature of development and property use; 
- proximity of project to public transit and other non-Single-Occupant Vehicle facilities; 
- availability of and accessibility to offsite parking spaces which could serve the project; 
- number of employees and their likely place of origin; and 
- type and number of patrons/users of proposed parking supply and their likely place of origin. 
- number of vehicle trips expected to be generated by the project and description of measures to reduce associated traffic impacts on Cambridge streets; and 
- other factors published by the Planning Officer. 
(ii)  Commitments: 
- commitment to work with the Cambridge Office of Work Force Development; 
- commitment to implement vehicle trip reduction measures including some or all of the following: 
subsidized MBTA passes and other incentives; shuttle services; ride-sharing services; bicycle and pedestrian facilities; flexible working hours; preferential parking for Low Emission Vehicles/Zero Emission Vehicles/bicycles/carpools/vanpools (Note: this list is not meant to preclude implementation of other types of vehicle trip reduction measures). This commitment must be accompanied by a detailed description of the measures proposed to be implemented; and 
commitment to establish and make reasonable efforts to achieve a specified, numeric reduction (or percent reduction) in single-occupant vehicle trips in and around Cambridge. The percent reduction will be based on PTDM practices successfully implemented in reasonably comparable environments and as identified in professional and academic literature and based on analysis of existing trip reduction measures in Cambridge. 
Each PTDM Plan shall identify the total number of existing and proposed parking spaces at the facility and specify how many existing and proposed spaces fall within each of the following categories (explain how many spaces are used for multiple purposes): 
- residential 
- commercial 
- non-commercial 
- customer 
- employee 
- patient 
- student 
- client 
- guest 
Where the parking facility includes or proposes a combination of commercial and non-commercial parking spaces, the Plan shall specify how the parking facility will prevent commercial use of the non-commercial parking spaces. 
Each PTDM Plan shall contain the following certification signed by an authorized corporate officer: 
"I hereby certify that a commercial parking permit has been obtained for each space being used for commercial parking. None of the other existing or proposed parking spaces at this parking facility have been or will be available as commercial parking spaces until a commercial parking permit therefor has been obtained." 
(d)  The Planning Officer shall review, condition, approve and/or deny the PTDM Plan based on the above-listed facts, projections, and commitments. The Planning Officer shall issue his/her decision in writing within 60 days of receipt of the proposed PTDM Plan. The required time limit for action by the Planning Officer may be extended by written agreement between the proponent and the Planning Officer. Failure by the Planning Officer to take final action within said sixty (60) days or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed PTDM plan. If the project proponent elects to make a request pursuant to 10.18.060, the decision of the Planning Officer shall be expanded to include a recommendation about whether offsite parking should be allowed at distances greater than those allowed in the Zoning Ordinance and/or whether fewer parking spaces than the minimum required in the Zoning Ordinance should be allowed. Decisions of the Planning Officer may be appealed by the project proponent to a review committee composed of the City Manager, or his designee, and two other City staff members designated by the City Manager none of whom may have participated in the initial review of the Plan. 
(e)  The Planning Officer shall also make available sample PTDM plans which a project proponent may adapt for their project, such to approval by the Planning Officer. 
(f)  No permit, commercial parking permit, special permit, variance, building permit, certificate of occupancy, or operating license shall be issued for any project subject to 10.18.050 by the Planning Board, Commercial Parking Control Committee, Board of Zoning Appeal, Commissioner of Inspectional Services, or License Commission absent a written decision indicating approval from the Planning Officer of the project proponent's PTDM Plan. Any such permit or license shall be consistent with, and may incorporate as a condition, the decision of the Planning Officer and shall include written notice of the requirements of 10.18.050 (g) and (h), below. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit the power of the Planning Board or Board of Zoning Appeal to grant variances from or special permits under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. No project proponent shall be required by the Planning Officer to seek such relief under the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Approvals issued by the Planning Officer shall be automatically transferrable by and among private parties, provided that the proposed new owner (the "Transferee") shall continue to operate under the existing PTDM Plan and shall submit to the Planning Officer within thirty (30) days of the title transfer a certification that the existing PTDM plan will remain in effect. The certification shall be submitted on a form issued by the Planning Officer and shall certify that such Transferee commits to implement the existing PTDM plan, as approved; and acknowledges that failure to implement the plan is subject to the enforcement provisions of this Chapter. Where such certification is submitted, the approved plan shall remain in effect as to the Transferee. The Transferee may elect instead to and consult with the Planning Officer within thirty (30) days of title transfer regarding appropriate revisions to the existing plan. Based on such consultation, the Planning Officer may require information from the Transferee concerning proposed changes in use of the parking facility and associated buildings and the relevant facts and projections regarding the proposed changes. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such information, the Planning Officer may issue a written approval of the revised plan and obligations to the Transferee, or the Planning Officer may require submittal of a new PTDM Plan from the Transferee for review, condition, approval and/or denial. Until such time as a new or revised plan has been approved, the existing PTDM plan shall remain in effect. 
(h)  Each PTDM Plan approval issued by the Planning Officer shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions: 
(i)  The parking facility owner and operator each commit to implement all elements of the PTDM Plan, as approved, including annual reporting requirements, and to maintain records describing implementation of the Plan; 
(ii)  The City shall have the right to inspect the parking facility and audit PTDM implementation records; and 
(iii)  The parking facility owner and operator each commit to notify and consult with the Planning Officer thirty (30) days prior to any change in ownership, use or operation of the facility. 
(1252, Amended, 09/24/2001; 1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.060 - Reduction in Minimum Parking and Maximum Distance Requirements. 
(a)  A project proponent may elect to request that the Planning Officer include as an element of its PTDM Plan a plan for fewer parking spaces that the minimum set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Upon the written request of the project proponent, based on an evaluation of the facts, projections, and commitments listed at 10.18.050 (c), the Planning Officer may make a written recommendation about the maximum number of parking spaces for the project. This recommendation shall remain subject to review and approval by the Planning Board or Board of Zoning Appeal as appropriate. 
(b)  A project proponent may elect to request that the Planning Officer include as an element of its PTDM Plan a plan for utilizing off-site parking spaces that are farther from the project site than the maximum distance requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Upon the written request of the project proponent, based on an evaluation of the facts, projections, and commitments listed at 10.18.050 (c), the Planning Officer may make a written recommendation about how many parking spaces serving the project may be appropriately located at an off-site location and at what distance from the project site. This recommendation shall remain subject to review and approval by the Planning Board or Board of Zoning Appeal as appropriate. 
(1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.070 - Requirements Applicable to Small Projects. 
The owner or operator of each Small Project shall implement at least three (3) PTDM measures and maintain records of such implementation. A list of acceptable types of measures may be obtained from the Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department, the Inspectional Services Department, the Community Development Department, or the License Commission. The Planning Officer shall create and periodically update this list, which shall include: T-pass subsidies; bicycle parking; changing facilities; carpools/vanpools; financial incentives not to drive alone; or other similar measures. 
(1252, Amended, 09/24/2001; 1121, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.080 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Director shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter. If the Director has reason to believe that any provision of this Chapter is being violated, the Director shall investigate the possible violation. If after investigation the Director determines that any provision of this Chapter is being violated, s/he shall provide a first written notice of violation to the person charged with the violation, or the duly authorized representative thereof, of the determination of violation and shall order that the violation cease within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the first written notice. If the violation is not cured within the thirty (30) days after issuance of the determination of violation, the Director may proceed to assess the fines established in this chapter as well as any other remedies available to the city. In addition to all other remedies, if the violation has not ceased within thirty (30) days after the first written notice, then the Director may order shutdown of the parking facility. Second or subsequent written notices to a facility for the same violation shall be immediately effective and shall not provide the thirty (30) day opportunity to cure contained in the first written notice. A determination and order of the Director may be appealed to the City Manager by the person charged with the violation within thirty (30) days of issuance of the Director's determination and order. 
(b)  In addition to other remedies available to the City, any person who builds or modifies a parking facility without complying with the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $10.00 per day per parking space for every day that such parking space was operated without a registration accepted by the Director or without a PTDM Plan approval issued by the Planning Officer or in non-compliance with an approved PTDM Plan. On a determination, after investigation, by the Director that this Chapter is being violated, and the exhaustion of any appeal to the City Manager in accordance with (a) above, the Director shall take steps to enforce this chapter by causing complaint to be made before the district court and/or by applying for an injunction in the superior court. 
(c)  In addition to other remedies available to the City, a determination that a facility is operating in violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be ground for revocation by the Director of the facility's parking permit or other form of approval. 
(d)  The Planning Officer shall have independent authority to inspect a parking facility and audit its records to determine whether it is in compliance with its PTDM Plan. The Planning Officer shall issue a finding of non-compliance in writing and provide copies to the parking facility owner and operator and to the Director. 
(1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
10.18.090 - Evaluation. 
The PTDM Planning Officer shall prepare a report annually on the status and effectiveness of the implementation of this Ordinance. 
(1300, Amended, 09/11/2006; 1252, Amended, 09/24/2001; 1211, Added, 11/16/1998)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - STREET NAMES AND NUMBERS 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Street names affirmed—Changes and new designations. 
The several streets in the City shall continue to be called by the names heretofore given to them, until such names are altered by the City Council. The City Council, subject to any provisions of law relative thereto, shall give names to all streets hereafter laid out and may change the name of a street at any time, except that no street shall be given the designation of any existing street, and no street shall be accepted so long as the name thereof is the same as that of any existing street. 
(Prior code § 17-6)  
12.04.020 - Street numbers established—Posting on premises. 
The Council may order numbers in regular series, at the expense of the owner or occupant, of such form, size and material, and in such mode, place, succession and order, as it may determine, to be affixed to or inscribed upon, all building on any street. Any person having the control of any such building, refusing or neglecting to affix or inscribe it, the number designated by the Council, or allowing any other number to remain thereon more than one week after notice so to affix or inscribe, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars. 
(Prior code § 17-7)  
Chapter 12.08 - ADVERTISING SIGNS AND DISPLAYS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Encroachments onto streets—Permit required—Fee—Exceptions. 
No sign, advertising device, clock, marquee, barber pole, stationary or movable, permanent awning or other like structures, projecting into or placed on or over the public highway a distance of more than six inches, except poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances of telegraph and telephone, water, gas, electric light, heat and power companies and public transportation authorities shall be placed or maintained in any public way until a permit therefor has been granted by the City Council. The permit shall be issued by the Superintendent of Streets and effective June 1, 2009, the fee shall be seventy-five dollars. 
(Ord. 1322, 5/18/2009; Prior code § 3-1)  
12.08.020 - Display of merchandise—Permit—Fee. 
A.  No merchandise shall be displayed within the limits of any public highway in the City without a permit granted by the City Council and issued by the Superintendent of Streets. Effective June 1, 2009, the fee for the permit shall be seventy-five dollars annually. 
B.  No counter, platform or other apparatus or structure for the purpose of selling merchandise shall be placed on any public highway in the City without a permit granted by the City Council, and issued by the Superintendent of Streets. Effective June 1, 2009, the fee for the permit shall be seventy-five dollars and for any permits granted for periods of more than one year the fee shall be seventy-five dollars annually. 
C.  No permit shall be granted for encroachment of such merchandise, counter, platform or other apparatus or structure to exceed more than twenty-five percent of the width of the sidewalk from the property line of the premises in front of which such merchandise, counter, platform or other apparatus or structure shall be displayed or installed. 
(Ord. 1322, 5/18/2009; Prior code § 3-2)  
12.08.030 - Connection with buildings—Building ordinance conformance. 
All signs, advertising devices, clocks, marquees, barber poles, permanent awnings and other like structures shall be constructed, and, when attached to the building, shall be connected therewith in accordance with the requirements of the building ordinances of the City. 
(Prior code § 3-3)  
12.08.040 - Gasoline swing arms—Permit required—Fee. 
No person shall install a gasoline swing arm to extend over the sidewalk without a permit from the Superintendent of Streets when authorized by the City Council. Permits may be granted for not more than one year from May 1st and shall be renewed on expiration or within thirty days thereafter. A fee of five dollars shall be paid for such permit and each renewal thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-4)  
12.08.050 - Advertising banners prohibited—Exceptions. 
No advertising sign or banner shall be extended across any highway in the City except those of religious, fraternal or charitable organizations. 
(Prior code § 3-5)  
12.08.060 - Permit issuance subject to bond requirements. 
Any person granted a permit under this chapter shall file a bond with the City Clerk in such amount as shall be fixed by the City Council with surety to be approved by the City Auditor and in form to be approved by the City Solicitor, so as to indemnify and save harmless the City from all claims, costs, damages or judgments resulting from or incident to or arising out of the issuing of permits. 
(Prior code § 3-6)  
12.08.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Noncriminal Disposition. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, s. 21D. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner of Public Works shall be the enforcing officer, except that the Commissioner may delegate his enforcing authority to designated Public Works Enforcement Officers. The penalty for each violation will be twenty-five dollars. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1084 § 4, 1989)  
Chapter 12.12 - STREET EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - License—Required—Filing of final plan. 
A.  No person shall break or dig up the ground or stones in any street or on any sidewalk, or erect any staging for building, or place or deposit any stone, bricks, timber or building materials thereon, or otherwise occupy, obstruct or encumber the same, without first obtaining a written license from the Superintendent of Streets for that purpose. No gas pipe, water pipe, sewer, conduit, street railway track, pole nor any other structure, except wires, shall be placed beneath, upon or above any public street or way, except upon a location and at a grade approved by the City Engineer, or authorized by the City Council. 
B.  Within sixty days after the completion of the work so approved or authorized a final plan showing accurately in detail the lines, grades and construction of the work as finished shall be filed in the office of the City Engineer. If required by the City Engineer, a preliminary plan showing the proposed location and grade of the structure shall first be filed in his office. 
C.  Any person who violates the foregoing provision shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense and shall remove any structure placed contrary to the provisions of this section if required so to do by the City Engineer, and upon failure so to do the City Engineer may make such removal or change, and the cost thereof shall be paid to the City by the person owning or controlling the structure. 
(Prior code § 17-9)  
12.12.020 - License—Form—Issuance conditions. 
A.  The Superintendent of Streets may grant licenses in writing to persons having authority in the premises to open, occupy, obstruct, encumber and use parts of any street or sidewalk. 
B.  Every license shall specify the time, place, size and use of such opening, occupation or obstruction, and the time within which the street must be put in a condition satisfactory to the Superintendent of Streets, and each license so granted shall be upon the condition that: 
1.  The licensee shall conform to the statutes and ordinances of the City then in force, or that may thereafter be in force, and to the specifications in the license; 
2.  The license may be revoked at any time by the Superintendent of Streets; 
3.  Before performing any work authorized by the license the party licensed shall execute a bond to the City conditioned as required by the ordinances of the City, and subject to the additional condition that he shall cause the excavation and obstruction to be properly fenced during the whole time the street is opened and obstructed; 
4.  He shall place and maintain from the beginning of twilight, through the whole of the night, over or near the place so occupied, opened, obstructed or used, and over or near any dirt, gravel or other material when thereupon or to be used by him, a light or lights fixed to the fence or in some other proper manner sufficient to protect travelers from injury; 
5.  He shall place and maintain a safe and convenient way for the use of foot travelers, and a safe and convenient passage for public travel around or over such place; 
6.  If he does not, within the time prescribed by the Superintendent, put the street into good condition, satisfactory to the Superintendent, he shall pay whatever sum the Superintendent shall expend for putting it to good condition, and that he shall surrender the license to the Superintendent on or before the expiration of the time fixed in the license for completing the work or any extension or extensions thereof. 
C.  The Superintendent may in addition to such specifications, specify in the license, or after the issuance thereof, in writing the kind of rail or fence to enclose the place, and the kind of way over or around such place, and the manner of constructing it and where the passage or flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic will be impeded or rerouted that such licensee shall procure at such licensee's expense sufficient police detail as the regulations issued by the Chief of Police may require and nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the insertion in the license of any other specification deemed advisable by the Superintendent of Streets. 
(Prior code § 17-10)  
12.12.030 - License—Bond required. 
Before any license described in Section 12.12.020 of this chapter is delivered to any person for the applicant therefor, such person, unless he is an employee of the City employed on public work, shall certify that a copy of the license entered in a book kept for the purpose is a correct copy of the license he received, and the applicant, unless the application is made in behalf of a department of the City or by a person who has given bond and who applies for a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall give a bond in the sum of not less than one thousand dollars with one or more sureties conditioned to the faithful observance of the conditions and specifications of every and all such licenses issued to the applicant, and the Superintendent of Streets may at any time require a new bond which shall be considered a strengthening bond, unless the sureties on the former bond are expressly released from their liability by the City Council; provided, that the Superintendent may accept one bond for more than one license whether then issued or issued at any time after the date of the bond. 
(Prior code § 17-11)  
12.12.040 - License—Previous violations—Time limitations. 
The Superintendent shall not issue any license to a person who has within one year previous to his application violated or failed to observe the conditions or specifications of any such license without special authority of the City Council. 
(Prior code § 17-12)  
12.12.050 - Notices of defects in public ways. 
The Superintendent shall keep a record of the notices of defects sent to him, with the name of any person giving the notice, and the time when given, and he shall without delay cause the locality of the alleged defect to be examined, and, if the defect is of such a character as to endanger the safety of public travel, shall do whatever may be necessary to prevent the public from injury by the defect, and cause it to be immediately repaired; and every person in the employ of the City shall send to the Superintendent notice of every defect of which he has any knowledge. 
(Prior code § 17-13)  
12.12.060 - Unnecessary obstruction prevention—Proper repair required. 
Whenever any street is opened, occupied, obstructed or encumbered by any department of the City, or any person, the Superintendent of Streets shall prevent any unnecessary obstruction while the work is in progress, and shall see that the street is repaired and put in good order when the work is completed. If the street is not repaired to his satisfaction he shall forthwith put it in good order, and shall render a bill for the expense of such repair to the department, or person whose duty it was to repair the street. All openings made in the street for any purpose whatever shall be filled back in layers six inches in depth, and each layer shall be properly rammedHH and, when necessary shall be wet down to prevent settling of the filling. 
(Prior code § 17-14)  
12.12.070 - Responsibility for damages. 
Whenever any person lawfully makes any opening or causes any obstruction in any street, he shall be held responsible for any damages that may result from such opening or obstruction. 
(Prior code § 17-15)  
12.12.080 - Repaving within one year of excavation. 
A.  Should any portion of the street which has been excavated require repaving or resurfacing within a period of one year from the time it has been disturbed, the Superintendent of Streets, shall, by mail, postage prepaid, notify the person applying for the license under authority of which the disturbance was made, to forthwith make such repairs as, in the opinion of the Superintendent, are necessary; and in case of the failure of the person to make such repairs within twenty-four hours after the receipt of such notice the Superintendent shall then have the right to make the necessary repairs at the expense of the licensee. 
B.  All amounts received by the City Treasurer for work done or materials furnished under the direction of the Superintendent, as authorized above, shall be placed to the credit, and to be used as a part, of the appropriation of the Streets Division. 
(Prior code § 17-16)  
12.12.090 - License—Water and electrical connection approval. 
The Superintendent shall grant a license to a person who presents a license from the Water Department to repair or lay water pipes, and to a person who presents a license from the City Electrician to connect with the lamps or pipes of the City. 
(Prior code § 17-17)  
12.12.100 - License—Removal or delivery of merchandise. 
The Superintendent may grant to competent persons engaged in the business, licenses to occupy and use certain portions of the streets for the purpose of raising and lowering goods and merchandise into and from buildings on conditions the terms of which shall be those stated in Sections 12.12.020 through 12.12.080 of this chapter, so far as the same may apply, and in addition that the person applying for the license shall maintain, during the whole time the work is in progress, good and sufficient barriers across the sidewalk, from the wall of the building to or from which they are so raised, out to the curbstone or edge of the sidewalk, on each side of such goods or merchandise, sufficient to protect travelers from injury or danger; and that he shall not encumber the sidewalk for more than thirty minutes at a time for such work. 
(Prior code § 17-18)  
12.12.110 - Proposed construction or excavation—Notification procedures. 
Whenever the Superintendent of Streets is about to construct a new street, or to break up the surface of any street, he shall, at least two weeks before beginning work, notify the City Engineer, as head of the Sewer Division, City Electrician and all public utilities having locations in such street. If any of these departments or utility companies has any work to be done in the street so designated, it shall consult and arrange with the Superintendent, in order that such work may be done before the surface of such street is again prepared for and open to public travel. After such notice and opportunity have been given, none of the departments or utility companies shall, for the period of six months, break up such street within the area of such previous disturbance, except in case of obvious necessity, to be certified to and approved by the City Manager. 
(Prior code § 17-19)  
12.12.120 - Barriers and lighting. 
Whenever any highway, street or bridge is from any cause unsafe or inconvenient for travelers, the Superintendent of Streets shall forthwith put up a suitable barrier across such highway, street or bridge, and exclude all travelers from passing over the same; or cause the parts thereof, so rendered unsafe and inconvenient, to be enclosed by a sufficient barrier, which shall be kept standing so long as the same remains unsafe and inconvenient; and he shall also place one or more lighted lanterns to such barrier, or in some other proper manner, to be there kept every night, from twilight in the evening, through the night, so long as such barrier is kept standing. 
(Prior code § 17-20)  
12.12.130 - Gates and doors swinging outward prohibited. 
No person shall make, erect or maintain any gate or door in or upon any street in such manner that, when opening it, swings over such street. 
(Prior code § 17-22)  
12.12.140 - Doorsteps, porticos or entrances to basements—Authorization required. 
No person shall make, erect or maintain any doorstep, portico, porch, entrance or passageway to any cellar or basement or any other structure, in or upon any street, without permission in writing, from the Superintendent when authorized by the City Council. No person shall suffer the platform or grate of the entrance or passageway to his cellar or basement in any street, to rise above the even surface of such street; and every such entrance or passageway shall either be kept covered by a suitable and substantial platform or grate, or in case it is kept open, it shall be guarded and protected by a sufficient railing, on both sides thereof, at least two and one-half feet high, and well lighted at night. 
(Prior code § 17-23)  
12.12.150 - Wells, cisterns, drains and cavities—Protective barriers required. 
If any person digs or sinks or causes to be dug or sunk, any well, cistern, drain or other cavity in the ground, near to or adjoining any street, he shall put up and at all times keep up, so long as it is necessary for the purpose, a railing or barrier, on or near the line of such street, sufficient to guard and protect travelers and passengers from falling into such well, cistern, drain or other cavity. 
(Prior code § 17-24)  
12.12.160 - Obstructing crosswalks unlawful. 
No person shall stop his vehicle, or unnecessarily place any other obstruction, on any crosswalks laid in or across any street. 
(Prior code § 17-25)  
12.12.170 - Encroaching building removal. 
Whenever the City Manager shall be notified by the City Engineer that any building or structure has been placed within the lines of a public street, or so that it may cause injury or inconvenience to a public street, he shall forthwith issue an order to the party offending, directing that the building or structure be removed within a certain specified time, and in case of noncompliance the City Manager shall direct that the encumbrance be removed at the expense of the delinquent. 
(Prior code § 17-26)  
12.12.180 - Apertures or receptacles in streets. 
No person shall make or cause to be made any aperture in or under any street or sidewalk, for the purpose of constructing a receptacle for any article, or for light and air, or for any other purpose, without a license from the Superintendent of Streets, authorized by the City Council; and no person shall leave such aperture open or unfastened, except while actually in use. No aperture in a sidewalk shall be made or maintained more than eighteen inches in diameter, nor unless the cover therefor is made of iron with a rough upper surface and with three or more iron rods or legs at least two feet in length fitting closely to the underside of the cover, and so constructed that while the cover can be lifted perpendicularly, it cannot be tipped or easily removed from the opening. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; prior code § 17-29)  
12.12.190 - Temporary sidewalk erection and maintenance. 
A.  Any person licensed under the provisions of Sections 12.04.020 and 12.16.140 of this title and Sections 12.12.010 through 12.12.050 of this chapter, whenever so ordered by the City Manager or the Superintendent of Streets, shall erect and maintain in good condition, day and night a temporary sidewalk abutting upon that part of the street which he is licensed to use and obstruct, constructed in accordance with specifications approved by the Commissioner of Public Works. 
B.  When a building is used or occupied by more than one tenant, the owner or person having care of the building shall cause the ice to be removed from the sidewalk, in the manner provided for in Section 12.16.110 of this title, and in default thereof shall be liable to the same penalties as are therein provided. 
(Prior code § 17-31)  
12.12.200 - Awnings, canopies and clothes lines—Authorization required. 
No canopy or awning shall hereafter be erected or maintained within the limits of any street, without the written permission of the Superintendent of Streets authorized by the City Council, except a canopy or awning, constructed of cloth or canvas attached to an iron frame, securely fastened and supported from above and with no part less than nine feet above the level of the sidewalk over which it is placed. No clothes dryer or clothes lines, and no clothes or garment shall be hereafter placed or hung over a sidewalk or within the limits of any street without the written permission of the Commissioner of Public Works. 
(Prior code § 17-32)  
12.12.220 - Claims for damages—Liability limitations. 
Every owner of any estate who maintains any cellar, vault, coal hole or other excavation under the part of the street adjacent to or which is a part of, his estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part to hold the City harmless from any claim for damages to himself or the occupants of the estate resulting from gas, sewage or water leaking into such excavation, and every owner who maintains a post, pole or other structure in or over a street, or a wire, pipe, conduit or other structure under a street, shall do so only on the condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part to keep the same and the covers thereof in good repair and condition, at all times during his ownership, and to indemnify and save harmless the City against any and all damages, costs, expenses or compensation which it may sustain, or be required to pay by reason of such excavation or structure being over, under or in the street, or being out of repair during his ownership, or by reason of any cover of the same being out of repair or unfastened during his ownership. 
(Prior code § 17-33)  
12.12.230 - Extinguishing lights— Violation—Penalty. 
Whoever maliciously or wantonly, and without legal cause, extinguishes or diminishes a light fixed in accordance with the provisions of Sections 12.12.020 through 12.12.080 of this chapter, shall be liable to a penalty of not exceeding fifty dollars. 
(Prior code § 17-21)  
Chapter 12.16 - STREET AND SIDEWALK USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.16.010 - Acceptance of public ways— Review and report required. 
In order to protect the citizens and their real estate values and to encourage the best possible land development, no proposed public way shall be accepted by the City Council until the proposal has been referred to the City Engineer, Electrical, Planning, Public Works, Traffic and Water Departments for a review and report concerning the design, engineering, construction and utility aspects of the proposed road. If no such report shall have been filed with the Council after thirty days from the date of referral, the Council may accept the proposed road. 
(Prior code § 17-42)  
12.16.020 - Person obstructing passage—Loitering. 
No person shall stand upon any sidewalk or street so as to interrupt, obstruct or prevent the free passage over the same by the public, or to stand or loiter on the sidewalk in front of or at the side of any building to the annoyance or disturbance of any person, and who fails or refuses to move on when directed to do so by a police officer. 
(Prior code § 17-41)  
12.16.030 - Trees—Climbing—Signposting—Fastening horses. 
No person shall climb a tree in any street or fasten or tie a horse or other animal, bicycle, moped, scooter, motorcycle, or any other form of conveyance to, or post a bill upon, any such tree, or allow any horse or other animal owned by him, or under his control to stand so near any such tree, that such tree may be gnawed or otherwise injured by such horse or other animal. 
( Ord. 1383 , 5/23/2016; prior code § 17-35)  
12.16.040 - Sidewalks—Riding or driving. 
No person shall drive, ride, wheel or draw any vehicle across a sidewalk except on a driveway designed for the purpose of passage of vehicles, and no person shall use for access of any vehicle to a sidewalk any log, skid block, bricks or other articles placed in the gutter or street; provided that this section shall not apply to children's carriages or sleds containing children and drawn by hands. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989: prior code § 17-39)  
12.16.050 - Sidewalks—Responsibility for repairs. 
All sidewalks shall be kept in repair at the expense of the City; provided, however, that if such repairs are rendered necessary by any act of the owner or occupant of the adjoining land or by any defect in the buildings thereon or by any other cause under the control of such owner or occupant, the repairs shall be made by such owner or occupant; and if he fails to do so the repairs shall be made by the City, at his expense. 
(Prior code § 17-27)  
12.16.060 - Plank sidewalks—License required. 
A.  No person shall place upon any sidewalk any board or plank walk without first obtaining a written license from the Superintendent authorized by the City Council; and walks hereafter laid under authority of such license shall be constructed in accordance with the specification to be approved by the Superintendent. Such walks shall be removed whenever in the judgment of the City Council, public safety and convenience require such removal. 
B.  Plank walks, authorized as provided in subsection A of this section, shall be laid and kept in proper condition by the respective owners thereof, and the same shall be taken up by such owners whenever the Superintendent of Streets shall so direct. 
(Prior code § 17-28)  
12.16.070 - Sidewalks—Signposting—Water runoff. 
No person shall insert a sign in a sidewalk without the permission of the Superintendent of Streets, authorized by the City Council; and no person shall permit a leader or conductor from the roof of a building owned by him to be so placed or maintained as to direct a volume of water upon or across the surface of the sidewalk. 
(Prior code § 17-30)  
12.16.080 - Carrying showboards, placards and signs. 
No person shall, without authority from the Superintendent of Streets, place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, on a sidewalk, a showboard, placard or sign for the purpose of there displaying or attracting attention to the same. 
(Prior code § 17-38)  
12.16.090 - Free commercial distribution of tobacco products in public places—Penalty. 
A.  In order to avoid obstruction and congestion of public ways and places, to control and reduce litter, and to protect pedestrians from annoyance and invasion of privacy, no person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products for commercial purposes, shall in the course of such business, distribute any cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products free to any person on any public street or sidewalk, or in any public park or playground, or any other public ground, or in any public building. 
B.  Any person who violates this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty nor more than fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 981, 1982: prior code § 17-41A)  
12.16.100 - Sidewalks—Obstruction—Fruit peelings. 
A.  No person shall place, or cause to be placed, upon any sidewalk, any article whatsoever, so as to obstruct a free passage for travelers for more than fifteen minutes. 
B.  No person shall wilfully and maliciously tip over and spill out the contents of any box or barrel containing ashes or other house dirt set upon the sidewalk. No person shall throw or place upon any sidewalk or crosswalk any banana skin, orange peel or other slippery substance. 
(Prior code § 17-40)  
12.16.110 - Sidewalks—Snow and ice removal. 
A.  Removal of Snow from Sidewalks. The owner or occupant of private property bordering on a street where there is a sidewalk or footway shall, within twelve hours after snow ceases to fall in the daytime and before one p.m. after a fall of snow during the night, cause all snow that may be on such sidewalk or footway to be removed therefrom. In the event of an unusually heavy snowfall, the time limit shall be extended at the discretion of the Commissioner of Public Works. The provisions of this section shall apply to snow which falls from buildings as well as to that which falls from the clouds. 
B.  Removal of Ice from Sidewalks. The owner or occupant of private property bordering on a street where there is a sidewalk or footway any portion of which is encumbered by ice shall within six hours after the sidewalk or footway becomes encumbered with ice cause such sidewalk or footway to be made safe and convenient by removing the ice therefrom, or by keeping the same covered with sand or some other suitable substance. 
(Prior code § 17-79)  
12.16.130 - Cleaning carpets in streets. 
No person shall shake or otherwise clean a carpet in any street. 
(Prior code § 17-37)  
12.16.140 - Alteration or repair—Authority. 
The provisions of this chapter and Chapters 2.54, 12.04 and 12.12 of this code shall not be construed as limiting in any manner the legal rights and duties of the Superintendent of Streets to order such alterations and repairs in streets as he may deem that the safety and convenience of the inhabitants require. 
(Prior code § 17-43)  
12.16.150 - Alteration or repair— Improvement assessments. 
Whenever the City Council determines that land or buildings shall be taken for street widening or street laying out purposes betterments shall be assessed according to law for the improvement of any property that the City Council may determine is in the benefited area. 
(Prior code § 17-8)  
12.16.160 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates Section 12.16.110 (Sidewalks—Snow and ice removal) shall be subject to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Noncriminal Disposition. Whoever violates Section 12.16.110 (Sidewalks—Snow and ice removal) may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G.L. c. 40, s. 21D. For purposes of this section, the Commissioner of Public Works shall be the enforcing officer, except that the Commissioner may delegate his enforcing authority to designated Public Works Enforcement Officers. The penalty for each violation will be fifty dollars, thereby increasing the non-criminal disposition fine for failure of an abutter to remove snow and ice from sidewalks in front of their property within the timeframes provided in the ordinance. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 1084 § 5, 1989) 
(1317, Amended, 10/06/2008; Ord. 1289, Amended, 09/12/2005)  
12.16.170 - Street performers. 
A.  Introduction. The City Council of the City of Cambridge (the "City") finds that the existence in the City of street performers provides a public amenity that enhances the character of the City and seeks to encourage such performances to the extent that they do not interfere with the reasonable expectations of residents to the enjoyment of peace and quiet in their homes, the ability of businesses to conduct their businesses uninterrupted, or for the free flow of traffic and movement on public ways, public sidewalks, and other public pedestrian areas (collectively hereinafter referred to as "Public Ways"). This Section seeks to balance the interests of the performers with those of the residents and businesses of the City. 
B.  Enforcement. The City Council designates the Cambridge Arts Council (the "Arts Council") to be the department of the City primarily charged with the responsibility of supervising and enforcing the provisions of this Section. 
C.  Definitions. 
1.  "Perform" includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting; singing; playing musical instruments; pantomime; juggling; magic; dancing; reading; reciting; puppetry; and sidewalk art (working with non-permanent, water-soluble media, such as chalk, pastels, or watercolors, directly on the pavement). 
"Perform" shall not include the production of items for sale, such as jewelry making or craft production, but may include the creation of visual artworks that are demonstrated live in a large-scale performative manner. 
2.  "Performer" means a person who has obtained a Permit pursuant to this Section. 
3.  A "Performing Group" means a group of four or more Performers who perform together, are identified as such in their permit application, and noted as such on their Permits. All Performers acquiring a Permit for a group performance must perform as a group; group Permits do not authorize individual performance. 
4.  "Public Areas" means Public Ways, parks, plazas, and playgrounds. 
D.  Prohibition. 
1.  No person may perform in a Public Area without a Permit issued by the Arts Council pursuant to Subsection E. of this Section. 
2.  In accordance with the Cambridge Fire Department's (the "Fire Department's") rules promulgated by the Cambridge Fire Chief (the "Fire Chief") pursuant to his authority under G. L. c. 148, § 28 and the Code of Massachusetts Regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the use of fire in a public assembly, including, but not limited to, street performing, is not permitted in the City. 
E.  Permit. 
1.  A Permit shall be issued by the Arts Council to each applicant in exchange for a completed application at no fee. 
Each applicant for a Permit must present valid identification at the time of submitting the application for a Permit. 
2.  A completed application for a Permit shall contain the applicant's name, residential address, contact information, including e-mail address and telephone number, group name, if applicable, instrumentation, and type of performance, and shall be signed by the applicant. 
3.  A Permit shall contain the Performer's name; group name, if applicable; Permit number; date issued; year in which the Permit is valid; and a brief description of the type of performance permitted. A Permit shall be valid from the date on which it is issued through the end of that calendar year. 
4.  A Permit shall not be transferable. Each member of a Performing Group who performs together shall be required to obtain an individual Permit in person. 
5.  Upon issuing a Permit, the Arts Council shall give the Performer a copy of this Section. 
6.  If a Performer loses the Performer's Permit, a replacement Permit may be obtained at no fee. 
F.  Display of Permit. 
1.  A Performer shall clearly display the Performer's Permit while performing and shall allow inspection of the Permit by any Cambridge Police Officer ("Police Officer") or staff person of the Arts Council upon request. Refusal to allow inspection of a Permit upon request by a Police Officer or staff person of the Arts Council, or refusal to display a Permit, may result in the revocation of the Permit. 
G.  Permitted Performances. 
1.  Performances may take place in the following locations: 
a.  In Public Areas when not interfering with use of a park permit, special events permit, or regular use of playgrounds, except, within one hundred (100) feet of an elementary and/or secondary school, library, church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other house of worship while in session, or a hospital at any time; and any areas excluded by the City Council, the Commissioner of the Cambridge Public Works Department (the "Commissioner of Public Works"), the Police Commissioner of the Cambridge Police Department (the "Police Commissioner"), or the Fire Chief, pursuant to Subsection H of this Section; 
b.  On private property, with the written permission of the owner or other person in control of such property; 
c.  In Public Areas where an authorized street fair or public festival is being conducted, but only with the express permission of the sponsor or producer of such fair or festival. 
2.  Performances may take place at the following times: 
Monday through Thursday, between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.; Friday, between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight; 
Saturday, between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight; Sunday, between 12 noon and 11:00 p.m. 
3.  Sound and Noise Regulations: 
a.  No Performer or Performing Group may generate noise exceeding a median sound level of eighty decibels (80 db(A)) measured at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the Performer or Performing Group. A Performer or Performing Group may use sound amplification as long as eighty decibels (80 db(A)) measured at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the Performer or Performing Group is not exceeded. Upon receipt of a complaint, a designated staff person from the Arts Council shall, with the permission of the complainant, measure the sound level inside the structure wherein the occupant has complained of noise from a street performance. If the sound level inside the structure wherein the occupant has complained of noise from a street performance exceeds a median sound level of fifty decibels (50 db(A)), and exceeds the background noise by at least ten decibels (10 db(A)), the Performer or Performing Group causing the excessive sound level shall either turn down the music or move to a distance from the structure so as to reduce the sound level to a level within these limitations. Background Noise will be measured using the L90 statistical value. 
b.  It shall be prohibited to use prerecorded music as part of a performance, except as backup accompaniment to a live performance. All prerecorded music shall be turned off when the Performer or Performing Group is not performing. The volume of prerecorded music shall not exceed fifty (50) decibels db(A) on its own or eighty (80) decibels db(A) with music/audio accompaniment. 
c.  Drums shall be inaudible at a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
4.  A Performer or Performing Group may not create an undue interference with the passage of the public through a Public Area. If a Performer or Performing Group attracts a crowd sufficient to obstruct a Public Area as defined in this Section, the Performer or Performing Group shall encourage the crowd to relocate and no longer obstruct the Public Area. A Police Officer may disperse the portion of the crowd that is creating the obstruction. The Police Officer shall not cause the Performer to leave the location unless efforts to move the crowd fail to adequately protect the public safety or order. A Police Officer shall not ask the Performer to leave the location unless all other means of restoring the public safety or order have been exhausted. 
5.  No Performer or Performing Group may perform within fifty (50) feet of another performer or group of performers. 
6.  A Performer or Performing Group may request contributions of money or property at a performance, provided that signs requesting contributions shall not exceed twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches in size. Contributions may be received in any receptacle, such as an open musical instrument case, box or hat. Performers may offer for sale items of their own artistic works if said items directly relate to the performance for which they are permitted to perform. 
7.  On sidewalks, displays must not obstruct accessibility ramps, doorways, or windows (i.e., Performers shall not tape or post signs or posters on windows or lean displays against windows so as to obstruct a clear view through the window), and must not exceed more than twenty percent (20%) of the width of the sidewalk from the property line of the premises in front of which the display is installed. Displays and/or Performer setups must be located at least ten (10) feet away from business doorways. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Performer may set up a display on the public sidewalk in front of a doorway to a business if the business is not open, assuming said display meets all other requirements of this Section. A Performer or Performing Group shall be required at all times to maintain four and one-half (4½) feet of sidewalk between their setup and the edge of the sidewalk in order to allow for accessibility for persons with disabilities. 
8.  In Public Areas other than sidewalks, no such display shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet, and it shall be prohibited to place a carpet, rug, blanket, tent or other such covering over grass in a Public Area. No tents may be erected in Public Areas without a tent permit from the Fire Department. Any tent permit received from the Fire Department must be current and on display at all times while any such tent is erected. Tables and chairs may be used as long as they do not exceed the maximum footprint outlined in this Section. 
9.  Unless otherwise provided in rules and regulations promulgated by the Arts Council pursuant to Subsection J. of this Section, performance locations/spaces are first come, first served, and cannot be reserved with equipment, apparatus, or by persons not permitted to perform. Live performance must take place at all times while a Performer, or Performing Group, is set up. Fifteen (15) minute breaks between sets are allowed once per hour. 
10.  It shall be prohibited to use public furniture, whether movable or immovable, or Public Art structures as part of a performance setup or for the storage of equipment, displays, supplies, or materials used in any performance. 
H.  Exclusion of Public Areas. 
1.  A specific Public Area may be excluded from performances in accordance with a decision of the City Council after a public hearing, notice of which shall be advertised once in a local newspaper and on the Arts Council's website, no less than fourteen (14) days prior to said hearing. In addition, a written notice shall be sent to Community Arts Advocates, Inc., or its successor(s), not less than ten (10) days prior to said hearing. 
a.  Based upon evidence presented to the City Council during its deliberations on the adoption of this Section, the City Council designated Brattle Street on both sides from the northerly side of Church Street to the northerly lot line of 76 Brattle Street as an excluded area, thereby prohibiting performances in that area. 
2.  In the case of an emergency, the Police Commissioner or the Fire Chief may prohibit a Performer or Performing Group from performing in a particular location. In the case of such an emergency, any holder of a Permit who disputes the need for said emergency performance prohibition may appeal to the City Council for review. 
3.  In the case of an emergency, the Commissioner of Public Works may prohibit a Performer or Performing Group from performing in a particular park or playground. In the case of such an emergency, any holder of a Permit who disputes the need for said emergency performance prohibition may appeal to the City Council for review. 
I.  Penalties. 
1.  Non-criminal Disposition. Whoever violates any provision of this Section may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in G. L. c. 40, § 21D. For purposes of this Section, the following officials shall be enforcing persons: Police Officers and/or Arts Council staff. The penalty for each violation will be twenty-five dollars ($25). 
2.  Suspension of Permit. The Arts Council and/or the Cambridge Police Department may suspend a Permit for no more than thirty (30) days if: 
a.  a Performer is found to have knowingly provided false information in the application; or 
b.  a Performer has received three (3) noncriminal dispositions within one (1) calendar year. 
3.  Revocation of Permit. The Arts Council may revoke a Permit for the remainder of the calendar year if: 
a.  a Performer has received five (5) non-criminal dispositions during that calendar year; 
b.  a Performer fails to clearly display the Performer's Permit while performing; or 
c.  a Performer fails to allow inspection of the Performer's Permit by any Police Officer or any Arts Council staff upon request. 
4.  Before suspending or revoking a Permit, the Arts Council must hold a public hearing, after ten (10) days' written notice to the Performer setting forth the facts constituting the basis for the proposed suspension or revocation. 
5.  A Performer may not receive a Permit unless all tickets issued pursuant to this Section from the previous calendar year(s) have been paid in full. 
J.  Regulations. The Arts Council shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Section, with the approval of the City Manager, as may be appropriate or necessary for the implementation of this Section. 
K.  Exclusivity. The provisions of this Section take precedence over any other City regulations or ordinances applicable to street performances. To the extent other City regulations or ordinances are applicable and are inconsistent with this Section, this Section shall govern. Sound levels generated by street performances shall be governed by this Section and not by the Cambridge Noise Ordinance. 
L.  Peace and Quiet. A performance in accordance with this Section shall be presumed not to constitute a disturbance of the peace or quiet. 
M.  Severability. The provisions of this Section are severable, and if any part of this Section should be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder of this Section and the remainder of this Section shall stay in full force and effect. 
N.  Effective Date. The provisions of this Ordinance, as amended, shall be effective commencing on January 1, 2019. 
(Ord. 1403, 12/10/2018; Ord. No. 1176, Revised, 042296; Ord. No. 1176, Revised, 04/22/96; Ord. No. 1176, Revised, 04/22/96)  
Chapter 12.18 - STANDARDIZING THE PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF NEWSRACKS 
Sections: 
 
12.18.010 - Definitions. 
When used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
a.  "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the Public Works Department of the City of Cambridge or such person as said Commissioner may from time to time designate. 
b.  "Newsrack" shall mean any type of self-service device for the vending or free distribution of newspapers or periodicals. 
c.  "Certificate of Compliance" shall mean the Certificate of Compliance issued by the Commissioner to the Certificate Holder in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
d.  "Certificate Holder" shall mean the holder of a Certificate of Compliance issued by the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. A Certificate Holder is responsible for the installation and maintenance of newsracks encompassed by any Certificate of Compliance issued pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance and for compliance with all provisions contained herein. 
e.  "Operator" shall mean any natural person or other legal entity including, but not limited to, corporations, partnerships, joint ventures and the like who either own, operate or are otherwise in control of a newsrack. 
f.  "Public way" shall mean any public highway, private way laid out under authority of statute, way dedicated to public use, or way under the control of park commissioners or other body having like power.  
12.18.020 - Certificate of Compliance 
a.  Requirement. No person shall place, affix, erect, constitute or maintain a newsrack in or on any part of a public way without first obtaining a Certificate of Compliance from the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
b.  The Certificate of Compliance must be renewed annually by application to the Commissioner. 
c.  Issuing Authority. The Commissioner shall be the issuing authority and coordinator of the application process and administration of this Ordinance. 
d.  Approving Authority. The approving authority shall be the Commissioner. The Commissioner or his/her designee shall review and approve for compliance with Section 12.18.020, entitled Certificate of Compliance, Section 12.18.040, entitled Standards, and Section 12.18.070, entitled Installation, Maintenance and Delivery Time. 
e.  Application Process. Applicants must complete a written application on a form provided by the Commissioner. 
f.  Application. The application shall describe in sufficient detail, the number, location and type of newsracks for which the Certificate of Compliance is sought and shall contain the following information: 
1.  the name, address and telephone number of the applicant who is the owner/operator or other person who is the principal responsible person in charge of the newsrack (s); and 
2.  the name, address and telephone number of a natural person (if different from the applicant) whom the City may notify and/or contact at any time concerning the applicant's newsracks. This person would be responsible for receiving complaints and notices of violations when a Certificate of Compliance is issued and for providing information relating to the application during the application process; and 
3.  the number of newsracks and a written description specifying the proposed approximate location of each; and 
4.  a certificate of insurance naming the City of Cambridge as an additional insured in an amount sufficient to indemnify the City and hold it harmless from any and all claims or judgements for personal and bodily injury, including death, or property damage and from costs and expenses to which the City may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur by reason of the design, placement, installation, operation or maintenance of any of the applicant's newsracks. Reasonable evidence of self-insurance coverage may be substituted by the applicant for the certificate of insurance. Insurance under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the applicant's newsrack in City of Cambridge public ways and any termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this Ordinance, subject to appropriate remedy under Section 8 of this Ordinance; and 
5.  a certification from the applicant stating that the proposed location for all of the newsracks listed in the application are in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
g.  Issuance of a Certificate of Compliance. Upon a finding by the Commissioner that the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Compliance for installation by the applicant. The Commissioner shall issue a partial Certificate of Compliance upon a finding that some of the proposed newsrack locations are in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Issuance of a Certificate of Compliance or a partial certificate of compliance shall designate the applicant to be the Certificate Holder. The Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Compliance within ten days of the Commissioner's receipt of the completed application. 
Proposed locations shall be approved on a first come, first serve basis by the Commissioner. No preference shall be given to applicants who might have had newsracks in a particular location prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. No applicant shall be approved for more than one newsrack at any particular location. 
h.  Denial of Certificate of Compliance. If an application for a newsrack location is denied, the Commissioner shall notify the applicant within ten days of the Commissioner's receipt of the completed application. The Commissioner shall state the specific reasons for denial. The applicant may reapply for a substitute alternative location without having to pay an additional application fee. An applicant who has been denied a Certificate of Compliance pursuant to this Ordinance may appeal within thirty (30) days of such denial by requesting in writing to the Commissioner an appearance before the Commissioner to review said denial. The appeal shall be heard within twenty (20) days of receipt of the appeal. The decision on the appeal shall be sent to the applicant within five (5) days after the hearing. Any such appeal shall be subject to the Massachusetts Administrative procedures Act, G.L. c. 30A. 
i.  The Commissioner reserves the right to order by written notice to the Certificate Holder that newsracks be removed from an approved location, either temporarily or permanently, in the interests of public safety. 
(Ord. 1291, Added, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.030 - Fees. 
a.  There shall be a Certificate of Compliance fee in the amount of two hundred ($200.00) dollars paid to the City. This fee shall be due upon initial application and upon each annual renewal. 
b.  Additional Certificate of Compliance. If at any time after the Commissioner has issued a Certificate of Compliance a Certificate Holder proposes to install additional newsracks, then the provisions of Section 12.18.020 are to be repeated. Additional Certificate of Compliance fees shall be in accordance with Section (a), except that the Certificate of Compliance fee is waived if previously paid. 
c.  In addition to the Certificate of Compliance fee, an annual fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per newsrack authorized shall be paid to the City to offset the City's cost of monitoring compliance with this Ordinance. 
d.  Where the Commissioner has required newsracks to be set in corrals, or at hitching posts pursuant to Section 12.18.040 (b) below, additional fees shall be imposed by the Commissioner on Certificate Holders to offset the City's costs for each such corral or hitching post used by such Certificate Holder. 
e.  Upon a showing of significant financial hardship, whereby the payment of the full Certificate of Compliance fee will impair the ability of the publisher to distribute a publication through newsracks to members of the public, the Commissioner may reduce the fee due upon initial application or upon an annual renewal by an amount s/he determines, in her or his sole discretion, as appropriate. 
(Ord. 1291, Amended, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.040 - Standards 
a.  Placement. Subject to the prohibitions contained in this section newsracks shall be placed parallel to and not less than eighteen (18?) inches nor more than twenty-four (24?) inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks so placed shall face the sidewalk, not the street. Newsracks placed near the wall of a building or other structure must be placed parallel to and not more than six (6?) inches away from the wall. 
No newsrack (s) shall be affixed, erected, installed, placed, used or maintained: 
1.  at any location in excess of eight (8) feet in width (plus the width of a newsrack) whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than eight (8) feet in width; or, if the sidewalk location is less than eight (8) feet in width (plus the width of a newsrack), then the clear space for the passage of pedestrians shall not be reduced to less than five (5) feet in width; however, a width of four (4) to five (5) feet may be approved by the Commissioner if requested, only after the Commissioner consults with the Pedestrian Committee and the Disabilities Commission as to whether the particular location at issue necessitates the 4-5 foot width, and whether the pedestrian passage there could safely and reasonably be reduced to a width of 4-5 feet; and 
2.  within five (5) feet of any marked, or unmarked crosswalk or handicapped ramp; and 
3.  within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire lane, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility, mail box, telephone booth or stand; and 
4.  within five (5) feet of any part of a curb return of a curb ramp or driveway, or in the case of a curb ramp or driveway without a curb return, within five (5) feet of the point where the curb edgestone or edging begins a change in grade toward the driveway or ramp on each side thereof, or in the case of a termination of the curb, edgestone or edging without a change in grade or a turn, within five (5) feet of the point of the same terminates on each side of the ramp or driveway; and 
5.  within five (5) feet of any traffic control signal or traffic sign; and 
6.  within five (5) feet of a bicycle rack; and 
7.  within five (5) feet ahead or fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any designated bus stop, taxi stand, valet parking area, loading zone or fire lane, or any disabled parking space, unless such newsrack is placed parallel against a wall that is within four feet (4') of a designated bus stop, taxi stand, valet parking area, loading zone or fire lane and the newsrack so placed does not project into or otherwise interfere with the unobstructed flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
8.  which in any way protrudes onto a street; 
9.  on any sidewalk immediately abutting a public school; or 
10.  within three (3) feet of any structure's window or within three (3) feet of any pre-existing sign. 
The Commissioner may require that newsracks at locations in which more than three (3) are adjacent shall be set within an open-ended corral installed by the City; and the Commissioner may require that newsracks at a particular location be chained to each other and/or to a permanent hitching post installed by the City. The Commissioner may choose the locations for corrals and hitching posts based on the history of misaligned or knocked over newsracks at the location, the high volume of pedestrian traffic at the location, or the relatively high concentration of newsracks at the location. However, nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to limit the locations at which corrals and hitching posts may be required. 
(Ord. 1291, Amended, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.050 - Attachment to Property. 
a.  Attachment to Trees and Other Objects Prohibited. Except to the extent permitted by regulations promulgated by the Commissioner, no operator shall place or cause to be placed and no operator shall suffer to remain any newsrack chained or otherwise attached to any tree, street light post, traffic signal or sign. 
b.  Attachment to Other Newsracks. Newsracks, when placed side by side, may be chained or otherwise attached to one another, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than eight (8) feet along a curb. Not more than eight (8) newsracks shall be located within a two hundred (200) foot stretch of sidewalk, unless the Commissioner deems the particular sidewalk at issue to be large enough to safely and aesthetically accommodate a larger number. 
(Ord. 1291, Amended, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.060 - Advertising Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any operator to use a Newsrack for advertising or publicity purposes other than to display the publication's name and/or company logo. 
(Ord. 1291, Amended, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.070 - Installation, Maintenance, and Delivery Time. 
Newsracks shall be of a sturdy material and installed or otherwise placed and maintained by the Certificate Holder in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Each newsrack shall prominently display the name, address and phone number of a person or entity responsible for that newsrack. 
b.  Each newsrack shall be: 
l.  installed or placed on the pavement in an upright, sufficiently weighted and secure position; 
2.  of a type that is completely enclosed, with a self-closing door that is either self-latching or otherwise requires manual or mechanical release at each use; and 
3.  maintained in a state of good repair and in a neat and clean condition; and 
4.  maintained in a condition that is free of accumulations of outdated printed materials, trash, rubbish, or debris; and 
5.  handicapped accessible, as defined by the state Architectural Access Board at 521 C.M.R. 
6.  no part of any newsrack may exceed five (5) feet in height, thirty (30) inches in width, and twenty-four (24) inches in depth. 
c.  Each newsrack shall be regularly serviced so that: 
1.  it is kept reasonably free of graffiti; and 
2.  it is kept reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof; and 
3.  it is kept reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof; and 
4.  the clear glass or plastic parts thereof, if any, through which the printed material is being dispensed are not broken and are kept reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and 
5.  the structural parts of the newsrack are not broken or unduly misshapen. 
d.  Anyone disturbed by noise from the delivery of papers to any newsrack may complain to the Commissioner. The Commissioner shall forthwith notify the Certificate Holder of the complaint. The Certificate Holder shall contact the complainant and attempt to resolve the complaint. If the complaint is not resolved to the complainant's satisfaction within ten (10) days, the complainant may request a meeting before the Commissioner, or his/her designee, and the Certificate Holder. After such meeting, the Commissioner shall have authority to impose a reasonable resolution to the complaint, including ordering the relocation of the newsrack/s causing the noise problem. 
(Ord. 1291, Amended, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.080 - Enforcement Procedures. 
a.  Non-Conforming Newsracks. Any newsrack found not to be in compliance with this Ordinance shall be subject to the enforcement provisions contained herein. 
b.  Abandonment. In the event that any newsrack installed pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance does not contain the printed material being dispensed therein for a period of seventy-two (72) hours after the release of the current issue, the Commissioner may deem the newsrack abandoned and take appropriate action under this Ordinance. A newsrack shall otherwise be deemed abandoned if no printed material is found in the newsrack for a period of more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. In the event that a Certificate Holder voluntarily abandons a newsrack location, the Certificate Holder shall so notify the Commissioner, completely remove the newsrack and restore the public way to a safe condition. 
c.  Enforcement. 
1.  Enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be carried out by the Commissioner. Upon a determination that a violation of any provision of this Ordinance exists the Commissioner shall notify the Certificate Holder of the violation in writing by first class mail. The notice shall included: 
a.  the location of the newsrack; and 
b.  the date of the incident or other cause giving rise to the violation; and 
c.  a brief and concise statement of the facts causing the violation. 
2.  The notice shall inform the Certificate Holder that at the expiration of ten (10) days from the receipt of the violation notice, the newsrack will be removed by the Commissioner, unless the violation is corrected. 
3.  Upon removal of a newsrack, the Commissioner shall send, by first-class mail, written notice of such removal to the Certificate Holder. 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs 1(a) - 1(c) of this section, the Commissioner may order the immediate removal of any newsrack (s) that the Commissioner determines presents an imminent threat or peril to public safety, provided that the Certificate Holder, shall be notified of such removal as soon as practicable thereafter, and further provided that any newsrack so removed shall be stored a period of thirty (30) days in order to allow the Certificate Holder to retrieve the newsrack. If the Commissioner removes a newsrack under this section (4) which does not have a Certificate of Compliance, the Commissioner shall dispose of the newsrack at the end of the thirty (30) day period.  
12.18.090 - Fees For Removal and Storage. 
a.  A newsrack removed pursuant to this Ordinance may be retrieved by the Certificate Holder at any time within thirty (30) days of its removal upon payment of a removal fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars plus a storage fee of ten ($10.00) dollars per day, to a maximum combined removal and storage fee of two hundred ($200.00) dollars per rack. 
b.  After thirty (30) days, any newsracks removed by the Commissioner pursuant to Section 12.18.080 of this Ordinance shall be deemed "abandoned property" and become the property of the City of Cambridge. 
c.  Failure of a Certificate Holder to retrieve a newsrack within the specified thirty (30) day period shall not operate to dismiss any fees owned to the City for removal and storage of such newsrack. Unpaid fees accrued pursuant to this Section 12.18.090 shall be considered a debt payable to the City. 
(Ord. 1291, Amended, 11/07/2005)  
12.18.100 - Regulations. 
The Commissioner may, with the approval of the City Manager, promulgate such rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as shall carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.  
12.18.110 - Effect on Other Laws. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the adoption of regulations affecting newsracks by other government bodies, such as historic district commissions, to the extend such bodies are authorized to adopt such regulations.  
12.18.120 - Severability 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable and if any section, part, or portion hereof shall be held invalid for any reason by any court, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any remaining section, part or portion thereof.  
12.18.130 - Effective Date. 
This Ordinance shall take effective one hundred fifty (150) days from the date of approval. 
(1214, Added, 02/22/1999)  
Chapter 12.20 - COMMONS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Playgrounds—Rules and regulations. 
The City Manager, after consulting respresentatives of the surrounding neighborhood and with the approval of the City Council in each instance, may adopt and amend reasonable rules governing activities in public playgrounds not exceeding fifteen thousand square feet in area. Such rules may prescribe the hours during which the playground shall be open. A sign or signs containing the rules shall be posted at the playground. 
(Ord. 1021 (part), 1985: prior code § 14-24)  
12.20.020 - Playgrounds—Radio playing. 
No person shall use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in any park or playground at any time to the disturbance of the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the City. 
(Ord. 1021 (part), 1985: prior code § 14-25)  
12.20.030 - Sunday sports or games. 
A.  Permits for Sunday sports or games on public parks or playgrounds shall be issued by the Recreation Commission or by its authorized agents. 
B.  Permits for such Sunday sports and games shall be conducted between the hours specified on the permits and shall be started sufficiently early to allow for their ending within the specified time. 
C.  At least one police officer shall be assigned to duty on each Sunday when a permit for any game or sport is issued by the Receation Commission for any park or playground. 
D.  Permits for use of Russell Field for sports or games on Sundays shall be issued by the Commission at its discretion. When admission is charged or when any collection is made, the fee for the use of the field for such Sunday games or sports shall be determined by the Commission, but shall be not less than twenty-five dollars, payable at the office of the Recreation Commission before the permit is issued. When no admission is charged or no collection is taken, there shall be no charge for the permit. Police protection satisfactory to the Commission or its authorized agent shall be furnished by the permit or organization to whom the permit is issued. 
E.  An additional fee of not less than fifty dollars shall be charged when any permit shall be granted for hurling, soccer or Gaelic football games, which amount shall be reserved for appropriations for reconditioning or repairs which may be necessary to the field. 
(Prior code § 14-9)  
12.20.050 - Selling items or holding shows prohibited. 
No person shall expose for sale or sell any goods, wares or merchandise, or erect or maintain a booth, stand, tent or apparatus of any kind for purposes of amusement or show on any grounds under the control of the Commissioner of Public Works, except by permission of said Commissioner. 
(Prior code § 14-19)  
12.20.060 - Walking or lying on grass prohibited. 
No person shall walk, stand or lie upon the grass upon any common or other public grounds where such walking, standing or lying has been prohibited, and notice of such prohibition given to the public by legible notices placed on such common or public ground. 
(Prior code § 14-22)  
12.20.070 - Damaging flower beds prohibited. 
No person shall walk, stand, sit or lie down in or upon, or pull a flower or plant out of a flower bed on any common or other public grounds, nor suffer a dog or other animal belonging to him, or in his charge, to stand or walk upon such flower bed. 
(Prior code § 14-21)  
12.20.080 - Athletic sports—Location restrictions. 
No person, except by permission of the Commissioner of Public Works, shall engage in any athletic sports upon any common or other public grounds, except upon such portions thereof as may be set apart for such purposes. 
(Prior code § 14-17)  
12.20.090 - Digging in or dumping on grounds prohibited. 
No person, except by permission of the Commissioner of Public Works and for some public use, shall dig or carry away any sward, gravel, sand, turf or earth from, nor carry or cause to be carried upon any common or other public grounds any carcass, ordure, filth, dirt, stones or any offensive matter whatever, or throw or place thereon any stones, sand, gravel, turf, earth, rubbish or other substance. 
(Prior code § 14-15)  
12.20.100 - Horse riding prohibited—Exceptions. 
No person, except by permission of the Commissioner of Public Works, shall ride, lead or drive a horse in or upon the commons or other public grounds, except that, on the occasion of a military exercise, parade or review, horses necessary for the purposes thereof may be allowed upon any common or other public grounds used for such exercise, parade or review. 
(Prior code § 14-13)  
12.20.120 - Carpet cleaning prohibited. 
No person shall shake or otherwise clean a carpet on any common or other public grounds. 
(Prior code § 14-16)  
12.20.130 - Injuring or breaking public property. 
No person shall pull up, break, cut or deface any of the walks, seats, fences or railing upon or around any common or other public grounds, nor deface any monument or statue on any common, nor interfere with any of the hydrants upon any common or other public ground. 
(Prior code § 14-20)  
12.20.140 - Violation - penalty 
A.  Criminal Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule adopted and posted pursuant to section 12.20.010 shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Non-criminal disposition. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule adopted and posted pursuant to section 12.20.010 may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in General Laws Chapter 40, section 21D. For purposes of this section, the following officials shall be enforcing persons: Police Officers, employees of the Animal Commission, Inspectional Services Inspectors and Parking Control Officers. The penalty for each violation shall be twenty-five dollars. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1188, added, 09/08/1997)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - CEMETERY USE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Perpetual care—Deposits—Disposition of revenues. 
The Superintendent shall determine the amount necessary to preserve and care for any lot in Cambridge Cemetery, and shall also determine what lots may be received under perpetual care. Sums deposited by lot owners for perpetual care shall be paid into the Treasury and invested. The income therefrom shall be applied by the Superintendent for the preservation and care of such lots. The fund so created shall be denominated the "cemetery fund for the perpetual care of lots." 
(Prior code § 17-68)  
13.04.020 - Lots received in trust. 
Proprietors of lots may, upon forms prescribed by the Superintendent of the Cemetery Division, and upon written approval of the City Manager, convey the lot or lots to the City; and the Superintendent may, with the written approval of the City Manager, accept the same, for and in behalf of the City upon certain trusts in the deed of conveyance to be expressly mentioned. But in no event shall any such deed of conveyance be accepted as set out in this chapter, unless and until there shall be deposited with and held by the City Treasurer, a sum sufficient to provide for the perpetual preservation and care of such lot or lots, as provided for in this chapter, and in addition thereto, such sum or sums as may be determined by the Superintendent with the approval of the City Manager for keeping in repair and for the replacement of any curb, monument, headstone and fence on such lot or lots at the time of such conveyance. Any proprietor so conveying may in the deed reserve to himself and to such as may be beneficiaries thereunder the right of admission and such supervision as to the Superintendent of the Cemetery Division may seem proper and as may not be inconsistent with the rights which have vested in the City. 
(Prior code § 17-69)  
13.04.030 - Rates for services—Sale of rights of burial—Authority. 
A.  The Superintendent shall have authority to establish rates for and to sell rights of burial in the Cambridge Cemetery. All deeds and conveyances shall be executed by the City Manager in the name of the City, and recorded by the City Clerk in a book kept for that purpose. 
B.  The Superintendent shall have authority to establish rates for services rendered to lot owners. 
(Prior code § 17-66)  
13.04.040 - Rates for services—City Manager approval. 
All rates established in Section 13.04.030 of this chapter shall be subject to the approval of the City Manager and no rate shall be deemed to be in effect until such approval in writing is given thereto. 
(Prior code § 17-67)  
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SYSTEM REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Water Board—Powers and duties. 
The Water Board shall have full power to make all necessary repairs, extensions or improvements on the works, and to provide new supply pipes. All hydrants, standpipes and drinking fountains, established by the City, shall be constructed, and all repairs upon such hydrants, standpipes and drinking fountains made, and the streets, when broken up, shall be again put in good order, to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets, by and under the direction of the Water Board. The Water Board shall have no power to expend any money, or to incur any debt, beyond the amount of appropriations made by the City Council. 
(Prior code § 19-5)  
13.08.020 - User's responsibilities—General regulations. 
A.  The following regulations shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who takes the water and every such person, by taking the water, shall be considered to express his consent to be bound thereby. The regulations shall be printed upon every bill for water rent, and whenever any one of them is violated (notwithstanding two or more parties may receive the water through the same pipe), the Chief Superintendent, under the direction of the Water Board, shall cause the water to be cut off, and it shall not be let on again except upon payment of two dollars and all chargeable rates; provided, further, in case of any such violation, the Water Board may declare forfeited any payment made for the water, by the person committing such violation, and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. The regulations are as follows: 
1.  All persons taking the water shall, at their own expense, keep the service pipes in good repair and protected from frost, and they will be held liable for all damage which may result from their failure to do so. 
2.  They shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water, and there shall be no concealment of the purposes for which it is used. 
3.  No alteration shall be made in any of the pipes or fixtures installed by the City, except by its agents, who shall be allowed to enter the premises supplied, to examine the apparatus, and to ascertain if there is any unnecessary waste. No plumber or other person shall make any alteration or extension of the pipes in any house or on any premises without first giving notice to the Chief Superintendent and procuring a written permit from him which shall be returned to the Chief Superintendent within ten days after the completion of the work, endorsed with a statement of all fixtures added or removed. Any person violating this regulation shall be fined not more than fifty dollars. 
4.  No water shall be supplied to parties not entitled to the use of it under City ordinances, unless by special permission. 
5.  Except as provided in this chapter, no connection of a fountain shall be made, directly or indirectly, with the water pipes of the City. Persons desiring water for fountain purposes, shall make application in writing to the Water Board, stating the number and size of the jets to be used, and the hours of the day and the months during which it is proposed to use the same. Upon such application the Water Board shall fix the rate to be charged to the applicant, and the connection with the water pipes shall be made by and under the direction of the Superintendent; it being understood and agreed that the water shall be used exclusively for fountain purposes, unless supplied through a meter. 
6.  a.  Whenever on account of nonoccupancy of premises or nonuse of water or abatement is desired, and notice thereof is given at the office of the Chief Superintendent, while the person liable for the water rates is in possession of the premises, the water shall be cut off by an employee of the Board and an abatement made, less the charge of one dollar for cutting off; provided, that such seal locks as may be adopted by the Water Board may be placed upon faucets in tenements so connected with other tenements that then cannot be separately shut off in the street; but they shall not be put in any house that can be so shut off from the street, except for particular fixtures. 
b.  The charge of putting on such seal locks shall be established by the Water Board. Such seal locks shall not be taken off by any one except an employee of the Water Board, on penalty of forfeiting all claims for allowance, and having the water shut off from the premises. 
7.  The Chief Superintendent, with the necessary agents and assistants, may enter the premises of any water taker to examine the quantity used, and the manner of use, and to cut off the water for nonpayment of rents and fines, or for any violation of these regulations. 
B.  The Chief Superintendent shall, under the direction of the Water Board, make all the water rate charges, excepting charges for metered water, to the owner of the property, and in every case the owner shall be liable for the water rates, except where the ownership is changed after water is shut off for nonpayment, in which case the new owner shall be liable for the water rates from the time when the water is again let on. 
(Prior code § 19-16)  
13.08.030 - Rate assessment authority. 
The Water Board shall determine and assess the water rates according to the tariff of rates adopted by the City Council, and shall have power to establish such regulations as it may deem expedient for the introduction and use of water; and the water shall not be supplied to any building unless the pipes and fixtures are made conformable to such regulations. 
(Prior code § 19-7)  
13.08.040 - Water rents—Payable in advance. 
The annual rent for the use of water shall be payable in advance on May 1st of each year. All charges for specific supplies or for fractional parts of the year to May 1st shall be payable in advance and before the water is let on. 
(Prior code § 19-11)  
13.08.050 - Water rents—Abatements. 
The Chief Superintendent, under the direction of the Board, may make abatements in the water rents in all proper cases. 
(Prior code § 19-13)  
13.08.060 - Recordkeeping. 
A.  The Chief Superintendent shall cause to be kept suitable books in which shall be entered the names of all persons who take the water, the kind of building, the name and number of the street, the nature of the use, the number of takers and the amount charged, and amounts of abatement, which shall always be kept open to the inspection of the Water Board, and any committee of the City Council. 
B.  The Chief Superintendent shall, at the end of each year, report to the Water Board: 
1.  The amount of the bills sent to the Treasurer; 
2.  The amount of the abatements; 
3.  The amount of uncollected bills. 
(Prior code § 19-14)  
13.08.070 - Issuance of bills—Form. 
A.  The Chief Superintendent shall, under the direction of the Water Board, cause the annual bills for water rates to be issued and delivered on or before April 10th of each year, and shall make out bills for all other amounts payable to the City on account of the water works, and deliver the same to the Treasurer, from time to time , as they may become due. All the bills so delivered by the Chief Superintendent shall be numbered to correspond with the number of the charge on his books. 
B.  A certificate of each abatement and refund shall be furnished by the Chief Superintendent, which certificate shall be addressed to the Treasurer, and shall state the account on which it is allowed, and the number of the bill. The Chief Superintendent shall, on the first day of every month, report in writing to the auditor the amount of the bills of each class placed in the hands of the Treasurer for collection, and also the amount abated or ordered to be refunded, during the preceding month. Whenever it shall appear to the Chief Superintendent that an error has been made in the rates charged for any house or tenement whereby a larger amount has been charged than is required he shall cause an abatement certificate to be made for the amount of the excess charged, and forthwith transmit the same to the City Treasurer, who shall send a corrected notice to the owner or the person to whom the rates are charged. 
(Prior code § 19-20)  
13.08.080 - Injury to pipes, reservoir or hydrants. 
No person shall injure any public pipe, reservoir or fire hydrant connected with the water works, or shall break and enter the same, or draw off or cause to be removed, any of the water therefrom, or shall turn on or off the water in any such water pipe, reservoir or fire hydrant, or shall make any opening or connection with such pipe, reservoir or fire hydrant or remove the cover of any hydrant except in case of fire, without the license or permit of the Water Board, or by authority of the City Manager, and then only under the direction of the Superintendent of the Water Works, who shall provide competent men to perform the same; and the expense thereof shall be charged to the person or department applying for such license or permit. 
(Prior code § 19-15)  
13.08.090 - Water restriction authority. 
The Water Board shall have the power to restrict the use of hand-hose or automatic sprinkler or similar devices to such hours of the day as it may deem necessary; and for any violation of such restriction the occupant of the premises shall be liable to the penalties imposed in Section 13.08.110 for a waste or improper use of water. 
(Prior code § 19-19)  
13.08.100 - Pipe and fixture maintenance—Unnecessary use. 
An owner or occupant of premises in which water furnished by the City is used, who fails to keep his service pipes and fixtures in good order, and neglects to repair the same within three days after they have, from any cause, become defective, or who neglects to shut off the water after using it, so that it runs to waste, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars; and if such fine is not paid within two days from the time when the person incurring it receives notice that he is liable thereto, the water shall be cut off from his premises, and shall not be let on again until the waste is stopped and the fine paid, together with an additional sum of two dollars for cutting off and letting on the water. In case of a second offense during the same year, a fine not exceeding fifty dollars shall be imposed, and if it is not paid within two days, as aforesaid, the water shall be cut off, and shall not be let on again until the cause of the complaint is removed and the fine paid, together with two dollars for cutting off and letting on the water. In case of a third offense, the water shall be cut off, and shall not be let on again except by a vote of the Water Board and the payment of such fine, not exceeding fifty dollars, as the Water Board may impose. 
(Prior code § 19-17)  
13.08.110 - Waste or improper use—Determination authority. 
The Water Board shall have the power to decide what shall be considered a waste or improper use of water, and to restrict the use thereof when it may deem necessary. If the water taker refuses or neglects to comply with any order of the Water Board, after notice given to him, the water may be cut off, and shall not again be let on, except by a vote of the Water Board, and the payment of such fine, not exceeding fifty dollars, as the Water Board may impose. 
(Prior code § 19-18)  
13.08.120 - Waste or improper use—Reporting requirements. 
The police shall report to the Chief Superintendent all cases of leakage, waste or unnecessary profusion in the use of the water, and all violations of this chapter that may be brought to their notice. 
(Prior code § 19-23)  
13.08.130 - Rates—Established. 
A.  For the fiscal year commencing on July 1, 1979, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the City Manager shall recommend as a part of the annual budget submitted to the City Council, a just and equitable water use charge based on metered water consumption and/or other applicable standards for computation of water consumption as set forth in this section. The charge shall take into account all appropriate water related estimated revenues and available revenue surpluses, and shall produce sufficient revenue to equal or exceed the annual appropriations proposed for water department operation, maintenance and debt service. The City Council shall adopt the annual water use charge in conjunction with its adoption of the annual budget. In so doing, the City Council may increase or decrease the City Manager's recommended water use charge in proportion to any increase or decrease it may adopt in the City Manager's recommended appropriations for water department operation, maintenance and debt service. 
B.  The quantity of water supplied by the City through a water meter in good working order shall be determined by the reading of such meter. If a meter malfunctions and fails to register, the consumer shall be charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in order. 
C.  The charges established by this section shall be due and payable by the owner of record at such time or times and in such installments, if any, as the Chief Superintendent from time to time may shut off the supply, after sending a special notice that the water will be shut off for nonpayment, and shall not again be let on for the same occupant or owner, except upon the payment of the whole amount due, together with costs as determined by the Board. The Superintendent shall, in his order of assessment, designate as the owner of a parcel assessed, the person who was liable to assessment therefor on the preceding January 1st. 
D.  A monthly interest charge of one and one-half percent shall be assessed on the balance of any water bill remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of billing. 
E.  When water is required for purposes which are not specified in the foregoing tariff, the rates shall be fixed by the Chief Superintendent. 
F.  The Board shall have the power to prevent the erection of yard hydrants, and water shall not be supplied to any water closets unless such water closets are constructed to conform to the plumbing ordinance. 
(Ord. 1092 (part), 1989; Ord. 902, 1978; prior code § 19-21)  
13.08.140 - Rates—City exempted. 
All water required by the City in its various departments, shall be furnished free of charge. 
(Prior code § 19-22)  
13.08.150 - Rates—Penalty for nonpayment. 
A.  In all cases of nonpayment of the water rent in thirty days after the same is due, the Chief Superintendent under the direction of the Water Board shall cut off the supply, and the water shall not again be let on, for the same occupant or owner, except upon the payment also of the whole amount due together with costs as determined by the Water Board; provided, that in case of specific supplies or for fractional parts of the year, when the water has been let on, it may be cut off immediately after notice given at the place that the rent is not paid, and may be let on again upon the conditions before mentioned. The foregoing provisions shall apply when two or more parties take the water through the same service pipes, although one or more may have paid the proportion due from him or them. 
B.  All bills for water furnished by meter shall be payable quarterly and if the same be not paid within twenty days after the end of the quarter, the Chief Superintendent shall cut off the supply after sending a special notice that the water will be so cut off for nonpayment. 
(Prior code § 19-12)  
Chapter 13.12 - WATER RESERVOIRS 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Established—Fishing or swimming. 
Fresh Pond, Stony Brook and Hobbs Brook are constituted reservoirs, storage basins and water supplies for the use of the City. No person shall fish, swim or bathe, or intentionally permit any animal under his control to swim or bathe in Fresh Pond, Stony Brook or Hobbs Brook, or other reservoir of the water works, or enter into the waters thereof, or place or use a boat in the same, or throw dirt, rubbish, filth, offensive or other foreign matter, or commit a nuisance therein, or on the land and driveways of the City connected therewith and appurtenant thereto. 
(Ord. 1151 (part), 1993; prior code § 19-25)  
13.12.020 - Speed limit establishment authority. 
The Water Board may regulate the use and speed of any vehicles within the enclosures of Fresh Pond, Stony Brook, Hobbs Brook or any other reservoir and may prohibit or prevent entrance of any vehicles within such enclosure. 
(Prior code § 19-33)  
13.12.030 - Ice skating and other winter sports. 
No person shall go upon the ice of Fresh Pond, Stony Brook or Hobbs Brook, or any other reservoir of the water works for the purpose of skating or place or use a sled, ice boat, sleigh or vehicle thereon. 
(Prior code § 19-26)  
13.12.040 - Driving teams. 
No person shall drive a team, cart, wagon or other vehicle, for the conveyance of burdens, upon the land and driveway connected with, and appurtenant to, Fresh Pond. 
(Prior code § 19-27)  
13.12.050 - Funeral processions. 
No person shall drive or conduct a funeral, or a hearse or carriage connected with a funeral, on the driveway of Fresh Pond. 
(Prior code § 19-28)  
13.12.060 - Fast driving. 
No person having the charge or use of a horse or other animal, shall drive or permit such horse or other animal to go at a greater rate of speed than eight miles an hour upon the driveway or within the enclosure of Fresh Pond, and the Water Board may by regulation prohibit or limit the bringing of any animals within such enclosure. 
(Prior code § 19-29)  
13.12.070 - Destruction of property. 
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any tree, shrub, grass, path, fence, building or wall on the land and driveway connected with and appurtenant to, Fresh Pond, Stony Brook or Hobbs Brook, or other reservoir of the water works, or dig or carry away the sward, gravel, rock, stones, sand, turf or earth on such land and driveway. 
(Prior code § 19-30)  
13.12.080 - Climbing trees. 
No person shall climb a tree on the land connected with, and appurtenant to Fresh Pond, Stony Brook or Hobbs Brook, or other reservoir of the water works, or tie a horse or other animal to a tree or fence on such land. 
(Prior code § 19-31)  
13.12.090 - Posting bills or advertisements. 
No person shall post a bill, placard or advertisement within the grounds connected with Fresh Pond, Stony Brook or Hobbs Brook, or other reservoir of the water works. 
(Prior code § 19-32)  
13.12.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter and Chapters 2.74, 13.08 and 13.12 of this code shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars for each offense. 
(Prior code § 19-34)  
13.12.110 - Violation—Noncriminal disposition. 
Whoever violates any section of this chapter may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in G. L. c. 40, §21D. The enforcing officers shall be employees of the Water Department designated by the Water Board, Police Officers, Animal Control Officers and the Director of the Animal Commission. The penalty for each violation shall be twenty-five dollars. 
(Ord. 1151 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 13.16 - WASTEWATER AND STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
1.  "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer designed to receive both wastewater and stormwater. 
2.  "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Public Works of the City of Cambridge, or his or her designee. 
3.  "Land Disturbance" shall mean any action that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand rock, gravel of similar earth material. 
4.  "Land Disturbance Activity" shall mean any activity that causes a change in the position or location of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth material. 
5.  "Owner" shall mean a person who along or jointly or severally with others has the legal title to any premises or has care, charge or control of any premises as agent, executor, administrator, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title. 
6.  "Person" shall mean any agency of the federal government, any agency or political subdivision of the Commonwealth, any State, public or private corporation or authority, individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, partnership, association, or other entity, or any group thereof, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person, and any group of persons. 
7.  "Private Combined Sewer" shall mean a combined sewer which is not owned by the City, DCR or the MWRA. Private combined sewers include, but are not limited to, building Drains (wastewater), building combined sewer laterals and manholes located on private property and not located within an easement held by the City or other public agencies. The owner of the private combined sewer is also responsible for the connection from a private sewer to the public wastewater system. 
8.  "Private Sewer" shall mean a sewer that is not owned by the City, DCR or the MWRA. Private sewers include, but are not limited to building Drains (wastewater), building sewer laterals and manholes located on private property and not located within an easement held by the City or toher public agencies. The owner of the private sewer is also responsible for the connection from a private sewer to the public wastewater system. 
9.  "Private Stormwater Drain" shall mean a stormwater Drain that is not owned by the City or the DCR. Private Stormwater Drains include, but are not limited to, building Drains (stormwater), building stormwater Drain laterals, catch basins and manholes located on private property and not located within an easement held by the City and other public agencies. The owner of the private stormwater Drain is also responsible for the connection from a private stormwater Drain to the public stormwater system. 
10.  "Public Combined Sewer" shall mean a combined sewer that is owned by the City, DCR or the MWRA. 
11.  "Public Sewer" means a sewer which is owned by the City, DCR or the MWRA or any of their successors. 
12.  "Public Stormwater Drain" shall mean a stormwater Drain that is owned by the City or the DCR. 
13.  "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer designed to carry sewage. 
14.  "Sewage" means the spent water of a community, which may be a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial facilities, together with leachate and construction site dewatering, and exclusive of groundwater, surface water, and/or stormwater. 
15.  "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
16.  Shall and May. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
17.  "Stormwater" shall mean any water resulting from rainfall or other precipitation that runs off surfaces during or after a storm. 
18.  "Stormwater Drain" means a pipe or conduit that carries surface water, stormwater and groundwater or runoff and is exclusive of sewage. 
19.  "Stormwater Drainage System" means pipes, conduits, pumping stations and appurtenances, including tidegates, catch basins, and manholes used in the collection and transport of stormwater, groundwater and runoff. 
20.  "Wastewater" shall mean Sewage, together with any Groundwater, Stormwater and surface water that may be present. 
21.  "Wastewater System" shall mean totality of the devices, equipment or works used in transportation, pumping, storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of Wastewater or in the disposal of the effluent. 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.020 - Wastewater System and Stormwater Drainage System connection - General regulations. 
A.  The Commissioner is hereby authorized to regulate Combined Sewers, Land Disturbance Activity, Private Combined Sewers, Private Sewers, Private Stormwater Drains, Public Combined Sewers, Public Sewers, and Public Stormwater Drains and any other equipment or installations of any description now or in the future connected to the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System. The Commissioner shall have authority to promulgate regulations and guidance documents regulating all activities in any way related to the uncovering, excavating over, blocking access to, making any connection with or opening into, altering, or disturbing, or in any way directly or indirectly using the city's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System, and shall establish permit requirements for all such activities and take necessary and appropriate enforcement action to prohibit or remedy any such unpermitted activity. 
B.  No unauthorized Person or Owner shall uncover, excavate over, block access to, make any connection with or opening into, alter or disturb, or in any way directly or indirectly use the City's Wastewater system or Stormwater Drainage System or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Commissioner. Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or in any way changing the volume or character or any effluent that is to be or is being discharged into the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System shall be required to notify the Commissioner at least forty-five days prior to the proposed change or connection, and shall be further required to obtain all required permits and to comply with all regulations and guidance documents promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner by this ordinance and by any and all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and rules and shall be responsible for all fees and charges established by the Commissioner in said regulations. 
C.  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection to the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System and any costs of maintenance thereof shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of any connection to the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city Manager may provide for connection to the mains of the City's Wastewater System and Stormwater Drainage System in the public way at the expense of the City when the need for a new connection stems from the City's commitments to sewer and storm drain separation and correction of improperly connected building sewer and storm drain lines as required by the United State Environmental Protection Agency, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority, and the City of Cambridge DPW. The City Manager may limit the City's assumption of costs for correction or improperly connected building sewer or storm drain lines where the City Manager determines that the improper connection was made negligently, knowingly, or intentionally by the owner or form owner of the property, their agents, or other acting on their behalf. 
(Ord, 1313, Added, 01/28/2008; Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008; 1203, Amended, 06/01/1998)  
13.16.030 - Wastewater System and Stormwater Drainage System — City Engineer's duties. 
The City Engineer shall make and file in his or her office, accurate plans of the Wastewater System and the Stormwater Drainage System, showing all entrances thereto when made as provided in the regulations and guidance documents promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner by this ordinance and by any and all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and rules. 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.040 - Interference and obstruction during construction. 
Whenever any street is opened for the laying of pipes for water, gas or other purposes, or for any work of construction, such laying of pipes and work connected therewith, or such work of construction shall be so executed as not to obstruct, in any way, the course, capacity or construction of any part of the City's Wastewater System and Stormwater Drainage system, and whenever pipes for any purpose, or any work of construction, are found to exist at such a depth or in such location as to interfere with any existing part of the city's Wastewater system or Stormwater Drainage System, the person maintaining the same, shall, upon notice thereof, at once remove, change or alter such pipe or pipes or other works, in such a manner as the City Engineer may direct.If such person neglects to comply immediately with the terms of such notification the City Engineer may make such removal, change or alternation, and the cost thereof shall be paid by such person; provided, that whenever any sewer is to be constructed, or any water pipe to be laid, in any street or way, the city Engineer and Chief Superintendent of Water works shall consult with each other in regard to the location of any existing pipes. 
(Prior code 17—49) 
(Ord, 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.050 - Discharges—Commissioner's responsibilities. 
A.  The Commissioner shall promulgate regulations and guidance documents to control the use of the City's Wastewater System and Stormwater Drainage system throughout the city so as to require that no person shall, without prior authorization from the commissioner, uncover, excavate over, block access to, make any connection with or opening into, alter, or disturb, or in any way directly or indirectly use the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater drainage system, to prohibit any person from maliciously, willfully or negligently breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing or tampering with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the city's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System.Said regulations promulgated by the Commissioner shall require that all activities by users of the City's Wastewater System and Stormwater Drainage System are accomplished in a manner that complies with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and rules n effect and as amended.If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater drainage System, which waters contain substances or possess characteristics prohibited in the Commissioner's regulations and guidance documents or in any and all applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or rule, the Commissioner may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
4.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, or 
5.  Take any other enforcement action or response provided in the Commissioner's regulations and guidance documents or pursue any other remedy provided by any applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or rule. 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.060 - Inspectors—Powers and authority. 
A.  The Commissioner or his or her designees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the regulations and guidance documents promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner by this ordinance and any and all applicable laws, regulations and rules. 
B.  The Commissioner or his or her designees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage or stormwater works lying within such easement.All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. 1007 (part), 1984: prior code § 17-58) 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.070 - Assessments — Wastewater System prerequisite. 
No owner of land or buildings or any portion of land or buildings shall be assessed for a Wastewater System benefit until said land or buildings can be drained into the Wastewater System and no such land or buildings or portion of such land or buildings shall be assessed more than once for the same sewer benefit. 
(Prior code § 17-50) 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.080 - Annual Wastewater System use charge. 
There is established an annual charge for the use of the City's Wastewater System by any land or buildings in the City having one or more connection discharging into said Wastewater System. 
A.  The City Manager shall annually recommend to the City Council, a just and equitable Wastewater System service charge based on water supplied to, delivered to, and received by any land or buildings that drain to the Wastewater system, determined by metered water consumption an/or other applicable standards for computation of water supplied, delivered or received by said land or buildings.The charge shall take into account all appropriate Wastewater System related estimated revenues and available surpluses, and shall produce sufficient revenue to equal or exceed the annual appropriations proposed for Wastewater System operation, maintenance and debt service.the city Council shall adopt annually the Wastewater system service charge. 
B.  The quantity of water supplied by the City through a water meter in good working order shall be determined by the reading of such meter.The owner of land or buildings or any portion of land or buildings that drain to the Wastewater System receiving or using water supplied to, delivered to, or received by any source other than the City shall so notify the Commissioner in accordance with regulation promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner by this ordinance any any and all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and rules.Where water is not supplied by the City, but derived or received by said land or buildings from another source, and/or water is used by said land or buildings in such a manner as to enter the Wastewater System of the City, such water shall be measured by one or more water meters in good working order installed and maintained on the land or buildings by the owner, at the expense of the owner, subject to inspection and approval by the Commissioner. The quantity of water so derived or received, or the quantity of water so used, or both, shall be determined by the readings of such meter or meters.Alternatively, at the discretion of the Commissioner, the quantity of all other water delivered to or received by land or buildings shall be established by the Commissioner by any reasonable and equitable method apt in the circumstances of the particular case to determine the quantity of water discharged by said land or buildings into the Wastewater System of the City. 
C.  An owner of land or buildings may apply to the Commissioner for an abatement of said Wastewater System charge if water so supplied, derived or received is used on said land or in said buildings in such a manner as not to enter the Wastewater System of the City. Determination of the charge established by this Section shall be adjusted to reflect the quantity so used deducted from the aggregate amount of water so supplied. derived or received during such period. 
D.  In no case shall the minimum annual charge for Wastewater System use under the provisions of this chapter be less than ten dollars. 
E.  The charges established by this Section shall be due and payable by the owner of record at such time or times and in such installments if any, as the Commissioner from time to time determines.The Commissioner shall in his or her order of assessment designate as the owner of a parcel assessed, the person who was liable to assessment therefor on the preceding January 1st. 
F.  A monthly interest charge of one and on-half percent shall be assessed on the balance of any sewer service use charge remaining unpaid after thirty days from the date of billing. Nonpayment upon such date shall furthermore be deemed to be delinquent and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such service is supplied.The city Treasurer-Collector is authorized and directed to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Middlesex County, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of the lien of such charges for such services. 
(Ord. 1007 (part), 1984: prior code § 17-62) 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2998)  
13.16.090 - Property destruction prohibited. 
In addition to all penalties and remedies available to the Commissioner pursuant to the regulations and guidance documents promulgated pursuant to the authority of this ordinance and provided in any other applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or rule, no unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the City's Wastewater System or Stormwater Drainage System.Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. 1007 (part), 1984: prior code § 17-60) 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
13.16.100 - Violation — Penalty 
A.  Any person found to be violating any of the provisions of the regulations and guidance documents promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner by this ordinance and by any and all applicable federal, state or local laws, regulations or rules, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $5,000.00 dollars for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of the regulations and guidance documents promulgated by the Commissioner pursuant to the authority granted to the Commissioner by this ordinance and by any and all other applicable federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. 1007 (part), 1984: prior code § 17-61) 
(Ord. 1313, Added, 01/28/2008)  
Title 14 - FAIR HOUSING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 14.04 - FAIR HOUSING 
Sections: 
 
14.04.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the power conferred by the Commonwealth on the City Council of the City of Cambridge by Chapter 413 of the Acts of 1991.  
14.04.020 - Powers and duties of the Cambridge Human Rights Commission. 
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Cambridge Human Rights Commission established by Chapter 2.76 of this Code. 
The Commission shall work with the City Manager to provide for fair housing practices within the City of Cambridge. 
This ordinance is intended to incorporate the substantive provisions and protections of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended (42 USC Sections 3601 et seq., the Fair Housing Act, and Chapter 151B of the General Laws, and is to be interpreted in a manner which is not inconsistent therewith. 
A.  The Commission, to carry out the policies of this chapter, shall exercise the following powers and duties: 
1.  Receive, process and investigate complaints and initiate its own investigations of violations of this chapter, in accordance with Section 14.04.050; 
2.  Transmit for filing with other government agencies copies of any complaint filed with the Commission, or of which the Commission is otherwise aware, that relate to acts of discrimination under the jurisdiction of such agencies; 
3.  Engage in conciliation to resolve any complaint over which it has jurisdiction, and draft, approve, and monitor any conciliation agreement agreed to by the parties in the dispute; 
4.  Hold hearings; summon witnesses and compel their attendance; administer oaths; take the testimony of any person under oath, and order the production of any relevant evidence, so as to permit reasonable discovery, in the same manner and to the same extent as exercised by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination; 
5.  Seek or apply remedies as enumerated in Section 14.04.060 and urge and use its best efforts to effect compliance with its recommendations and findings; 
6.  Seek or accept grants, gifts, or bequests to help finance its activities. 
B.  Every power and duty enjoyed by the Commission as enumerated in Chapter 2.76 of this code for protecting and advancing the human rights of the people of Cambridge shall be retained and exercised to enable the Commission to promulgate rules and procedures consistent with this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth, in order to effectuate the goals, policies and provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed in order to accomplish the goals of fair housing in Cambridge. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.030 - Definitions. 
A.  "Accessible" means with respect to buildings containing covered multifamily dwellings that the public or common use areas to the building can be approached, entered and used by individuals with physical handicaps. "Accessible route" means a continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and space in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe and usable by people with other disabilities. 
B.  "Age" means the actual or perceived chronological age of an individual eighteen years or older. 
C.  "Aggrieved person" includes anyone who claims to have been injured or is about to be injured by any unlawful practice listed in Section 14.04.040 of this chapter. 
D.  "Blockbusting" means any effort, for profit, to induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry into a neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
E.  "Covered multifamily dwelling" means buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground floor dwelling units in other buildings consisting of four or more dwelling units. 
F.  "Disability" shall mean any actual or supposed physical or mental handicap of an individual, other than the state of being presently legally incompetent. 
G.  "Discrimination" shall mean a policy or practice that by design or effect segregates, creates unequal status, separates, or has a disproportionate impact on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
H.  "Dwelling" as used herein means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereupon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. A "dwelling unit" is a unit of residence for a family of one or more persons. 
I.  "Family" shall include a single individual. 
J.  "Family status" shall mean the actual or supposed condition of having children below the age of eighteen years domiciled with a parent, or another person having parental custody of such child or children, or the designee of such parent or other person having such custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protection afforded against discrimination on the basis of family status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen years. Nothing herein shall limit the applicability of reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of persons permitted to occupy a dwelling. 
K.  "Handicap" means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, a record of having such impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. 
This term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act [21 USC 802]). This term also does not include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite. 
L.  "Housing set aside for, or limited to, the elderly" means housing: 
1.  Provided under any state or federal program specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons; or 
2.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two years of age or older; or 
3.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five years of age or older per unit. Housing qualifies as housing for the elderly under this section if and only if 
a.  It has significant facilities and services designed to meet the physical or social needs of elderly persons, or if provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, or that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for elderly persons; and 
b.  At least eighty percent of the units are occupied by at least one person fifty-five years of age or older; and 
c.  There is publication and notice of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons fifty-five years of age or older. 
M.  "Marital status" means the actual or supposed state of being or having been single, married, separated, or divorced. 
N.  "Military status" means the actual or supposed condition of being, not being, having been or not having been in the service of the military. 
O.  "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, unincorporated organizations, fiduciaries, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, the City of Cambridge, and all political subdivisions, boards, and commissions thereof. 
P.  "Real estate transaction" shall mean the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; or the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
Q.  "Reasonable attorney's fees and costs" includes the reasonable expenses of expert witnesses, the reasonable cost of any study, analysis, engineering report, test, or project which is found by the court to be necessary for the preparation of the party's case, and reasonable attorney fees. The amount of fees and costs awarded shall be based upon prevailing market rates for the kind and quality of services furnished. 
R.  "Religious creed" means the actual or supposed faith, belief, or moral philosophy of an individual or the lack thereof. 
S.  "Sexual orientation" shall mean the actual or supposed heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality of an individual. 
T.  "Source of income" means public assistance recipiency. "Source of income" shall not include income derived from criminal activity. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.040 - Unlawful practices. 
A.  It shall be an unlawful practice: 
1.  For any person whose business includes granting mortgage loans or engaging in residential real estate transactions to discriminate against any person in the granting of, refusal to grant, in making available, refusing to make available, or in the terms or conditions of, a loan or transaction because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. Such transactions shall include, but are not limited to: 
a.  The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance secured by residential or commercial real estate; 
b.  Any intercourse that involves the selling, brokering, inspection, repair, design, construction, alteration, leasing, subleasing, subletting, mortgaging, rental, or appraising of a building, structure, dwelling, or portion thereof, or parcel of land, developed, or undeveloped, whether privately or publicly owned. Nothing in this subsection prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from considering factors other than race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
2.  For any person to deny another person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religious creed, sex, age, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
3.  For any person to refuse to rent, lease, sell, or negotiate for sale, or otherwise to deny or withhold from any person or persons a dwelling or any services or facilities in connection therewith, or to print, publicize, advertise, make any written or oral statement, or otherwise communicate publicly or privately, in a manner that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination because of race, color, religious creed, sex, age, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
4.  For any person to misrepresent that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental because of race, color, religious creed, sex, age, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
5.  For any person to engage in blockbusting by making implicit or explicit representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood or representations regarding the effects or consequences of any such entry or prospective entry of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
6.  For any person to make false representations regarding the availability of a suitable dwelling within a particular neighborhood or area; or in not disclosing or offering to show all properties listed or held for sale or rent within a particular neighborhood or area, or within a requested price or rental range; or make false representations regarding the listing, prospective listing, sale, prospective sale, or rental of any dwelling because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
7.  For any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere in any manner with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this chapter. 
8.  For any person to restrict or attempt to restrict the housing choices of persons by engaging in any conduct relating to the sale or rental of a dwelling that otherwise makes unavailable or denies dwellings because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
9.  For any person to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or on the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, discrimination on the basis of disability includes: 
1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the handicapped person, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the handicapped person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a rental, that landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford a handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; 
3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March thirteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-one, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site; 
b.  With respect to dwellings with a building entrance on an accessible route; 
i.  The public use and common use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
ii.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
iii.  All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically Handicapped People ["ANSI A117.1"] satisfies the requirements of this subsection. 
C.  The following practices shall not be deemed unlawful: 
1.  The leasing, rental, or other provision with or without a fee, of a space within a church, temple, synagogue, religious school, or other facility used for other than a commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin; 
2.  A private club not open to the public that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members; 
3.  The establishment of government-sponsored housing programs operated either directly by government agencies or indirectly through government subsidization and regulation, which are determined by the Commission to be specifically designed to assist elderly persons, the handicapped, or economically disadvantaged individuals, provided that such programs shall not discriminate among elderly persons, the handicapped, or economically disadvantaged on the basis of race, color,sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, or source of income; 
4.  The establishment of housing set aside for, or limited to, elderly persons or the handicapped, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate among elderly persons or handicapped on the basis of race, color, sex, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, military status, or source of income; 
5.  The establishment of same-sex dormitories or portions thereof by educational facilities, provided that such establishment shall not discriminate among its residents on the basis of race, color, age, religious creed, disability, national origin or ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, family status, military status, or source of income; 
6.  The establishment of a hospital, convent, monastery, shelter, asylum, or residential facility for the care and lodging of persons in need of special medical, rehabilitative, social, or psychological support, including, but not limited to half-way houses, drug treatment centers, detoxification facilities, and shelters for the homeless. 
D.  The following practices shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  The leasing or renting of a room or rooms within a dwelling unit which is occupied by the owner as his or her residence and in which the roomer or boarder must pass through the space or a portion thereof occupied by such owner in order to gain access to the room or rooms thus let or rented; 
2.  The leasing or renting of a single apartment in a two-family dwelling, the other residential unit of which is occupied by the owner as his or her residence. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.050 - Complaint procedures. 
A.  Any aggrieved person may make, sign, and file with the Commission a verified complaint in writing which shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have committed a violation of this chapter and the particulars and other information as may be required by the Commission. The Commission may, in like manner, make, sign, and file such a complaint whenever it has reason to believe that any person has engaged in, or is engaging in an unlawful practice. 
B.  No complaint shall be considered unless it is filed within one hundred eighty days after the occurrence of the alleged unlawful practice, or in the case of continuing unlawful practices, within one hundred eighty days after the termination of the unlawful practices. A complaint may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A complaint referred to the Commission by the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination after having been timely filed there will be considered filed for the purposes of this chapter. 
C.  The filing of a complaint, the failure to file a complaint, or the dismissal of a complaint by the Commission shall not bar an aggrieved person from filing a civil action in the Superior Court within two years after the occurrence or termination of an alleged discriminatory practice; provided, that the aggrieved person may not initiate an action with respect to an alleged discriminatory practice that forms the basis of a charged issued by the Commission, if a Commission's hearing has begun with respect to the charge. The Court shall be empowered to award the plaintiff actual and punitive damages; grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any temporary or permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order; and allow reasonable attorney's fees and costs. The plaintiff shall be liable for reasonable attorney's fees and costs only to the extent that the plaintiff's participation in the proceeding was frivolous or vexatious or was for the purpose of harassment; to the extent that the plaintiff is the prevailing party, the respondent shall be liable for reasonable attorney's fees and costs, unless special circumstances make recovery of such fees and costs unjust. 
D.  Upon the filing of the complaint, the Commission shall, by certified mail, return receipt requested, serve notice upon the complainant acknowledging the filing and advising the complainant of the time limits and choice of forum under the law. At any time after the filing of the complaint, the Commission, by its attorneys, may seek temporary or preliminary injunctive relief in the Superior Court, pending final disposition of the complaint, if the commission concludes such action is necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
E.  The Commission shall promptly serve a copy of the complaint and a notice upon the respondent advising him of his procedural rights and obligations under the law, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The respondent may, in response to said notice, file a verified answer with the Commission not later than ten days after receipt of the notice of the complaint. 
F.  The chairperson of the Commission shall designate the Executive Director or one or more of the Commissioners to make, with the assistance of the staff of the Commission, a prompt investigation of the alleged discriminatory act. The investigation shall be commenced within thirty days after receipt of the complaint. 
G.  The Commission shall complete its investigation and issue a final investigative report consistent with Section 14.04.059 within one hundred days after receipt of the complaint unless impracticable, and if impracticable, shall notify the complainant and the respondent in writing and state the reasons for the delay. 
H.  Any conciliation agreement arising out of conciliation efforts by the Commission shall be an agreement between the respondent and the complainant and shall be approved by the Commission and shall be made public unless the complainant and the respondent otherwise agree and the Commission determines disclosure is not necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
I.  At the close of the investigation, the Commission shall issue a final investigative report. Said report shall conclude whether or not probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the complaint. 
J.  If lack of probable cause is found, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint, notify the parties of its finding, and inform the complainant of his right to commence a private civil action in the Superior Court. Said action shall be commenced within ninety days from the date of the dismissal or within two years from the date of the violation alleged, whichever occurs later. The court shall be empowered to award the plaintiff actual and punitive damages; grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any temporary or permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order: and allow reasonable attorney's fees and costs as permitted under Section 14.04.053 of this code. 
K.  If probable cause is found, both the complainant and respondent shall be notified in writing. Either party may elect, within twenty days from receipt of the Commission's finding, to file a civil action in the Superior Court. 
1.  If a timely election is made by either party, the Commission shall immediately notify the office of the Attorney General, who shall file a civil action on behalf of the aggrieved person within thirty days after a timely election is made. Any complainant may intervene as of right in said civil action. The Commission shall administratively close the case, without prejudice. 
2.  If a timely election is not made, the case shall proceed to a public hearing. No Commissioner participating in the aforementioned hearing shall have been involved in the prior investigation. The Massachusetts law of evidence shall apply at the Commissioner's hearing. At any such hearing before the Commission, all parties and witnesses shall have the right to be advised and represented by counsel at their own expense. The complainant shall be represented by the Executive Director of the Commission as prescribed by the Commission's Rules of Procedure. 
3.  Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the Commission's Rules of Procedure which shall ensure that all parties are afforded due process of law. 
L.  The hearing Commissioners shall issue a report which lists findings of fact and conclusions of law within sixty days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the hearing Commissioners conclude that the charges of discriminatory conduct by the respondent cannot be substantiated, the case shall be dismissed with prejudice. 
M.  The decision of the hearing Commissioners is subject to review by the entire Commission. The review must be initiated within thirty days from the date of the decision or said decision becomes the final administrative decision. 
N.  The Commission shall make a final administrative disposition of the complaint within one year from the date of the receipt of the complaint, unless impracticable. If impracticable, it must notify the complainant and the respondent in writing and list the reasons for not doing so. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.060 - Remedies—Relief sought and granted. 
A.  After a finding of probable cause is made, the Commission may file a petition in equity in the Superior Court seeking injunctive relief against the respondent. If justice so requires, the court shall be authorized to grant relief including: 
1.  Orders or decrees restraining the respondent from selling, renting, or otherwise making the real estate transaction unavailable to the complainant; 
2.  Any appropriate injunctive relief the court deems necessary to protect the rights of the complainant. 
B.  If the Commission, in the final administrative report of its decision, finds that any respondent committed any unlawful practice under this chapter, said Commission may: 
1.  Award to the complainant damages to reimburse him for expenses incurred including, but not limited to, moving, storage of furniture and personal effects, and alternative housing or space because of the respondent's unlawful acts. Damages for emotional distress may also be awarded to the complainant; 
2.  Assess to the respondent civil penalties not to exceed ten thousand dollars for the first offense, twenty-five thousand dollars for the second offense within a five-year period ending at the time of filing the complaint; fifty thousand dollars for a third or subsequent offense within a seven-year period ending at the time of filing the complaint. In a proceeding involving two or more respondents, the hearing Commissioners may assess a civil penalty against each respondent that the hearing commissioners determine has been engaged or is about to engage in a discriminatory housing practice; 
3.  Seek relief from the Superior Court including any temporary or permanent injunction, temporary restraining order or other order it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.070 - Review of Commission's final administrative decision— Enforcement of order of Commission. 
A.  Any party aggrieved by the Commission's final administrative decision may seek judicial review within thirty days from the date of service of said decision in the Superior Court pursuant to Chapter Thirty A of the General Laws. 
B.  The Commission's final administrative decision may be enforced by the Commission, or any person entitled to relief, by filing a petition in the Superior Court seeking compliance with the decision. The Commission may obtain a decree of the court for enforcement of its order upon a showing that a copy of the petition for enforcement was served upon the party subject to the dictates of the decision. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.080 - Consistency. 
In the event that any provision of this chapter conflicts with, or is inconsistent with any prior enacted law, regulation, or ordinance of the City of Cambridge, then this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
14.04.090 - Severability. 
It any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason, be held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application thereof shall not be affected and shall continue to be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1130 (part), 1992)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING PERMIT FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Established—Work started prior to obtaining permit. 
Effective June 1, 2009, where work for which a permit is required by this code is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining such permit, the fee specified shall be tripled but payment of such triple fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this code. 
Building Fees 
  
Description 	  Fee 
All new construction, repairs or alterations 	$20.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Exemption: $15.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost for three residential dwelling units or less, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Amendments to plans 	$20.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Exemption $15.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost for three residential dwelling units or less, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Demolition of buildings and structures 	$20.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Exemption $15.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost for three residential dwelling units or less, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Preliminary permits for foundations 	$20.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Exemption $15.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of construction cost for three residential dwelling units or less, $50.00 minimum fee. 
Certificate of occupancy: 
a. Place of assembly 
b. Residential 
c. Other 
d. Request for inspection of dwelling unit as per Section 119.3 of the StateBuilding Code. 	Residential: $100.00 for first unit and $50.00 for each additional unit. 
Commercial: $100.00 plus $50.00 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
 
(Ord. 1394, 6/12/2017; Ord. 1324, 5/18/2009; Ord. 1156, amended, 03/21/1994; Ord. 995 (part), 1983; Ord. 979 (part), 1982: prior code § 5-2)  
Chapter 15.08 - ELECTRICAL FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.08.010 - Penalty for starting work prior to obtaining permit. 
Where work for which a permit is required by the Electric Code is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining such permit, the fee herein specified shall be tripled but the payment of such triple fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of the Code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1168, Amended, 10/02/95)  
15.08.020 - Work completed by others. 
Any person, firm, or corporation, other than electrical contractors and public service agencies, who employ one or more electricians permanently to do electrical work, may obtain a permit covering the work done by such permanent electricians for a period of time to be determined in each case. The fee for electrical work done under such a permit will be charged in the same manner as if separate permits had been given for each job. 
(Ord. No. 1168, Amended, 10/02/95)  
15.08.030 - Electrical Permits Fee Schedule. 
Effective June 1, 2009, electrical permit fees shall be as follows: 
Description 	Fee 
1. Minimum permit charge 	$25.00 
2. Switches, alarms, detectors, 
pullstations, etc. 	0.50 
3. Lights per watts 	1.00 
4. Receptacles: 	
  a. 15 ampere, each 	1.00 
  b. 20 ampere, each 	4.00 
  c. 30 ampere, each 	5.00 
  d. 50 ampere, each 	6.00 
5. Motors: 	
  a. Less than 1 horsepower 	5.00 
  b. Each additional horsepower 	1.00 
6. Signs 	40.00 
7. Service per 100 ampere 	5.00 
8. Meters, each 	5.00 
9. Heat: 	
  a. Less than 1 KW 	5.00 
  b. Each additional KW 	1.00 
  c. Gas or oil burner 	35.00 
10. Source of supply (Transformer, generator or rectifier): 	
  a. Less than 100 W 	3.00 
  b. Less than 10 KVA 	4.00 
  c. Each additional 10 KVA 	3.00 
11. Quarterly permits 	100.00 
12. Telephone wiring, per floor 	100.00 
13. Alarm Systems 	75.00 
14. Computer Systems 	75.00 
15. Siding 	25.00 
 
(Ord. 1325, 5/18/2009; Ord. No. 1168, Enacted, 10/02/95; Ord. 995 (part), 1983; Ord. 979 (part), 1982: prior code § 5-3)  
Chapter 15.12 - PLUMBING AND GAS FITTING FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Work started prior to obtaining a permit. 
Where work for which a permit is required by this code is started or proceeded with, prior to obtaining such permit, the fee previously specified shall be tripled but the payment of such triple fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this code. 
(Ord. No. 1169, Amended, 10/02/95; Ord. No. 1169, Amended, 10/02/95)  
15.12.020 - Work completed by others. 
Any person, firm, or corporation, other than plumbing contractors or public service agencies, who employ one or more plumbers permanently to do plumbing/gas fitting work, may obtain a permit covering the work done by such permanent plumbers/gas fitters for a period of time to be determined in each case. The fee for plumbing/gas work done under such a permit will be charged in the same manner as if separate permits had been given for each job. 
(Ord. No. 1169, Enacted, 10/02/95)  
15.12.030 - Plumbing and gas fitting fee schedule. 
Effective June 1, 2009, plumbing and gas fitting fees shall be as follows: 
Description 	Fee 
1. Ovens, kitchen range, space heaters, dryers 	$20.00 each plus gas permit 
2. Heating units, each 	 25.00 plus gas permit 
3. High pressure units: 	  
  a. 15 PSI or over 	 60.00 
  b. Each additional 5 PSI 	 12.00 
4. New plumbing up to: 	  
  a. 5 fixtures 	 50.00 
  b. Above 5 fixtures 	 5.00 
5. Alterations in plumbing: 	  
  a. Up to five fixtures 	 50.00 
  b. Above five fixtures 	 5.00 
6. Gas fitting, new and alterations: 	  
  a. Up to $300.00 	 50.00 
  b. $301.00 to $2,000.00 	 30.00 
  c. Over $2,000.00 	 30.00 plus $6.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof of cost 
7. Sprinklers, up to 5 	 50.00 
   Over 5 heads 	 50.00 plus $2.00 for each 
additional head 
8. Fire lanes or standpipe installation 	 50.00 plus $20.00 for each hose outlet or cabinet whether there is one or more sprinkler heads connected to the system. 
9. Air conditioners (no permit required for portable room units): 	  
   Up to 25 ton units 	 50.00 
   Over 25 ton unit 	 10.00 per ton 
10. Roof type combination air conditioner and heat up to 25 tons 	 50.00 
11. Temporary heat and LP installation 	 50.00 
12. Solar heat 	 30.00 
13. Failure to call for final inspections within 10 working days after completion 	 50.00 
14. Reinspection of code violations 	 50.00 
15. Annual testing sprinkler 	 50.00 plus $2.00 for each 
sprinkler head 
 
(Ord. 1326, 5/18/2009; Ord. No. 1169, Enacted, 10/02/95; Ord. 995 (part), 1983; Ord. 979 (part), 1982: prior code § 5-4)  
Chapter 15.16 - ELECTRICAL POLES AND WIRES 
Sections: 
 
15.16.010 - City Electrician-Authority. 
In case of fire, or whenever the maintenance of any wire may be dangerous to life or property, the City Electrician shall have authority to direct any person owning, leasing, operating or maintaining such wire, to shut off the electric current therefrom for such period of time as he may deem necessary, or to cause such wire to be cut or removed without notice, and such wire shall not be connected again or replaced without his approval. 
(Prior code § 9-6)  
15.16.020 - City Electrician—Inspection of wires—Determination of replacement or removal. 
The City Electrician shall require every person using, operating or maintaining electrical fixtures to affix at the points of support, or to a suitable cross-arm at or to which any such wires or cables containing wires are attached, a tag or mark distinctly designating the owner or user of such poles, wires or cables except that any such tag or mark shall not be required for the poles, wires or cables of public transportation authorities or other public utility companies. Whenever any such poles, structures, attachments, insulations, supports or appliances are unsuitable or unsafe, or the tags or marks thereof are insufficient or illegible, he shall order the same to be replaced. He shall also order any wire abandoned for use to be removed. If not replaced or removed forthwith, the City Electrician shall proceed to replace or remove the same at the expense of the owner thereof. 
(Prior code § 9-4)  
15.16.030 - Wiring type requirements—Attachment to poles—Insulation. 
The City Electrician shall require every person owning or operating a line of wires over, upon, through or under any streets or over any buildings throughout the City, to use only such wires as are suitable and strong; shall require such wires to be suitably and safely attached to strong and sufficient poles properly painted and insulated at all points of attachment. When a wire other than a wire designed to carry an electric light or power current enters a building it shall be attached to it at suitable and convenient points in the circuit and near the place of entering a building, an appliance calculated to prevent at all times a current of electricity of such intensity or volume as to be capable of injuring electrical instruments or causing fire to enter the building by means of such wire, beyond the point at which such appliance is attached, and shall cause to be suitably insulated every wire within a building when such wire is designed to carry an electric light or power current. 
(Prior code § 9-5)  
15.16.040 - Construction or repair—Inspection required. 
The City Electrician shall inspect the construction, location and insulation of wires designed to carry electric light, heat or power current in buildings in process of construction or repair within the City and the connection of such wires with any electrical circuit. He shall see that all laws, orders, ordinances and regulation relative to wires and conduits, and pole or conduit locations, are strictly enforced. 
(Prior code § 9-7)  
15.16.050 - City Electrician—Supervisor of wire systems. 
The City Electrician shall have supervision of the fire alarm telegraph, the police signal system, and all other electrical wires and wire systems of the City. He shall keep the same at all times in good working order and shall erect, or cause to be erected, all electrical wires and appliances used in connection with such systems and all electrical wires or lines owned by the City. 
(Prior code § 9-8)  
15.16.060 - City Electrician—Supervisor of street lamps. 
The City Electrician shall have supervision of the putting up of all posts, lamps and fixtures located by the City Council and shall contract for all lights under his control. 
(Prior code § 9-9)  
15.16.070 - Gas or electricity meter examinations. 
The City Electrician shall see that all meters for gas or electricity furnished to the City are in proper condition, and as often as may be necessary shall test the power of all lights furnished to the City, and shall see to it that in all particulars, the provisions of any contracts made are strictly performed. 
(Prior code § 9-10)  
15.16.080 - Installation or change—Permit required—Fee. 
A.  All wires, appliances and apparatus in the interior of buildings or on private premises which are intended for the transmission of electricity and whether or not connected with an outside circuit shall be properly and safely constructed, placed, arranged, attached, insulated, covered, changed and maintained by the person using the same. Such person shall allow the City Electrician at all reasonable times free access to such wires, appliances and apparatus, and shall notify the City Electrician of any intention to construct, place, arrange, attach, insulate, change or maintain any such wires, appliances and apparatus before they are covered or enclosed, or connected with any outside circuit. 
B.  Before installing or changing any wires, appliances or apparatus for the transmission or use of electricity for light, heat or power in buildings or on private premises, a permit for such installation or change shall be obtained from the City Electrician. At the time such permit is issued the applicant shall pay to the City a fee in accordance with a schedule of fees prepared by the City Electrician and approved by the City Council. These fees shall be collected by the City Electrician and shall from time to time be paid over by him to the City Treasurer. 
(Prior code § 9-11)  
15.16.090 - Bond requirements. 
A.  Every person constructing, maintaining or operating a telegraphic, telephonic or other electrical line in the City shall execute a bond with satisfactory surety, in a penal sum of not less than ten thousand dollars, and of form satisfactory to the City Solicitor, conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the City against all damage, costs, expenses and losses whatsoever, to which it may be subjected in consequence of the acts and neglects of such person, and any and all persons acting by, through or under such person, and in any manner arising from, or growing out of the use and transmission of electricity, the privileges permitted by the City, and the construction, maintenance, operation and use of lines, wires, cables, conduits, poles, structures, constructions, fixtures and apparatus; and also, to fulfill all their agreements with the City, all the orders, conditions and obligations imposed by the Pole and Conduit Commission or any other board having authority, and all obligations and duties required by law, and by this chapter and every other ordinance, and all additions and amendments relating thereto. 
B.  A new bond of like import, and with new surety, may at any time be required by the City, which new bond shall be a strengthening bond, unless the surety on former bonds is expressly released from further liability by vote of the Pole and Conduit Commission. 
(Prior code § 9-31)  
15.16.100 - Quality of appliances—Attachment to wires and poles. 
A.  Every person owning, operating or leasing any poles, wires, ducts, conduits, manholes, electrical structures or appliances within the public ways of the City shall comply with all rules and requirements of the Pole and Conduit Commission with respect to the quality of poles, wires, ducts, conduits, manholes, structures and other appliances and with all rules and requirements of the Commission with respect to their installation, removal and repair, and shall, at all reasonable times, give to the City Electrician access to such poles, wires, ducts, conduits, manholes, structures, appliances and apparatus. No line or wire excepting supporting wires for cables and ring construction shall be attached to any poles by means of brackets or other side fixtures, nor shall the wires or lines of more than one party be placed on the same cross-arm. 
B.  No person maintaining or operating a wire or line of wires for the transmission of electricity shall affix to or place upon any pole, structure or fixture owned by it and now erected or that may be erected hereafter, any additional wire, except upon a written permission of the City Electrician. 
(Prior code § 9-12)  
15.16.110 - Plans submitted to City Electrician upon request. 
Whenever the City Electrician shall request, any person operating electric or other wires, poles, ducts, conduits or manholes upon, over, through or under any public way or over any building, shall, within fifteen days, furnish a plan, showing the number and location of its poles, the cross-arms on each, the number of wires or cables thereto attached, or contained therein, the particular locations of all its ducts, conduits and manholes, and the usage to which the respective ducts in such conduits are, and hereafter may be put, with specification of the average volts, charges and current used, the tested strength, the kind and number of lamps or motors connected with any electrical circuit, and other electrical appliances, and, in general, the method of installation, operation, maintenance and repair. The plan shall be in form and size agreeable to the City Electrician. 
(Prior code § 9-14)  
15.16.120 - Obstructing street or sidewalk prohibited. 
No person shall permit any unused piece of coil or loose end of wire to be left on the surface of any public way or sidewalk, or attached to any cross-arm, pole or other structure. (Prior code § 9-13)  
15.16.130 - Tampering with police and fire alarm signal boxes. 
No person except a police officer, fireman or employee of the Electrical Department in the discharge of his duties shall open, attempt to open, or cause to be opened any of the police or fire alarm signal boxes, except in case of fire. No person shall interfere, tamper or meddle with, break, cut, injure or deface any such boxes, any part thereof, or anything connected therewith and no person shall put any bill or placard upon such signal box, pole or structure. 
(Prior code § 9-15)  
15.16.140 - Erection of utility poles—Permission required. 
No person shall conduct, erect, lay or maintain in any public way, any pole, duct, conduit, manhole or other structure to support or contain wires or lines for the transmission of intelligence or for the purpose of light, heat and power except by order of the Pole and Conduit Commission previously obtained, in which the exact location of each shall be duly set forth. 
(Ord. 1029, 1986: prior code § 9-16)  
15.16.150 - Attachment of wires—Permission required. 
No wire, line or apparatus used for the transmission of electricity for any purpose shall be attached by cross-arms or otherwise to any tree in any public way, except by consent in writing of the Commissioner of Public Works first obtained, nor shall any such wire, line or apparatus be attached as aforesaid to any public building, structure or fixture of any kind, in any public way or grounds, except by order of the City Electrician first obtained, in which order such building, structure or fixture shall be duly described; provided, however, that the aforesaid regulation shall not apply to wires, lines or apparatus owned or used by the City. 
(Prior code § 9-17)  
15.16.160 - Location of poles—Petition—Notice—Hearing. 
All petitions presented to the Pole and Conduit Commission for permission to erect poles, to support wires or lines or to construct conduits for the transmission of electricity for any purpose, shall be accompanied with, or contain a statement of, the exact location of each pole proposed to be erected, or conduit to be constructed, and shall be accompanied with duplicate plans showing such locations, such plans to be in form and size agreeable to the City Electrician. A hearing upon every such petition shall be given to all parties interested. Notice of the filing of every such petition and of the hearing thereon, shall be given by the petitioner, to the owners or occupants of the land along the public ways upon which location are prayed for, which notice shall state briefly the public ways or the parts thereof to which such petition relates. 
(Prior code § 9-18)  
15.16.170 - Acceptance of locations—Conditions. 
Whenever permission shall be granted by the Pole and Conduit Commission to erect and maintain poles, or to construct and maintain ducts, conduits, manholes or other fixtures in the public ways to support, hold or contain lines or wires for the transmission of electricity, the party to whom such permission is granted shall, within thirty days from the date of the order granting such permission, file in the office of the Pole and Conduit Commission a written acceptance without reservation of the location of such poles, ducts, conduits, manholes or other fixtures and of all the conditions, terms and provisions contained in the order and the ordinances of the City and future amendments thereof, and agreeing to carry out, observe, perform and be subject to the same; and in default of such written acceptance and agreement, the permission and grant of location shall be void. Such grant and permission shall likewise be void and deemed revoked unless within six months after the date of the order the poles, ducts, conduits, manholes and other fixtures shall have been erected or constructed and completed; and, unless within six months after such completion, the electric lines shall be constructed and put in operation. Whenever the operation of the electric lines upon or in any location granted shall be discontinued for six months, the grant shall cease and be of no further effect. 
(Prior code § 9-19)  
15.16.180 - Location of poles in sidewalks. 
All poles in sidewalks shall be set upon the outer edge thereof, and, wherever there are curbstones, placed within four inches of the inner edge of the curbstones. Poles for telegraphs, telephone and electric light lines shall be straight, smooth shaven, free from blemishes and so stained, treated or painted and of such quality of material and construction as the Pole and Conduit Commission in each case and permits given therefor, shall determine. Before any poles are set or reset, or any permits given therefor, they must be inspected and approved by the Superintendent of Streets and the City Electrician. The person to whom permits are granted shall keep the poles stained, treated or painted to the satisfaction of the City Electrician. 
(Prior code § 9-20)  
15.16.190 - Location changes. 
The location of all poles, ducts, conduits or manholes erected or used by permission of the Pole and Conduit Commission to support or contain wires and lines for the transmission of electricity shall be changed and altered whenever deemed necessary by the Commission by the owner or person using the same at his expense without any unnecessary delay. If not so changed or altered, it shall be done by the City Electrician at the expense of the owner or person using the same. 
(Prior code § 9-21)  
15.16.200 - Revocation of grants. 
All permission granted by the Pole and Conduit Commission to erect and maintain poles, or to construct ducts, conduits, manholes or other fixtures for electrical lines, in the public ways, may at any time be revoked by the Commission, either in whole or in part, and the Commission may order the removal of such poles, ducts, conduits, manholes, fixtures, wires and lines as it may deem necessary. Whenever any poles, ducts, conduits, manholes, fixtures, lines and wires are ordered to be removed, such removal shall be done by and at the expense of the owner, in conformity with the order, within thirty days after notice, and if not so removed, the Commission may cause the removal to be done and the expense thereof to be repaid to the City by the owner. 
(Prior code § 9-22)  
15.16.210 - Use of poles by others. 
All locations granted shall be subject to the condition that any person to whom locations shall be granted, shall give any other person permission to use its poles, ducts, conduits, manholes or other electrical appliances or apparatus whenever ordered so to do by the Pole and Conduit Commission on payment of a reasonable rental. 
(Prior code ï¿½1/2 9-23)  
15.16.220 - Existing pole connections—Consent required. 
No person shall attach any wire or line for the transmission of electricity for any purpose, except the lines and wires owned or used by the City, to any pole already erected for the use of another person, except by consent of the owner and the order of the Pole and Conduit Commission previously obtained, in which order such pole shall be duly described. 
(Prior code § 9-24)  
15.16.230 - City authority to make attachments. 
To all poles erected and maintained by any person under the provisions of this chapter, the City may at any time attach wires for its own use. 
(Prior code § 9-25)  
15.16.240 - Aerial cables. 
Whenever the Pole and Conduit Commission deems it proper, all persons mentioned in Section 15.16.100 of this chapter, shall gather and place in aerial cable, lines and wires to the number of fifty or more in any public way, within such time, at such height and in such manner as the Commission may designate. 
(Prior code § 9-26)  
15.16.250 - Excavations—Permit required—Restoration. 
A.  No public way or bridge shall be torn up or disturbed for the purpose of laying, repairing, changing or removing lines, wires, ducts, conduits or manholes, or erecting, altering or removing poles or other fixtures used for carrying electric lines or wires, without a permit from the Street Department, subject to the approval of the City Electrician. No formal permit shall be necessary for the temporary removal of covers to manholes for the purpose of removing and repairing lines, wires and cables. Whenever a manhole is opened, the person by whose authority the same is done shall place a suitable metallic guard rail around the opening, with a signal flag, at least one foot square, displayed therefrom. 
B.  Whenever any opening or disturbance is made in any public way or bridge for any purpose, such public way or bridge shall be promptly restored by the person owning or operating the lines, wires, ducts, conduits or manholes, or making such repairs, to a condition satisfactory to the Superintendent of Streets, and shall be kept and maintained in such condition by such person for two years thereafter; and, if not immediately so restored, kept and maintained, the same may be done by the City at the expense of such person. 
(Prior code § 9-27)  
15.16.260 - Expeditious removal, relocation or repair. 
Whenever the City constructs, enlarges, relocates, repairs or alters the streets, sewers, water pipes or other public works, in streets, ways and bridges where conduits and wires are laid, which in the opinion of the Pole and Conduit Commission may require the removing or changing the location of such conduits and the fixtures appertaining thereto, or the repairing thereof, the removing, changing and repair shall be done without delay at the expense of the person owning or operating the same. 
(Prior code § 9-28) 
Whenever underground conduits are laid in streets and ways of the City, they shall not be removed, relocated or changed, without permission from the Pole and Conduit Commission. 
(Prior code § 9-29) 
In all underground conduits and manholes sufficient and necessary space shall be reserved, free of expense, for wires belonging to or to be used by the City, and such conduits shall at all times be accessible to the City for the purpose of putting in, taking out and repairing its wires. 
(Prior code § 9-30) 
A.  Enforcement Officials. The Pole and Conduit commission and its designees shall be the authorized enforcement personnel charged with the enforcement of these provisions. 
B.  Violations. Authorized enforcement personnel may: order and specify reasonable remedial actions to be taken by a violator of this Chapter to achieve compliance; or issue citations, pursuant to General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D, for violations of these provisions assessing fines of three hundred dollars for each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue. Additionally, any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined three hundred dollars. 
C.  Removal of poles, wires, ducts, conduits, manholes, electrical structures, appliances and apparatus. Authorized enforcement personnel may order the removal of poles, wires, ducts, conduits, manholes, electrical structures, appliances and apparatus of any violators of this chapter. Whenever any poles, wires, ducts, conduits, manholes, electrical structures, appliances and apparatus are ordered to be removed, such removal shall be done by and at the expense of the owner, in conformity with the order, and if not so removed, within ten days after notice, authorized enforcement personnel may cause the removal to be done and the expense thereof to be repaid to the City by the owner. 
(Ord. 1204, Added, 06/01/1998)  
Chapter 15.20 - MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.20.010 - Moving buildings—License required—Bond requirements. 
A.  No person shall move, or assist in moving, any building through or upon any street, unless a written license therefor has been first obtained from the Commissioner of Public Works upon the authority of the City Council, specifying the terms and conditions on which such removal may be made. No such license shall be authorized without public notice and opportunity for hearing. No person thus licensed shall act under his license until he has filed with the Commissioner of Public Works a bond, with sufficient surety to indemnify the City from all loss and damage by reason of such removal. No building shall be removed through any street until the chimneys of the building have been taken down even with the roof. 
B.  No license for the removal of any building through any public street, square or place shall be authorized until certificates have been presented to the City Council from the Commissioner of Public Works certifying the general conditions with regard to the streets, squares or places through which it is proposed to remove the building and of general conditions with reference to trees and the possibility of injury thereto, from the Inspector of Buildings as to the safety of the structure to be moved, from the City Electrician as to the conditions respecting electric wires on the route, and, whenever it is proposed to move any building over and across any bridge which may be under the care of the Commissioner of Bridges, from the Commissioner certifying the general condition of the bridge, and when the granting of such license is authorized it shall be upon the following conditions: 
1.  The licensee shall give the Chief of the Fire Department and the Inspector of Wires notice of such removal, at least twenty-four hours before the building shall be placed in the street; 
2.  The licensee shall reimburse the City for any expenses incurred by it by reason of labor by any department of the City in cutting and replacing wires, trimming trees, or in any other way, by reason of such removal, and before receiving a license the licensee shall deposit with the Commissioner of Public Works the sum of one hundred dollars, which sum shall be returned to the licensee when he has reimbursed the City for such expenses. 
C.  The conditions set out in subsections B1 and B2 of this section shall be printed upon and become a part of each and every license issued. 
(Prior code § 12-9)  
15.20.020 - Depositing building material in streets—Permit required. 
No person shall deposit material from any construction or excavation site on any public street, way or sidewalk in the City without first obtaining a permit from the Commissioner of Public Works. All permits shall be issued subject to the following conditions: 
A.  All motor vehicles and equipment with a capacity of one-half ton or over used in connection with the construction or excavation site shall be suitably cleaned with steam or other method approved by the Commissioner of Public Works to remove dirt and mud from the wheels and undercarriages prior to entering upon a public street or way from the construction or excavation site. 
B.  No water shall be drained, pumped or otherwise caused to be removed from construction or excavation sites into the City storm or sanitary sewers without being filtered or treated be settling tanks or other means approved by the Commissioner of Public Works so that suspended solids are removed to the extent that the water discharged shall be substantially cleaned when entering storm or sanitary sewers. No petroleum products may be discharged into storm or sanitary sewers. 
C.  When a permit is granted by the Department of Traffic and Parking or the Department of Public Works for temporary facilities, or storage of material on a public street or way, these shall not obstruct more than fifty percent of the streets width at any one time without closing the street to vehicular traffic, and such obstruction shall be suitably maintained and marked with barriers and lights and other measures, necessary to promote the public safety. Such markings and barriers shall be at the expense of the person granted the permit. 
D.  Each violation shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed fifty dollars. Any permits granted for work, which may result in violation of the City regulations shall be suspended until corrective measures have been carried out. 
(Prior code § 12-10)  
Title 17 - ZONING 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.04 - ZONING CODE ADOPTED 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Adoption by reference. 
17.04.010 Adoption by reference. 
The zoning ordinance of the City, enacted by the Council on September 8, 1969, is adopted and by this reference made a part of this code with the same force and effect as though set out in full in this code. At least three copies of the zoning ordinance are on file and open to public inspection in the office of the City Clerk. 
(Prior code § 21-1) 


ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1.000 PREAMBLE
1.10 Title
1.20 Authority
1.30 Purpose
1.40 Effective Date
1.50 Amendments to the Ordinance and Zoning Map
1.60 Applicability
1.70 Severability
ARTICLE 2.000 DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 3.000 ZONING DISTRICTS
3.10 Division of the City into Zoning Districts
3.20 Zoning Map
3.30 Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
ARTICLE 4.000 USE REGULATIONS
4.10 General Classification Rules
4.20 Special Classification Rules
4.30 Table of Use Regulations
4.40 Footnotes to the Table of Use Regulations
4.50 Institutional Use Regulations
ARTICLE 5.000 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
5.10 General Regulations
5.20 Standards for Dimensional Regulations
5.30 District Dimensional Regulations
5.40 Transitional Requirements
5.50 Special Dimensional Regulations
ARTICLE 6.000 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
6.10 Intent and Applicability
6.20 Off Street Parking Regulations
6.30 Parking Quantity Requirements
6.40 Design and Maintenance of Off Street Parking Facilities
6.50 Parking Plan Information Requirements
6.60 Purpose and Intent of Loading Requirements
6.70 Application of Loading Requirements
6.80 Required Amount of Loading Requirements
6.90 Location and Layout of Loading Facilities
6.100 Bicycle Parking
ARTICLE 7.000 SIGNS AND ILLUMINATION
7.10 Signs
7.20 Illumination
ARTICLE 8.000 NONCONFORMITY
8.10 Existing Buildings
8.20 Nonconformance
ARTICLE 9.000 PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
9.10 Enforcement
9.20 Certificate of Occupancy
ARTICLE 10.000 APPEALS, VARIANCES, AND SPECIAL PERMITS
10.10 Board of Zoning Appeal
10.20 Appeals
10.30 Variances
10.40 Special Permits
10.50 Repetitive Petitions
ARTICLE 11.000 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
11.10 Townhouse Development
11.20 Deleted
11.30 Fast Order Food Establishments
11.40 Deleted (see Article 22.70)
11.50 Deleted (see Article 20.000)
11.60 Deleted (see Article 20.000)
11.70 Deleted (see Article 20.000)
11.80 Employment Plan Compliance Procedure
11.90 Deleted
11.100 Deleted (see Article 20.000)
11.200 Incentive Zoning Provisions
11.300 Deleted (see Article 20.000)
11.400 Deleted (see Article 20.000)
11.500 Interim Planning Overlay Permit
11.700 Deleted (see Article 20.700)
ARTICLE 12.000 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
12.10 Statement of Purpose
12.20 Area of Applicability
12.30 Review of Planned Unit Development Applications
12.40 Enforcement
12.50 General Development Controls
ARTICLE 13.000 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
13.10 PUD at Kendall Square: Development Controls
13.20 PUD-1 District: Development Controls
13.30 PUD-2 District: Development Controls
13.40 PUD-3, and PUD3A Districts: Development Controls
13.50 PUD-4, PUD4A, PUD 4B and PUD4C Districts: Development Controls
13.60 deleted
13.70 Planned Unit Development in the North Point Residence District
13.80 Planned Unit Development 5 District.
ARTICLE 14.000 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT: CAMBRIDGE CENTER
14.10 Scope and Intent
14.20 Use Regulations
14.30 Intensity of Development Requirements
14.40 Open Space Requirements
14.50 Vehicular Access, Parking and Loading
14.60 Signs
14.70 Special Provisions Applicable within the Ames Street District
14.80 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations
ARTICLE 15.000 CAMBRIDGEPORT REVITALIZATION DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
15.10 Scope and Intent
15.20 Use Regulations
15.30 Intensity of Development Requirements
15.40 Open Space Requirements
15.50 Parking and Loading Requirements
15.60 Signs
15.70 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations
15.80 Public Benefits
15.90 Public Benefits
15.100 Consistency With Letter Of Commitment
ARTICLE 16.000 NORTH POINT RESIDENCE, OFFICE AND BUSINESS DISTRICT
16.10 Scope and Intent
16.20 Use Regulations
16.30 Intensity of Development Requirements
16.40 Open Space Requirements
16.50 Parking and Loading Requirements
16.60 Signs
16.70 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations
16.80 Public Benefits
ARTICLE 17.000 SPECIAL BUSINESS, OFFICE AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
17.10 Special District 1
17.20 Special District 2
17.30 Special District 3
17.40 Special District 4 & 4A
17.50 Special District 5
17.60 Special District 6
17.70 Special District 7
17.80 Special District 8 & 8A
17.90 Special District 9
17.100 Special District 10
17.200 Special District 11
17.300 Special District 12
17.400 Special District 13
17.500 Special District 14
17.600 Special District 15
ARTICLE 18.000
18.10 Traffic Mitigation Requirements
18.20 Construction Management Program
ARTICLE 19.000 Project Review
19.10 Intent and Purpose
19.20 Project Review Special Permit
19.30 Urban Design Objectives
19.40 Advisory Development Consultation Procedures
19.50 Building and Site Plan Requirements
ARTICLE 20.000 Overlay Districts
20.10 Transition Overlay Districts
20.11 Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District
20.12 Kirkland Place Transition Overlay District
20.20 Mixed Use Residential Overlay District (MXR)
20.30 Moved to Article 21.20
20.40 Eastern Cambridge Housing Overlay District (ECHO)
20.50 Harvard Square Overlay District and Harvard Square Historic Overlay
District
20.60 Parkway Overlay District
20.70 Flood Plain Overlay District
20.80 Memorial Drive Overlay District
20.90 Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6
20.100 North Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District
20.200 Prospect Street Overlay District
20.300 Central Square Overlay District
20.400 Pathway Overlay District
20.500 Lesley Porter Overlay District
20.600 Basement Housing Overlay District
20.700 Medical Marijuana Overlay Districts
20.800 Cambridge Highlands Overlay District
ARTICLE 21.000 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS REGULATIONS
21.10 General Provisions
21.20 Eastern Cambridge Development Rights Transfer Districts (TDD and
TRD)
21.30 Special Districts 8, 8A, 9 and 10
21.40 Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6
ARTICLE 22.000 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
22.10 Intent and Purpose
22.20 Green Building Requirements
22.30 Green Roofs
22.40 Exterior Walls and Insulation
22.50 Overhangs and Sun-shading Devices
22.60 Solar Energy Systems
22.70 Wind Turbine Systems
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
1-1
ARTICLE 1.000 PREAMBLE
1.10 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Cambridge”, hereinafter referred to as “this Ordinance”.
1.20 AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and amendments thereto, hereinafter
referred to as the “Zoning Act”. Certain provisions of this Ordinance are also adopted
pursuant to Chapter 565 of the acts of 1979, as amended by Chapter 387 of the Acts of
1980.
1.30 PURPOSE
It shall be the purpose of this Ordinance to lessen congestion in the streets; conserve
health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other danger; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to
encourage housing for persons of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other
public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings, including the
conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the
environment; to encourage the most rational use of land throughout the city, including the
encouragement of appropriate economic development, the protection of residential
neighborhoods from incompatible activities and including the consideration of plans and
policies, if any, adopted by the Cambridge Planning Board, and to preserve and increase
the amenities of the City.
1.40 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance and subsequent amendments to it shall be, and are hereby declared to
be in full force and effect from their date of adoption by the City Council which shall be
the effective date. The status of nonconforming uses, structures and lots with respect to
regulations existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or subsequent
amendments to it shall not be invalidated by such adoption, but shall be governed by the
applicable provisions of Section 6, Chapter 40A, G.L., as amended, and by Article 8.000
of this Ordinance, as amended.
1.50 AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE AND ZONING MAP
1.51 The City Council of the City of Cambridge may from time to time amend this Ordinance or
a district boundary indicated upon the Zoning Map in the manner prescribed in Section 5,
Chapter 40A, of the General Laws and all amendments thereto.
1.52 No proposed amendment to this Ordinance which has been unfavorably acted upon by
the City Council shall be considered on its merits within two years after the date of such
unfavorable action unless such an amendment is recommended in the report which the
Planning Board is required to make to the City Council. The granting of “leave to
1-2
withdraw” after a proposed amendment has been advertised for a hearing before the City
Council shall be considered as constituting unfavorable action. Failure of the City
Council to take action on a petition for a zoning amendment within ninety (90) days after
the City Council’s hearing on said petition shall render the petition inactive. Such failure
to act shall not be considered unfavorable action but shall require another Planning
Board public hearing, in accordance with the requirements of Section 5, Chapter 40A,
G.L., prior to any subsequent City Council action on the petition.
1.53 A person making application to the City Council for a change in this Ordinance shall pay
to the City Clerk at the time of filing of such application the filing fee set forth in Section
2.24.050 entitled “Fee Schedule” in Chapter 2.24 of the Cambridge Municipal Code,
entitled “City Clerk Department.”
1.60 APPLICABILITY
Where the application of this Ordinance imposes greater restrictions than those imposed
by any other regulations, permits, easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions
of this Ordinance shall control.
1.70 SEVERABILITY
Should any Section or paragraph of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, that decision shall not effect the validity of the Ordinance as a
whole or any part thereof, other than the portion so declared to be invalid.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
2-1
ARTICLE 2.000 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance certain words and terms are hereby defined. The definitions
set forth in the State Building Code are also applicable, where appropriate, with respect to words
and terms not defined herein. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “lot” includes “plot”, the word
“building” includes “structure”; the word “occupied” includes “designed, arranged,” or “intended to
be occupied”. Where the verb “use” is employed it shall be construed as if followed by the words
“or is intended, arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented, or leased to be used”, the
word “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive or discretionary.
Accessory Apartment. An accessory use with one or more rooms with separate kitchen and
bathroom facilities, constituting a dwelling unit, located within and under the same ownership as a
single family detached dwelling and designed for the occupancy of a single family.
Accessory Building. A building subordinate to, and located on the same lot (or on an abutting
lot in the same ownership) as the main or principal building or principal use, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the principal building or use of the land.
Accessory Use. A use subordinate to the principal use and customarily incidental to the principal
use.
Area Median Income (AMI) The Housing Area Median Family Income set forth in or calculated
from regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development pursuant to Section 8 of the Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and
Community Development Act of 1974, determined for the Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH
Metropolitan Statistical Area and adjusted for family size, or if such income standard no longer
exists, such other equivalent income standard determined by the Community Development
Department with the advice of the Affordable Housing Trust.
Art/Craft Studio. A room or group of rooms used by artists and craftspeople in the creation of
their work, including: painting, photography, sculpture, ceramics and other related arts and crafts.
Automatic Amusement Device. Any mechanism whereby, through the insertion of a coin or
token, any apparatus is released or set in motion or is put in a position where it may be in motion
for the purpose of playing any game, involving in whole or in part, the skill of the player, including,
but not exclusively, such devices as are commonly known as pinball machines, including free play
pinball machines.
Automobile Oriented Fast Order Food Service Establishments. A fast order food service
establishment which provides a greater number of parking spaces than is required by the Zoning
Ordinance.
Bakery, retail. The sale of breads, pastries, cakes, pies and similar baked goods for
consumption by the final customer at home whether or not final baking occurs on premises.
Bicycle Parking. The accessory storage of non-motorized bicycles (which may include trailers or
other customary accessories) in a secure manner that allows for quick and convenient access,
2-2
storage and removal of the bicycles by users who are making trips to or from the associated
principal use. A facility that provides Bicycle Parking shall conform to the standards set forth in
Section 6.100 of this Zoning Ordinance.
Building. Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
property of any kind.
Clinic. An institution licensed under Sec. 51, Chapter 111, G.L., for the purpose of providing
medical, surgical, dental, or restorative or mental hygienic services to persons not residing
therein.
Commercial Recreation. A bowling alley, skating or skateboard rink, pool hall, billiard parlor,
establishment containing more than three pinball machines or similar automatic amusement
devices, game room, or other establishment where entertainment or recreation services are
provided to the general public, wholly in an enclosed building, and for which user fees are charged
and which is operated for profit. As used in this Ordinance, commercial recreation does not
include a restaurant, bar, dance hall, theater, or private club with admission to facilities by limited
membership only.
Community Center. A multipurpose family center, community facility or other social service
establishment not elsewhere classified in this Ordinance where a variety of recreational,
educational, social, health care or counseling services are provided under the aegis of a non-profit
agency.
Cornice Line. The line which marks the horizontal edge at the top of the principal front wall plane
of a structure.
Development Parcel. The total land included within a Planned Unit Development, irrespective of
the number or configuration of lots. A development parcel may include land in more than one
ownership. In computing the area of a development parcel, both land and water areas within such
parcel may be counted. A development parcel shall contain contiguous lots only, unless the
regulations for a specific planned unit development district explicitly provides for development
parcels containing non-contiguous lots. However in no instance shall non-contiguous lots be
separated by more than twelve-hundred (1200) feet measured in a straight line from lot to lot.
District. A section of the City for which the zoning regulations governing the use of land, the use
of buildings and premises, and the permitted height of buildings, and the area of open space
about the buildings are uniform.
Dormitory. Any dwelling (other than a sorority or fraternity house) owned or controlled by an
educational institution and occupied primarily as a place of temporary residence for persons
whose permanent residence is elsewhere and who are employed or enrolled at the educational
institution.
Dwelling. A building or structure used in whole or in part for human habitation, but not a trailer.
Dwelling, detached. A dwelling with no party wall or walls arranged, intended or designed as the
home or residence of one family.
2-3
Dwelling, multifamily. A building arranged, intended or designed to contain three or more
dwelling units. However, any such building which consists of two or more semi-detached
dwellings shall be considered a townhouse development and shall be subject to the requirements
of Section 11.10, whether or not subdivided lots are to be created.
Dwelling, semi-detached (or Townhouse or Row House). One of a series of buildings with a
party wall or walls, common to adjoining buildings, which is constructed so that two opposite
building faces, or in the case of corner units two adjoining faces, (applicable to the building as a
whole and for each unit contained therein) have full outside exposure and so that each has
separate entrances from the outside, and each building of which is arranged, intended or
designed as the home or residence of one or two families.
Dwelling, two-family. A dwelling arranged, intended or designed as the home or residence of
two families, each family occupying a single dwelling unit.
Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms occupied or capable of being occupied separate from
any other such room or group of rooms by a family and equipped with cooking and sanitary
faculties for the exclusive use of such family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
Dwelling Unit, Affordable. A dwelling unit for which occupancy is restricted to an Eligible
Household and whose rent or initial sale price is established by (a) in the case of an Affordable
Dwelling Unit in an Inclusionary Housing project provided pursuant to Section 11.203.2, the
provisions set forth in Sections 11.203.3 and 11.203.4, or (b) standards set forth in another city,
state, or federal housing program for Eligible Households.
Dwelling Unit, Family-Sized. A dwelling unit that contains three or more bedrooms and not less
than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area.
Dwelling Unit, Studio. A dwelling unit in which there is no bedroom separated by a door or a
change in story from the other living area, such as a living room and kitchen, within the dwelling
unit.
Educational purposes, exempt by statute. Educational purposes exempted from prohibition,
regulation, or restriction as provided in Section 3, Chapter 40A, G.L.
Elderly Oriented Congregate Housing. A form of elderly oriented housing in which each
individual or two person family is provided with separate quarters which contain living and sleeping
space and which may contain kitchen and bath facilities. Each such living space shall be
considered the equivalent of one dwelling unit. Such housing shall also contain common dining,
kitchen and social facilities. Limited supportive services may also be provided.
Elderly Oriented Housing. A residential building where a minimum of eighty (80) percent of the
dwelling units are restricted to families of not more than two persons with (i) at least one member
sixty-two (62) years of age or older, or (ii) at least one member who has a chronic physical
impairment which substantially reduces his or her ability to live independently and is of such a
nature that the quality of his or her life would be improved by more suitable housing, and where
the certificate of occupancy issued by the Superintendent of Buildings is so restricted. The
certificate shall be renewed every two years and shall be issued initially and renewed only upon
submission of evidence that priority in occupancy be given to residents of Cambridge.
2-4
Eligible Household. A household whose gross household income does not exceed (a) in the
case of an Affordable Dwelling Unit in an Inclusionary Housing Project provided pursuant to
Section 11.203.2, the amounts set forth in Section 11.203.4, or (b) amounts set forth in another
applicable city, state, or federal housing program.
Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit; provided that a group of four or more persons who are not within the second
degree of kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a family.
Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding paragraph, a family shall be deemed to include four
or more persons not within the second degree of kinship occupying a dwelling unit and living as a
single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons as defined in Title
VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the “Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.”
Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and
to the same extent as any family in the first paragraph of this definition.
Fast Order Food. Food which is (a) primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for
use as an ingredient in or component of meals; (b) available upon a short waiting time; and (c)
packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where
it is sold.
Fast Order Food Establishment. A specific operation separate and distinct from any other
operation in the location occupied and in the kind of Fast Order Food sold, and which:
(a) has as its primary business the sale to the public of Fast Order Food for consumption on or off
the premises, and
(b) does not meet all of the following conditions:
(1) provision of nondisposable plates, cups and utensils to all patrons,
(2) availability of printed individual menus for all patrons,
(3) provision of seventy-five (75) percent of the seating in the premises at free standing
tables, rather than at counters, and
(4) at least eighty (80) percent of the revenues from food sales is attributable to food
consumed on premises.
Floor Area, Dwelling Unit Net. Floor area contained within dwelling units or single rooms in a
lodging house excluding common areas, such as lobbies, hallways, elevator cores, amenity
spaces, common storage areas or parking facilities, exterior walls, walls dividing dwelling units
from each other, or walls dividing dwelling units from common areas, or unenclosed spaces such
as open-air porches, balconies, or decks.
Floor Area Gross. The sum, in square feet, of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building, as measured from the exterior walls [except in (8) and (9) below where only interior
space shall be measured and in (h) where the area of the parking facility shall be measured] of a
building or the centerline of party walls between buildings.
Gross Floor Area shall include:
(a) roofed porches and balconies whether enclosed or unclosed;
2-5
(b) unroofed porches and balconies above third floor, with the exception of porch and balcony
spaces associated with Functional Green Roof Area, in accordance with the regulations in
Section 22.30 of this Zoning Ordinance;
(c) elevator shafts and stairwells on each floor, not excluded in (6) below;
(d) attic space, whether finished or unfinished, within the area of a horizontal plane that is five
(5) feet above the attic floor and which touches the side walls and/or the underside of the
roof rafters and which is not excluded in (5) below;
(e) interior balconies, mezzanines, and penthouses;
(f) deleted
(g) area of parking facilities in structures except as excluded in (2) below; and
(h) any accessory parking spaces not in above ground structures if in excess of the maximum
number permitted on the premises as set forth in Section 5.25 and 6.30.
Gross Floor Area shall not include:
(1) areas used for off street loading purposes;
(2) area of parking facilities in structures located underground and the area of on grade open
parking spaces outside the building footprint at or below the maximum number permitted
on the premises as set forth in Sections 5.25 and 6.30;
(3) basement and cellar areas devoted to the operations and maintenance of the building such
as heating and cooling equipment, electrical and telephone facilities, and fuel storage;
(4) open and lattice-work fire escapes;
(5) unroofed porches and balconies no higher than the third floor;
(6) attic space and other areas devoted to elevator machinery or mechanical equipment
necessary for the operation of the building, including sustainable mechanical systems and
related equipment and chases for systems including, but not limited to, solar energy
systems, geothermal systems and heat pumps, solar hot water systems and related tubes
and tanks, equipment related to radiant heating, hydronic cooling, heat recovery
ventilators, and energy recovery ventilators;
(7) elevator shafts and stairwells on floors where there is no other area which qualifies to be
included in gross floor area;
(8) attic space not otherwise included in (d) above;
(9) basement and cellar spaces with less than seven (7) feet of ceiling height measured from
the floor to the line of the bottom of the floor joists, or to any subfloor or finished surface
above any floor joists that are spaced not less than four (4) feet on center, and further
provided that the basement or cellar is not a Story Above Grade as defined in the State
Building Code.
(10) bicycle parking meeting or exceeding the requirements of Article 6.000, which shall include
all areas occupied by Bicycle Parking Spaces and access routes intended exclusively for
use by bicycles, which shall be clearly indicated in the bicycle parking plan requirements
set forth in Section 6.52.1whether located in a principal use structure, any parking facility
for motor vehicles, or in an accessory structure.
2-6
(11) Functional Green Roof Area, in accordance with the regulations in Section 22.30 of this
Zoning Ordinance;
(12) interior air spaces within Double-Skin Façades and additional exterior wall thickness to
accommodate insulation, in accordance with the regulations in Section 22.40 of this Zoning
Ordinance; and
(13) space directly beneath overhangs, eaves, awnings, pergolas, arbors, trellises or other sunshading
devices, in accordance with the regulations in Section 22.50 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
(14) Public Bicycle-Sharing Stations.
(15) Any basement or cellar living space in any single-family or two-family home.
(16) Any basement or cellar living space in any other type of structure with the issuance of a
special permit. In granting such a special permit, the permit granting authority may
approved the exemption of any portion of Gross Floor Area (GFA) located in a basement
or cellar from the calculation of GFA, provided the permit granting authority finds that the
uses occupying such exempted GFA support the character of the neighborhood or district
in which the applicable lot is located.
In a building with more than two floors, the area of each floor level of any interior courtyard
whether or not covered by a roof, which has a minimum dimension of less than forty (40) feet in
any direction shall be included unless twenty (20) percent or more of the perimeter of such court
yard at each floor level measured consecutively is not enclosed.
Floor Area Ratio. The ratio of gross floor area of a structure to the total area of the lot.
Formula Business. An individual Retail or Consumer Service establishment that is required by
virtue of a contract, franchise agreement, ownership or other similar legal obligation to conform or
substantially conform to a set of common design and operating features that served to identify the
establishment as one of a group of establishments for business, marketing and public relations
purposes. Specifically, an establishment shall be considered a Formula Business if it shares at
least two (2) of the following three (3) characteristics with ten (10) or more other establishments in
Massachusetts or within twenty (20) or more other establishments.
1. Trademark, service mark or logo, defined as a work, phrase, symbol, or design or
combination thereof that identifies and distinguishes the source of the goods or services
from others;
2. Standardized building architecture including but not limited to façade design and signage;
3. Standardized color scheme used throughout the exterior of the establishment, including
color associated with signs and logos.
Government Facility, Other. Land or structure of the federal government, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Middlesex County or any other supra-local governmental body or agency.
Group Quarters. A living arrangement for groups containing four or more persons not related to
the person in charge.
Height of Building. The vertical distance of the highest point of the roof above the mean grade
of the ground adjoining the building.
2-7
Helipad. Any area of land or water, or building, other than an airport which is made available for
the landing and takeoff of helicopters or other aircraft.
Home Occupation. For an occupation customarily carried on at home, the use of a room in a
dwelling as an office, studio, or work room by a person residing on the premises and in connection
with which there is kept no stock in trade nor commodity sold on the premises.
Hospital An institution under Section 51, Chapter 111, G.L., for the purpose of caring for persons
admitted thereto for diagnosis, medical, surgical or restorative treatment which is rendered in said
institution.
Incentive Project. Any new development that consists of at least thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet of Gross Floor Area devoted to one or more of the following uses listed in Section 4.30 of the
Zoning Ordinance: Sections 4.31 i-1 (Hotel or motel), 4.32 f (Radio and television studio), 4.33 b-5
(College or University not exempt by statute, specifically including those uses and facilities listed
in Subsection 4.56 c-4, c-5, and c-6), 4.33 c (Noncommercial Research Facility), 4.33 d (Health
Care Facilities), 4.33 e (Social Service Facilities), 4.34 (Office and Laboratory Use), 4.35 (Retail
Business and Consumer Service Establishments), 4.36 (Open Air or Drive In Retail Service), 4.37
(Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage), and 4.38 (Heavy Industry). For the purpose of
this definition, new development shall mean (1) construction of new buildings or additions to
existing buildings to accommodate uses in the above list, (2) substantial rehabilitation of buildings
to accommodate uses in the above list for which the buildings were not originally used, or (3)
Gross Floor Area whose use is changed from a use not included in the above list to a use
included in the above list. In no case shall Gross Floor Area devoted to a Municipal Service
Facility or Other Government Facility be considered an Incentive Project.
Inclusionary Housing Project. Any development of detached single-family, two-family,
multifamily, and townhouse housing, elderly oriented congregate housing, and lodging houses as
set forth in Sections 4.31 a-h and i-3, or development which includes any such residential use and
at least one non-residential use, that creates at least ten (10) dwelling units or at least ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of residential Gross Floor Area on one (1) lot or Development
Parcel or two (2) or more adjoining lots in common ownership or under common control at any
time within five (5) years following the first date of application for any special or building permit for
development on the lot or lots or at any time within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding
the first date of application for any special or building permit. For the purpose of this definition,
development shall include (1) construction of new buildings or additions; (2) increasing the
number of dwelling units or amount of residential Gross Floor Area within an existing residential
building; (3) occupancy of existing buildings which have not been used for any residential use for
a period of at least two (2) years; or (4) conversion of Gross Floor Area in existing buildings from
non-residential to residential use. Development of fewer than ten (10) dwelling units and fewer
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of residential Gross Floor Area may be an Inclusionary
Housing Project where the owner chooses voluntarily to comply with the provisions of Section
11.203.
Institutional Use. The use of land or structures for the non-profit charitable, benevolent, spiritual,
instructional or custodial activities of government, education, religious, health care, social service,
fraternal/sorority or similar organizations.
2-8
Lodging House. A dwelling where lodgings are let to four or more persons not within the second
degree of kinship to the person conducting it, including fraternity housing but not including
dormitories or charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions.
Lot. A parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or by streets, which
is designated by its owner to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
Lot Depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean
direction of the side lot lines.
Lot Line, Front. A line separating the lot from the street or from a building line if such has been
established.
Lot Line, Rear. A line most distant and opposite from the front lot line; where the lot is irregular, a
line perpendicular to the mean direction of the side lot lines, and at least ten (10) feet in length
within the lot.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured perpendicular to the
mean direction of the side lot lines.
Marijuana Dispensary, Registered. Registered Marijuana Dispensary, also known as RMD or
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, shall mean an establishment properly registered with the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health under 105 CMR 725.100 that acquires, cultivates,
possesses, processes (including development of related products such as edible marijuana
infused products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes,
dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or
educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Municipal Service Facility. Use of land or structures by the City of Cambridge or other
municipality for maintenance operations, public utilities, public works and similar governmental
functions.
Neighborhood. That geographical area within Cambridge whose boundaries are defined on the
Cambridge Planning Board’s map entitled “Cambridge Neighborhoods”, as attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference.
Nonconforming structure. Any structure which does not conform to the dimensional
requirements in Article 5.000 or to the parking and loading requirements in Article 6.000 of this
Ordinance for the district in which it is located; provided that such structure was in existence and
lawful at the time the applicable provisions of this or prior zoning ordinances became effective.
Nonconforming use. A use of a building, structure or lot that does not conform to the use
regulations of Article 4.000 of this Ordinance for the district in which it is located; provided that
such use was in existence and lawful at the time the applicable provisions of this or prior zoning
ordinances became effective.
Open Space, Green Area. A landscaped area of land associated with and located on the same
tract of land as a major building or group of buildings in relation to which it serves to provided light
and air, or scenic, recreational, or similar purposes. Green Area Open Space shall be open and
unobstructed to the sky, it shall be land at grade, and shall consist of friable, permeable materials
2-9
(including but not limited to loam, gravel, sand, crushed stone, and including naturally occurring
soil, bedrock, and incidental pipes and other underground utilities) having a minimum depth of
three (3) feet. Said land shall be capable of supporting the growth of trees, grass, ground cover,
shrubs and similar vegetation. Such area may not include any portion of the lot used for parking
areas and access drives or other hard surface areas, except walks and terraces designed and
intended for non-vehicular use.
Green Area Open Space shall, except as provided for below, consist entirely of living trees, grass,
ground cover, bushes, shrubs, and/or similar vegetation, as well as water and other natural
features of the site. However, in no case shall hard surfaced walks and terraces, or pervious
ground covers like gravel, stone, and wood chips not being used as mulch beneath vegetation,
exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total required Green Area Open Space.
Open Space, Permeable. A kind of Green Area Open Space (as defined above) in which the
surface material must be permeable but which surface material is not limited or restricted as to
type. That surface material may include vegetation; rocks, pebbles, wood chips and similar
landscaping materials; or unit pavers. All other materials (for example, continuously poured
asphalt or concrete) are not allowed except that any material may be used for pedestrian
walkways not exceeding forty-eight (48) inches in width or half the width of the area in which they
are located, whichever amount is less.
Open Space, Public. An area owned or controlled by the City of Cambridge or other public entity
that is intended for public use, that is open to the sky and that is designed for either
environmental, scenic, or recreation purposes. Public Open Space may include but is not limited
to lawns, decorative plantings, interior walkways, abutting sidewalks, active and passive
recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, and public performance areas. Public Open Space shall
not include rooftop areas, patios, balconies, parking lots, or driveways. Limited paved surfaces
may be designed to accommodate occasional use by motor vehicles servicing the park facility. If
the facility is not held in fee simple by the City of Cambridge or other public entity, the Public Open
Space may be land remaining in private ownership but protected for public use by means of a
permanent easement, conservation restriction, or other similar legal device acceptable to the City.
Open Space, Publicly Beneficial. A portion of a structure, a lot or other area of land associated
with and adjacent to a building or group of buildings in relation to which it serves to provide light
and air, or scenic, recreation, pedestrian amenity or similar purposes. Such space shall be
customarily available or shall be readily visible to such occupants and visitors, though physically
inaccessible, by being located and treated to enhance the amenity of the development through a
general appearance of openness. Publicly beneficial open space shall include parks, plazas,
lawns, landscaped areas, decorative plantings, and active and passive recreational areas.
Publicly beneficial open space shall also include loggias, atriums, arcades and pedestrian ways
listed and defined in Section 14.45. Streets, parking lots, driveways, service roads, loading areas,
and areas normally inaccessible to pedestrian circulation beneath pedestrian bridges, decks, or
shopping bridges shall not be counted in determining required publicly beneficial open space.
Open Space, Private. The part or parts of a lot or structure which are reserved for the use of
occupants of a building which is used wholly, or in part, for residential purposes. This space shall
have minimum dimensions as prescribed in the Ordinance, shall exclude parking areas,
driveways and walkways, and shall be open and unobstructed to the sky. Trees, plantings,
arbors, fences, flagpoles, sculpture, fountains and recreational and drying apparatus and similar
2-10
objects shall not be considered obstructions when located within a private open space. Objects or
structures intended exclusively for bicycle parking, designed and located in accordance with
Section 6.100, which may be uncovered, partially covered or fully enclosed, shall not be
considered obstructions provided that such objects or structures are not used for motor vehicle
parking, general storage or any other use, and further provided that any such structure exceeding
six feet (6’) in height conforms to the requirements for an accessory building in Section 4.21. To
the extent permitted in this Ordinance, balconies and roof areas may also be considered as
private open space.
Owner. Every person who alone or jointly or severally with others (a) has legal title to any land,
building or structure; or (b) has care, charge, or control of any land, building, or structure in any
capacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder or legal title; or (c) lessee under a written letting
agreement; or (d) mortgagee in possession; or (e) agent, trustee or other person appointed by the
courts.
Parking facility. A portion of a building or a lot which is located off-street and contains one or
more motor vehicle parking spaces and access thereto including driveways. A parking facility
may be a garage, an area of a lot or a parking lot. A parking facility may be an accessory use or a
principal use or any combination thereof. For the purposes of this definition a parking facility shall
include parking required by Section 6.30 and any other off-street parking provided.
Parking facility, accessory. A parking facility developed to serve the residents, occupants,
employees, patrons or other users of a particular land use of building. An accessory parking
facility shall be subordinate and customarily incidental to the principal use.
Parking Space. An area in a parking facility available to the storage of one motor vehicle with
free and unimpeded access to a street over unobstructed passageways, aisles or driveways.
However, the unimpeded access requirement may be waived only as provided in Subsection
6.43.2.
Planned Unit Development. A land development project comprehensively planned by the
developer with a single site plan for a parcel of a size eligible for PUD designation. A PUD is
designed to permit flexibility in building siting, mixtures of housing types and land uses, private
open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features.
Principal front wall plane. That face, side or elevation of a building most closely oriented
towards the street, excluding porches, window bays and similar appendages. If there is more
than one such front wall plane, the principal front wall plane shall be the one with the greatest front
surface area. Buildings on corner lots may be considered to have more than one principal front
wall plane.
Public Bicycle-Sharing Service. A system operated under the auspices of a program
administered and/or approved by the City of Cambridge whose function is to provide the general
public with opportunities to rent bicycles on a short-term basis for use within the city or region.
Public Bicycle-Sharing Station. A bicycle sharing facility placed of constructed by a Public
Bicycle-Sharing Service o public or private property where bicycles are stored and from which
2-11
members of the public may rent bicycles as part of a Public Bicycle-Sharing Service including
objects or equipment necessary for or appurtenant to its operation.
Religious purposes. Places of worship and other religious institutions or purposes exempted
from prohibition, regulation or restriction as provided in Section 3, Chapter 40A, G.L.
Signs. Signs shall mean and include any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, words,
model, banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag, or representation used as, or which is in nature of,
advertisement, announcement, or direction and which is designed to be seen from the outside of
a building.
Sign frontage. The length of a building, or the length of a separate and distinct ground floor
establishment, abutting a street. The length of the building or ground floor establishment shall be
that as defined in Section 5.24.4 of this Ordinance.
Signs, illumination of.
1. Natural - natural or ambient light.
2. External - artificial illumination from a light source which provides light directly onto the sign
face, or portions of the sign face, or its background, which light is then reflected back to the
viewer.
3. Internal - artificial illumination from a light source located behind the sign face and which
transmits light through the sign face or portions of the sign face to the viewer. Exposed
neon tubing and similar lighting shall be considered internal illumination.
4. Indirect - placement of the artificial light device such that the source of light cannot be seen
from a public way.
Signs, types of.
1. Free-standing Sign - A sign that is attached to or part of a completely self supporting
structure and which is not attached to any building or other structure.
2. Projecting Sign - Any sign, other than a wall sign or free standing sign, that is attached to
and projects from a building face. A projecting sign shall include marquee, canopy, and
awning-mounted signs.
4. Wall Sign - Any sign affixed in such a way that its exposed face and all sign area is parallel
or approximately parallel to the plane of the building to which it attached. A wall sign shall
be considered a projecting sign if the sign face projects more than twelve (12) inches from
the face of the building. Wall signs shall include signs located on or behind the surface of
windows; such a sign may not in total area exceed thirty (30) percent of glass area of any
window to which it is appurtenant.
2-12
Signs, related definitions.
1. Ground floor establishment - A separate and distinct use, business, enterprise, or
institution having a separate public entrance to the outside of a building, which entrance is
at grade or within six feet of grade as measured at the street line.
2. Premises - That part of a lot, building, or structure occupied by a business, enterprise,
institution, or other person and which is distinct and separate from the place occupied by
any other business, enterprise, institution or other person.
Social Service Center. A facility where counseling, limited short-term custodial care or similar
special services are provided to persons on a walk-in or appointment basis under the aegis of a
nonprofit agency.
Street. The right of way, including sidewalks, of a public way, or a private way open to public use,
used or intended for use by automobile traffic, including highways, parkways, alleys, courts and
squares used or intended for this purpose, to which owners of abutting land have a right of
access.
Street line. The line separating a street from a lot.
Structure. A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter,
such as a building, bridge, trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium,
reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole or the like.
Subdivided lot. A lot that has been created through the subdivision of a parcel of land on which
a townhouse development is constructed. Said lot is created for the purpose of selling an
individual semi-detached dwelling together with the land upon which it is constructed. Such
subdivided lot may be less than 5000 square feet. A subdivided lot, as controlled in Section 11.14
is applicable only to townhouse development.
Townhouse Development. The development (through conversion, addition to existing buildings,
or new construction) of two or more semi-detached dwellings in one or more structures, with at
least two semi-detached dwellings in each structure, on a single parcel of land.
Use, principal. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed,
arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained.
Yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, open and unobstructed from
the ground to the sky.
Yard, front. The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the front street
line, or the building line where such may have been established on the lot, and the nearest part of
a building.
Yard, rear. The yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear line of
the lot and the nearest part of a building.
Yard, side. The yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest part of a building and
extending from the front yard to the rear yard, or in the absence of either of such yards, to the
front or rear lot line, as may be.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
3-1
ARTICLE 3.000 ZONING DISTRICTS
3.10 DIVISION OF THE CITY INTO ZONING DISTRICTS
3.20 ZONING MAP
3.30 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
3.10 DIVISION OF THE CITY INTO ZONING DISTRICTS
3.11 For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Cambridge is hereby divided into fifty
classes of districts listed below in order of decreasing restrictiveness as follows:
1. Open Space District .................................... Public parks and recreation
facilities and other public facilities
2. Residence A-1 District ................................ Single-family dwellings
3. Residence A-2 District ................................ Single-family dwellings
4. Residence B District ................................... Two family or semi-detached
dwellings
5. Residence C District ................................... Multifamily dwellings
6. Residence C-1 District ................................ Multifamily dwellings
7. Residence C-1A District…………………….. Multifamily dwellings
8. Residence C-2 District ................................ Multifamily dwellings
9. Residence C-2B District .............................. Multifamily dwellings
10. Residence C-2A District .............................. Multifamily dwellings
11. Residence C-3A District .............................. Multifamily dwellings and limited office
12. Residence C-3 District ................................ Multifamily dwellings
13. Residence C-3B District……………………...Multifamily dwellings
14. Office 1 District ............................................ Business and professional
office and multifamily dwellings
(Apartment house, hotel, dormitory)
15. Office 2A District………………………………Business, research and professional
offices, limited research oriented
manufacturing
16. Office 2 District ............................................ Business, research and
professional offices, limited research
oriented manufacturing
17. Office 3A District ......................................... Business and professional
offices and multifamily dwellings
18. Office 3 District ............................................ Business and professional
offices and multifamily dwellings
19. Business A-3 District…………………………Neighborhood Business
3-2
20. Business A-1 District .................................. Local business
21. Business A-2 District .................................. Local business
22. Business A District ..................................... Local and drive in retail business
offices and multifamily dwellings
23. Business C-1 District ................................. General business, professional
offices, multifamily dwellings.
24. Business B-1 District* ................................ General business, business and
professional offices, and multifamily
dwellings
25. Business B-2 District* ................................ General business, business and
professional offices and multifamily
dwellings
26. Business B District ..................................... General business
27. Industry B-2 District ................................... Office, warehouse and light
.................................................................... manufacturing
28. Industry C District ....................................... Office, research and
light manufacturing, with optional
planned unit development
29. Industry A-1 District ................................... Limited impact business and industry
30. Industry B-1 District ................................... Heavy manufacturing, warehouses,
and offices
31. Industry A-2 District .................................... Limited impact business and industry
32. Industry A District ....................................... Warehouse, storage and light
manufacturing
33. Special Business, Office ............................. Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 1 requirements of Article 17.000
34. Special Business, Office ............................. Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 2 requirements of Article 17.000
35. Special Business, Office ............................. Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 3 requirements of Article 17.000
36. Special Business, Office ............................. Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 4 and 4A requirements of Article 17.000
37. Special Business, Office ............................. Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 5 requirements of Article 17.000
38. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 6 requirements of Article 17.000
39. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 7 requirements of Article 17.000
40. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
3-3
and Industrial District 8 requirements of Article 17.000
41. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 9 requirements of Article 17.000
42. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 10 requirements of Article 17.000
43. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 11 requirements of Article 17.000
44. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 12 requirements of Article 17.000
45. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 13 requirements of Article 17.000
46. Special Business, Office ............................ Various Uses governed by the
and Industrial District 14 requirements of Article 17.000
47. Cambridge Center ...................................... Various uses governed by the
Mixed Use Development requirements of Article 14.000
(MXD) District
48. Cambridgeport ........................................... Various uses governed by the
Revitalization Development District requirements of Article 15.000
49. North Point Residence, Office ................... Various uses governed by the
and Business District requirements of Article 16.000
50. Industry B District ........................................ Heavy Industry
* subject to the requirements of Sections 4.26, 11.40, and other requirements of
this Ordinance.
3.12 In addition to the districts established under Subsection 3.11, overlay districts may be
established from time to time. As specified elsewhere in this Ordinance, each overlay
district shall have special regulations which shall be applicable in lieu of or in addition to
the regularly applicable regulations for the base zoning district.
3.20 ZONING MAP
3.21 The boundaries of each of the said districts are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled, Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, or as hereafter amended, which map is
attached to and made a part of this Ordinance. The said Zoning Map and all boundaries,
notations, and other data shown thereon are made by this reference as much a part of
this Ordinance as if fully described and detailed herein. The said map shall be filed in the
custody of the City Clerk of Cambridge and may be examined by the public subject to
any reasonable regulations established by the City Clerk.
3.30 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
3.31 The boundaries between districts are shown on the Zoning Map. Where uncertainty
exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map
accompanying and made a part of this Ordinance, the following rules shall apply:
3-4
a. Where the district boundary is a street, the boundary line shall be the centerline of
the street.
b. Where the boundary line is indicated approximately parallel to the street, it shall be
taken as parallel thereto and, unless otherwise indicated, one hundred feet distant
from the nearest street line. If there is any variance between the scaled distance
from the boundaries to the street line and the distance as marked in feet upon the
map, the latter shall govern.
c. Where the districts designated on the map are bounded by lot lines, the lot lines
shall be construed to be the boundary lines, unless the boundary lines are
otherwise indicated on the map.
3.32 Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot under single ownership at the time of
the effective date of this Ordinance, (6/29/81) the regulations for each zoning district shall
apply to portions of the lot within the respective districts except as provided in this
Subsection 3.32.
3.32.1 Where more than one-half the area of said lot is in a less restricted district, (either in
terms of the district's overall regulations or a single regulation) the Board of Zoning
Appeal may grant a special permit allowing any of the less restrictive dimensional
regulation(s) to extend up to twenty-five (25) feet into the more restricted district. Uses
not allowed in the more restricted districts shall not extend into the more restricted
districts.
3.32.2 Dwelling units and/or gross floor area allowed in the more restricted district, according to
the formulas specified in Subsection 5.27, may be located in the less restricted district,
but dwelling units or gross floor area allowed in the less restricted districted may be
located in that portion of the lot located in the more restricted district only to the extent
permitted in Section 3.321.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
4-1
ARTICLE 4.000 USE REGULATIONS
4.10 GENERAL CLASSIFICATION RULES
4.20 SPECIAL CLASSIFICATION RULES
4.30 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
4.40 FOOTNOTES TO TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
4.50 INSTITUTIONAL USE REGULATIONS
4.60 SHORT TERM RENTALS
4.10 GENERAL CLASSIFICATION RULES
4.11 In each district, except the Cambridge Center Mixed Use Development (MXD) District, the
use of land, buildings, and structures shall be regulated as set forth in Section 4.30 of this
Article, Table of Use Regulations, and as provided elsewhere in this Ordinance. Uses in
the Cambridge Center MXD District shall be governed by Section 14.20.
4.12 A use listed in Section 4.30 is permitted as of right in any district under which it is denoted
by the word “YES”. Uses designated in the Table by the letters “SP” may be allowed
only if a special permit is issued by the Board of Zoning Appeal. Uses designated in the
Table by the letters “PB” may be allowed only if issued a special permit by the Planning
Board. Special permits shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.40
and may be subject to such restrictions as the special permit granting authority may
establish. Uses designated in the Table by the “PUD” may be allowed only if the use is
part of a Planned Unit Development approved by the Planning Board in accordance with
the applicable requirements of Articles 12.000 and 13.000. Uses denoted by the word
“NO” in Section 4.30 shall be prohibited. Uses in certain districts designated in the Table
by the letters “IUR” shall be governed by the applicable provisions of Section 4.50,
Institutional Use Regulations.
4.13 No building, structure, or land in any district may be used, erected or designed to be used,
in whole or in part, for any use not listed in Section 4.30, except nonconforming uses
which may be continued under the provisions of 8.20.
4.20 SPECIAL CLASSIFICATION RULES
4.21 Accessory Uses.
a. An accessory use shall be permitted only on the same lot as the building or use to
which it is accessory, with the following exceptions:
(1) Off street parking facilities complying with the requirements of Section 6.50 may
be located on a separate lot;
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a Special Permit for a use accessory to
a scientific research, scientific development, or related production activity,
whether or not on the same lot as such activity. A Special Permit shall be
granted where said Board finds that the proposed accessory use does not
substantially derogate from the public good.
4-2
(3) A use accessory to other permitted uses within the Cambridge Center MXD
District may be located on other lots in the MXD District.
b. Providing nontransient lodging within a residential structure shall be considered an
accessory use only if there is compliance with each of the following conditions:
(1) The residential structure is a detached, semi-detached or two family building;
(2) The owner of the building resides on the premises;
(3) Lodging is provided to not more than two roomers or boarders;
(4) Separate cooking facilities are not maintained for the roomers or boarders;
(5) No sign or nameplate for said roomers or boarders is displayed; and
(6) Signs advertising the availability of such lodging is not regularly displayed on
the premises.
c. Provisions of garage or parking space for occupants, employees, customers, or
visitors shall be considered as an accessory use, provided that where accessory to
residential uses in Residence A and B districts such garage or parking space shall be
limited to the accommodation of three passenger vehicles, or two passenger vehicles
for each dwelling unit, whichever is greater.
d. A customary home occupation or the office of a resident physician, dentist, attorneyat-
law, architect, engineer, properly licensed massage therapist, or member of other
recognized profession shall be considered as an accessory use, provided that no
more than three persons shall practice or be employed on the premises at any one
time. In the case of a massage therapist, no more than one person shall practice or
be employed on the premises at any one time.
e. In multifamily dwellings containing twenty-five or more dwelling units, hospitals or
hotels with more than fifty sleeping rooms, a newsstand or other retail shop, a barber
shop or similar service establishment, a dining room or other eating establishment
shall be considered as an accessory use provided that (1) the establishment is
primarily intended for occupants of the building, hotel or hospital; (2) the
establishment is conducted entirely within and only entered from the interior of the
dwelling, hospital or hotel; and (3) no signs or other advertising is visible from outside
the building.
f. In an office building containing at least one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
of gross floor area, a newsstand, candy/tobacco stand, barbershop or other similar
service establishment primarily intended for occupants of the building shall be a
permitted accessory use provided that such activities are conducted and entered only
from within the building and no signs or advertising devices thereof are visible from
outside the building.
g. The area occupied by accessory uses shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) The total area of uses accessory to the principal use may not occupy more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the building in which the
principal use is located or twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the dwelling
unit when the accessory use is located in a residence.
(2) The total area of uses or buildings accessory to the principal use except for
parking facilities and driveways may not occupy more than fifteen (15) percent
of the area of the lot.
4-3
(3) The area limitations of this paragraph 4.21 g shall be applicable in all zoning
districts except the Cambridge Center MXD District; however, if explicitly stated
elsewhere in this Ordinance certain accessory uses in specified districts may
exceed the foregoing area limitation.
h. In Residence A, B, C, and C-1 Districts an accessory building shall not be located
nearer than ten (10) feet to the principal building or nearer than five (5) feet to any
side or rear lot line or nearer to the front lot line than the minimum setback in the
zoning district.
i. In a Residence District an accessory use shall not involve the maintenance of a stock
in trade or the use of signs, illumination, show windows or displays either exterior or
interior, except such signs as are permitted by Article 7.000.
j. No accessory building shall be used as a dwelling except in an Industrial District for
the accommodation of a night watchman or janitor.
k. An accessory building in Residence A, B, C, C-1, and Office-1 districts shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the ground level.
l. No accessory building may be converted to a residential use unless it conforms with
the district dimensional regulations specified in Section 5.30.
m. Limited manufacturing activity shall be considered an allowed accessory use to a
technical research and development office, laboratory or research facility in a
nonindustrial district provided that the following requirements are satisfied:
(1) Such manufacturing activity is related to research and development activities of
the principal use.
(2) No manufacturing activity customarily occurs within fifty (50) feet of a residence
or residential district.
(3) All manufacturing activity customarily occurs inside of buildings; however,
outside research work and incidental outside fabrication of equipment to
conduct outside experimentation shall be permitted.
(4) Outside research in nonindustrial districts should not customarily involve
noxious activity which creates disturbances off of the premises.
(5) Manufacturing activity, excluding incidental fabrication of outside experiments,
shall not occupy an area in excess of sixty (60) percent of the gross floor area
of a building or group of associated buildings owned by the same
establishment.
n. A helipad or airport shall not be considered as an accessory use.
4.22 Accessory Apartments. The purpose of this Subsection 4.22 is to allow for the creation of
accessory apartments in all districts. Many large single and two-family homes are
underutilized. Alteration of these homes to provide additional dwelling units would be
prohibited in most cases due to the existing floor area ratio and/or lot area per dwelling
unit requirements of Subsection 5.31. Given contemporary life styles, housing needs and
energy and maintenance costs, it is beneficial to the City to allow greater flexibility in the
use of such dwellings without substantially altering the environmental quality of such
residential districts. This Subsection 4.22 gives the Board of Zoning appeal authority to
relax such requirements in certain instances as enumerated below.
4-4
4.22.1 In all districts the Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit for alteration of a
single family or two-family, detached dwelling to provide one accessory apartment if the
following conditions are met:
1. The dwelling has not been substantially enlarged since built. The addition in the
aggregate of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet or more of gross floor area shall
be considered a substantial enlargement.
2. Prior to alteration the dwelling contains at least one thousand eight hundred (1,800)
square feet of gross floor area.
3. The lot on which such accessory apartment is located contains at least five thousand
(5,000) square feet of lot.
4. Such accessory apartment shall not occupy more than nine hundred (900) square
feet or thirty-five (35) percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling,
whichever is less, and shall not be located in a garage.
5. The owner(s) of the residence in which the accessory dwelling unit is created must
continue to occupy at least one of the dwelling units as their primary residence. Prior
to issuance of a building permit, the owner(s) must submit a notarized letter stating
that the owner will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises as the owner’s
primary residence.
6. Any existing two-family home may be converted to a single family home with
accessory unit by right, without need for a Special Permit.
In granting a special permit the Board may impose such conditions, including
requirements for off street parking and limitations on other accessory uses of the
premises, as it may deem appropriate to avoid detriment to the neighborhood or to nearby
persons or property. The Board of Zoning Appeal shall evaluate each special permit
application which involves exterior changes with the appearance of and character of the
neighborhood and may require that there be no change or minimal change to any face of
a building oriented toward a public way or visible from a public way.
4.22.2 The requirement for an off street parking space specified in Article 6.000 shall not apply
for the addition of one accessory apartment in a single family or two-family, detached
dwelling in all districts. .
4.23 Offices in Residences. In a Residence C-2A, C-3, or C-3B district, offices for physicians
and dentists may be located on the first or second floor of a residential building where
such office space does not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the building.
In a Residence C-3A district, up to forty (40) percent of the gross floor area of a
residential building may be devoted to business and professional offices, but not technical
offices.
4.24 Temporary Buildings and Uses. The Superintendent of Buildings may grant a permit for a
temporary building or use incidental to a building development, which does not comply
with the provisions of this Ordinance, where reasonably required for such development.
Such permit may be issued for an initial period of not more than one year, and in the case
of a building, only upon application accompanied by a bond and bill of sale to the City,
effective in case the building is not removed prior to the expiration of the permit. Permits
4-5
may be renewed by the Superintendent of Buildings for successive periods of not more
than one year each, not to exceed a total of three years.
4.25 Non Open Space Uses in Open Space Districts. The purpose of this section is to provide
for public notification and review of governmental and institutional nonopen space
development statutorily exempt from prohibition in designated Open Space Districts. All
uses in an Open Space District other than a park or recreation use permitted by
Subsection 4.33.f shall comply with the procedural requirements of this Subsection prior
to the issuance of any building or special permit, variance or other approval or before
conveyance of any lot within the district.
4.25.1 A report shall be submitted to the Planning Board and filed with the City Clerk by the
agency or other party proposing such non open space development or proposing to
convey a lot. This report shall include the following information, as appropriate:
(1) A map indicating the location and area of the land proposed for nonopen space
development or for conveyance.
(2) A description of the proposed development and future use of the area including
information concerning the proposed site plan, physical design, and user population.
(3) An analysis of alternative sites for the development outside of the district.
(4) Evaluation of the anticipated impacts of the development or property transfer on the
remainder of the open space district, upon the ability of alternative park and
recreation areas in the neighborhood and city to meet the needs served by the
affected open space district which would be displaced by the proposed action, and
upon other land uses in the neighborhood.
(5) Any other information reasonably determined pertinent by the Planning Board.
4.25.2 Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a report required by Section 4.25.1, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing concerning the proposed development or conveyance.
Notice for the hearing shall comply with the requirements of Section 11, Chapter 40A,
G.L.
4.25.3 The Planning Board shall prepare a report with recommendations concerning the
proposed development or conveyance, including conditions that should be attached to
such action. This report shall be filed with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the
public hearing required in Section 4.25.2. Filing of such a report shall satisfy the
requirements of this Section 4.25. Failure of the Board to file a report within thirty (30)
days of the public hearing shall obviate any further actions under this Section 4.25.
4.26 Multifamily Special Permit Applicability
4.26.1 The construction of a multifamily dwelling containing twelve (12) or more dwelling units or
of elderly oriented congregate housing containing twenty-four (24) or more separate living
spaces in a Residence C, Residence C-1, Residence C-1A, Office 1, Business A-1, or
Business A-3 district shall require a special permit granted by the Planning Board.
4.26.2 The construction of a multifamily dwelling or of elderly oriented congregate housing in a
Residence C, Residence C-1, Residence C-1A, Office 1, Business A-1 or Business A-3
district which contains less than twelve (12) dwelling units or twenty-four (24) dwelling
4-6
living spaces shall require a special permit if both of the following conditions pertain to the
development.
(1) another permit for a multifamily dwelling or elderly oriented congregate housing has
been granted within the twelve month period immediately preceding the date of
permit application for the lot on which the development would be located or on an
abutting lot;
(2) the development for which the permit is being sought would increase the total
number of dwelling units on said lot(s) to twelve (12) or more, the total number of
living spaces to twenty-four (24) or more, or the total number of dwelling units and
living spaces to eighteen (18) or more.
4.26.3 The construction of multifamily dwellings and elderly oriented congregate housing in
Industry A and A-2 districts, Industry B, B-1, and B-2 districts, and the Industry C district
shall require a special permit granted by the Planning Board where any one of the
following conditions exits:
1. The development exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of Gross Floor Area;
2. The lot area per dwelling unit proposed is less than one thousand, two hundred
(1,200) square feet in an Industry C district, six hundred (600) square feet in an
Industry A, or three hundred (300) square feet in an Industry A-2, Industry B or
Industry B-1 district; or
3. Twelve (12) or more dwelling units are proposed where any portion of the
development is located within one hundred (100) feet of a Residence A-1, A-2, B, C,
or C-1 district.
4.26.4 A special permit from the Planning Board shall be required for development of elderly
oriented housing if a building permit, special permit or variance application filed for
construction of elderly oriented housing on a lot on which a permit to demolish a dwelling
has been granted within the previous three (3) years and on which said dwelling was
demolished or will be demolished prior to construction of said elderly oriented housing.
4.27 Special Use Limitations in the Business B-1 and B-2 Districts.
4.27.1 In the Business B-1 and B-2 districts, the uses specified in Subsection 4.35 shall be
permitted provided that they occupy no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
maximum gross floor area allowed on the lot. However, the gross floor area of any single
retail establishment shall not exceed twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
4.27.2 In the Business B-1 district, the portion of any parcel within forty-five (45) feet of a front lot
line facing Green Street shall be limited to the following uses: (1) residential uses
permitted by Subsections 4.31 a, b, d, and g; (2) parking which is both covered and
enclosed and which is accessory to dwelling units located within said aforementioned
portion of the parcel; and (3) landscaped green space subject to the requirements of
Subsection 4.27.3; however, where more than fifty (50) percent of the area of said portion
of a lot is devoted to landscaped green space a special permit shall be secured from the
Planning Board. Development plans for parcels which face Green Street shall show how
such portion will be used in compliance with this Subsection 4.27.2. Completion of plans
4-7
for said forty-five (45) foot portion shall be required prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy for development on other portions of the parcel. It is the intention of this
Subsection 4.27.2 that the pattern of property ownership rights existing at the time of
adoption of these regulations not be altered in a way to circumvent the creation of a
residential or green space buffer next to Green Street. Therefore, for the purposes of this
Subsection 4.27.2, a parcel shall consist of one or more lots as defined in Article 2.000 or
parts of such lots which, at the time of the effective date of this Subsection 4.27.2 were
either in the same ownership or which had some legal relationship to one another through
purchase and sales agreements, purchase options, lease agreement, or options, or
through some similar agreement or instrument.
4.27.3 Landscaped green space within the forty-five (45) foot portion of a lot described in
Subsection 4.27.2 shall be open to the sky and shall be located at an elevation within five
(5) feet of the grade level at the Green Street lot line. Such space shall include a
minimum of one three inch caliper tree for each nine hundred (900) square feet of area
within such landscaped portion. A suggested list of trees is contained in Section 11.16.4,
under 4b. In addition to the criteria listed in Subsection 10.40, the Planning Board shall
evaluate special permit applications with respect to the following: continuity with other
open spaces, relationship to other lots, and/or creative design features.
4.27.4 The Business B-1 and Business B-2 districts shall be considered areas of special
planning concern. Development proposals listed in Subsection 11.42 shall be subject to
the development consultation procedures specified in Article 19.000.
4.28 Art/Craft Studio. The purpose of this Section 4.28 is to ensure that art/craft studios
located in Residence C and Office Districts will be compatible with other permitted uses,
particularly in residential neighborhoods.
4.28.1 The Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit for the location of an art/craft
studio or group of studios in Residence C, C-1, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, C-3B and
Office Districts provided that the following requirements are satisfied;
a. Residence C, C-1, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, C-3B Districts:
1. The studio shall be located in a principal use nonresidential building in existence
as of May 1, 1984. Structures or buildings accessory to residential uses shall
not be so used.
2. The required amount of parking in Article 6.000 may be reduced only if the
Board determines that a lesser amount of parking will not cause excessive
congestion, endanger public safety, substantially reduce parking availability for
other uses or otherwise adversely impact the neighborhood.
b. Residence C, C-1, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, C-3B and Office Districts:
1. The studio will be principally used as a studio for independent artists and crafts
people in the creation of their own work. Mass production and assembly line
techniques are prohibited.
2. The type of studio use shall be appropriate to the particular building and its
location:
a. the building shall be structurally sound.
4-8
b. the proposed studio use will not generate traffic in volume or type in excess
of that normally occurring in the adjacent neighborhood.
c. no bulk storage of toxic or highly flammable materials shall occur.
d. the proposed studio use shall satisfy all applicable building, fire safety, and
health codes.
e. noise shall be restricted to levels customarily permitted in the districts as
regulated in General Ordinance #887 “Regulations for the Control of
Noise,” or as customarily produced by other permitted uses in the district,
whichever is less.
f. noxious odors, dust, and/or fumes shall be effectively disposed of and
confined to the premises to avoid air pollution and nuisance to the adjacent
neighborhood.
3. All activity must be carried out within the building, including the storage of
materials.
4. No more than three (3) persons shall practice or be employed at one time per
studio.
5. There shall be no retail sales except as may occur as an activity incidental to
exhibition permitted in b(6) below:
6. Public exhibitions shall not be permitted except as specifically authorized in the
special permit. The number and duration of any such exhibitions shall be
specifically stated, shall be for arts/crafts created on the premises, and shall
only be permitted upon finding that the residential or other prevailing
neighborhood character will not be significantly, negatively affected.
4.28.2 In issuing a special permit under this Section 4.28 the Board of Zoning Appeal shall state
the specific arts and crafts uses or range of uses being authorized for each studio granted
a permit.
4.28.3 Nothing in this Section 4.28 shall prohibit the establishment of residential uses, permitted
in the district, subsequent to the issuance of a special permit under this Section 4.28.
The establishment of residential uses shall not alter the principal use nonresidential status
of the building for the purpose of continuing or future authorizations for art/craft studios
under provisions of this Section 4.28
4.29 Conversion of Non Residential Structures to Residential Use
Where it is proposed to convert an existing principal-use structure designed and built for
non residential use to residential uses or to certain non-residential uses not otherwise
allowed in the applicable zoning district as set forth in the following Section 4.30 - Table of
Use Regulations, such uses may be allowed after issuance of a special permit by the
Planning Board consistent with the provisions of Section 5.28.2.
4.30 TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A, 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
4.31 Residential Uses
a. Detached dwelling occupied by not more
than one family No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB PB PB PB
b. Two family dwelling No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB PB PB PB
c. Existing one-family detached dwelling
converted for two families 15,16 No Yes2 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB PB PB PB
d. Townhouse development No No Yes3 Yes3 Yes Yes3 Yes Yes Yes Yes PB3 PB3 PB3 PB3
e. Elderly oriented congregate housing No PB PB Yes5 Yes5 Yes5 Yes Yes Yes Yes PB5 PB5 PB5 PB5
f. Existing dwelling converted for elderly oriented
congregate housing 17 No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB PB PB PB
g. Multifamily dwelling No No No Yes5 Yes5 Yes5 Yes Yes Yes Yes PB5 PB5 PB5 PB5
h. Existing dwelling converted for more than
two families 16 No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes PB PB PB PB
i. Transient accommodations
1. Tourist house in an existing dwelling No No No Yes Yes No SP Yes Yes SP PB PB PB PB
2. Hotel or motel No No No SP7 Yes6 No SP Yes Yes53 No SP No SP PUD4
3. Lodging House No No No Yes7 Yes6 Yes Yes Yes Yes SP PB No SP PB
j. Trailer Park or mobile home park No No No No No SP SP No No No No No No No
4.32 Transportation, Communication & Utility Uses
a. Bus or railroad passenger station No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes Yes Yes Yes
b. Automobile parking lot or parking garage
for private passenger cars 18 No No No No Yes SP SP Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
c. Railroad freight terminal, railroad yard and shops No No No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes No
4-12
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A, 1 A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
d. Truck or bus terminal, yard or building for
storage or servicing of trucks, trailers or
buses, parking lot for trucks No No No No No No No No No No SP No Yes No
e. Radio and Television transmission
station, including towers No No No No No No No No No SP8 SP No SP SP
f. Radio and television studio No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
g. Utilities
1. Telephone exchange (including
switching, relay and transmission
facilities serving mobile communications
systems) and any towers or antennas
accessory thereto49 No SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
2. Transformer station, substation,
gas regulator station, or pumping station No SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
3. Power Plant for the non-nuclear production,
generation, and distribution of electricity or steam. No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
h. Helipad or Airport No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
j. Wind Turbine Installation PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57 PB57
k. Public Bicycle-Sharing Station Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4.33 Institutional Uses
a. Religious Purposes 19
1. Place of worship Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Rectory, parsonage Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Convent, monastery Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4. Social or recreation center Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
5. Other use with religious purposes Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4-13
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A, 1 A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
b. Educational Purposes
1. Use of land or structures for
educational purposes on land owned
or leased by the Commonwealth or any
of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies
politic - by a religious sect or denomination
or by a nonprofit educational corporation 44 Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Preschool, day care center, kindergarten,
not exempt by statute No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes SP Yes PUD
3. Primary school, not exempt by statute No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes SP Yes PUD
4. Secondary school, not exempt by statute No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes SP Yes PUD
5. College or university not exempt by statute 45 No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes SP Yes PUD
6. Vocational or other schools
not exempted by statute No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes SP Yes PUD
7. Dormitory, resident fraternity or sorority No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes46 Yes Yes Yes Yes No SP No SP PUD
c. Noncommercial Research Facility 20 No IUR IUR SP43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
d. Health Care Facilities
1. Hospital 21 No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No
2. Infirmary No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes Yes
3. Nursing or convalescent home No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes No
4. Clinic not affiliated with any other institution No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes No Yes PUD
5. Clinic affiliated with a hospital or an
accredited university medical school No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes No Yes PUD
4-14
6. Clinic connected to a
community center No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes No Yes PUD
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
7. Other health care facility No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SP Yes No Yes PUD
e. Social Service Facilities
1. Social service center No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes PUD
2. Community Center No IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes PUD
f. Local Government 47
1. Administrative Office No IUR IUR No43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Fire or police station55 Yes11 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Museum SP11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes PUD
4. Municipal service facility SP11 IUR IUR No43 SP No SP SP SP SP Yes Yes Yes PUD
5. Public park, playground or public
recreation building Yes IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
6. Municipal Library Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54 Yes54
g. Other Governmental Facility Yes IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
h. Other Institutional Uses
1. Club, lodge or other fraternal
or sororal meeting facility No11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes PUD
2. Private library, museum or
noncommercial gallery 48 SP11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes PUD
3. Cemetery Yes11 IUR IUR Yes43 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes
4. Institutional use not listed in
any other category No IUR IUR No43 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP
4-15
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
4.34 Office and Laboratory Use
a. Office of a physician, dentist or other
medical practitioner not located in a
clinic listed under Subsection 4.33(d). No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
b. Office of an accountant, attorney, or other
non-medical professional person (includes
properly licensed massage therapists) No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
c. Real Estate, insurance or other agency office No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
d. General office use No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
e. Bank, trust company or similar financial
institution No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes SP Yes Yes
f. Technical office for research and development,
laboratory & research facility subject to the
restrictions in Section 4.21m No No No No9 Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4.35 Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments
a. Store for retail sale of merchandise 23
1. Establishment providing convenience goods
such as drug stores, food stores, tobacco,
newspaper and magazine stores, variety
stores, and liquor stores. 24 No No No No No Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes Yes
2. Other retail establishments No No No No No Yes Yes Yes10 Yes SP Yes No51 Yes No
b. Place for the manufacturing, assembly or
packaging of consumer goods 25 No No No No No SP SP Yes10 Yes Yes Yes SP51 Yes Yes
c. Barber shop, beauty shop, laundry and dry
cleaning pickup agency, shoe repair, self-service
laundry or other similar establishment No No No No No Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes Yes
d. Hand laundry, dry cleaning or tailoring shop 26 No No No No No Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes Yes
4-16
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A, 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
e. Lunchroom, restaurant, cafeteria 27 No No No No No12 Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes Yes
f. Establishments where alcoholic beverages are
sold and consumed and where no dancing
or entertainment is provided
1. Lunchroom, restaurant, cafeteria No No No No No12 Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes28 Yes No51 Yes Yes
2. Bar, saloon, or other establishment
serving alcoholic beverages but which is not
licensed to prepare or serve food No No No No No12 Yes Yes Yes13 Yes SP28 Yes No51 Yes SP
g. Bar or other establishment where alcoholic
beverages are sold and consumed and where
dancing and entertainment is provided. Dance
hall or similar place of entertainment No No No No No No No Yes13 Yes No Yes No51 Yes PUD
h. Theatre or hall for public gatherings No11 No No No SP SP SP Yes10 Yes SP Yes No51 Yes PUD
i. Commercial recreation No11 No No No No SP SP SP10 SP SP SP No14, 51 SP PUD
j. Mortuary, undertaking or funeral establishment No No No No SP Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes No
k. Printing shop, photographer’s studio No No No No SP Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes Yes
l. Veterinary establishment, kennel, pet shop or
similar establishment 29 No No No No No SP SP SP10 SP SP SP No51 SP No
m. Sales place for new and used car, rental
agency for autos, trailers and motorcycles 30 No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes10 Yes SP Yes No51 Yes PUD
n. Office including display or sales space of a wholesale,
jobbing or similar establishment 31 No No No No No SP SP Yes10 Yes Yes Yes Yes51 Yes Yes
o. Fast Order Food Establishment No No No No No No SP SP10 SP No SP No51 SP PUD
p. Deleted
q. Art/Craft Studio No No No SP50 SP50 Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes51 Yes Yes
r. Bakery, Retail No No No No No Yes Yes Yes10 Yes Yes Yes No51 Yes PUD
s. Registered Marijuana Dispensary No No No No No No PB PB PB PB No PB No No
4-17
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A, 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
4.36 Open Air or Drive In Retail & Service
a. Sales place for flowers, garden supplies
agricultural produce conducted partly or wholly
outdoors; commercial greenhouse or garden No No No No No Yes Yes No No Yes Yes No Yes Yes
b. Automobile oriented fast order food service establishment No No No No No SP SP No SP No SP No SP No
c. Drive in bank and other retail or consumer
service establishment where motorist does
not have to leave his or her car No No No No No No SP SP13 SP SP SP No SP No
d. Outdoor amusement park, outdoor sports
facility conducted for profit No No No No No No No No No No SP No SP No
e. Open air or drive in theatre or other open air
place of entertainment No No No No No No No No No No Yes No Yes No
f. Sale of new or used cars conducted partly or
wholly on open lots, or rental agency for
automobiles, trailer, motorcycles, conducted
partly or wholly outdoors No No No No No No SP No No No SP No SP No
g. Automobile service station where no major
repairs are made 32 No No No No No SP SP SP13 SP No Yes SP Yes SP
h. Car washing establishment using mechanical
equipment for the purpose of cleaning
automobiles and other vehicles No No No No No No SP No No No SP SP SP No
l. Place for exhibition, lettering or sale
of gravestones No No No No No SP SP No No Yes Yes No Yes No
4.37 Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage
a. Assembly or packaging of articles 33 No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes14 Yes Yes
b. Manufacturing, processing, assembly and
packaging the following: 34
1. Clothing, but not the manufacture of the cloth or
other material of which the clothing is made No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4-18
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
2. Food products, including bakery,
confectionery and dairy products No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
3. Drugs No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
4. Electrical, electronic and communication
instruments No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
5. Engineering, laboratory and scientific
instruments, temperature controls No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
6. Jewelry, insignia, emblems and badge,
lapidary, scale models, dolls, costume
jewelry and costume novelties No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
7. Lamp shades except of glass or metal No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
8. Leather goods, excluding footwear and
saddlery No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
9. Medical and dental instruments and
supplies, optical instruments and lenses No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
10. Paper and paperboard products 35 No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
11. Pens and mechanical pencils No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
12. Plaster of Paris or papier mache products No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
13. Office machines, including cash registers,
computing machines and typewriters, scales
and balances No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
14. Umbrellas, parasols and canes No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
15. Watches, clocks, watchcases, clockwork
mechanisms No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
c. Bottling of beverages No No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes
d. Distribution center, parcel delivery center,
delivery warehouse No No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes
e. Laundry, dry cleaning plant No No No No No No No No No SP Yes SP Yes Yes
4-19
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A 1, A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
f. Printing, binding, publishing and related arts
and trades No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
g. Auto body or paint shop 36 No No No No No No No No No SP Yes SP Yes No
h. Automotive repair garage not including
auto body or paint shop 37 No No No No No SP SP SP13 SP SP Yes SP Yes SP
i. Food Commissary No No No No No No No No No SP Yes Yes Yes Yes
j. Wholesale business and storage in roofed
structure, but not including wholesale storage of
flammable liquids, gas or explosives No No No No No No No No No SP Yes Yes14 Yes Yes
k. Storage warehouse, cold storage plant, storage
building, but not including storage or bailing of
junk, scrap metal, rags, waste paper or used rubber No No No No No No No No No Yes Yes Yes14 Yes Yes
l. Open lot storage of new building materials, machinery,
and new metals, but not including junk, scrap metal,
rags, waste paper and similar materials 38 No No No No No No No No No SP SP SP Yes SP
m. Open lot storage of coal, coke, sand, or
other similar material, or such storage in silos
or hoppers 39 No No No No No No No No No No SP No Yes No
4.38 Heavy Industry
a. Dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles
and storage or sale of dismantled, inoperative or
wrecked vehicles or their parts 38 No No No No No No No No No No No No SP No
b. Rendering or preparation of grease, tallow, fats
and oils, manufacture of shortening, table oil,
margarine and other food oils, but not including
garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse reduction No No No No No No No No No No No No Yes No
c. Stone cutting, shaping, and finishing, in completely
enclosed buildings No No No No No No No No No No No SP Yes SP
4-20
Res
C, C-1, Off Bus
C-1A, 1 A-1, Bus B, Bus Ind Ind
Open Res A Res 2, 2A, 2B, 2A,2, A-2, Bus B-1, C, A-1, Ind B-1, Ind Ind
Space 1&2 B 3, 3A, 3B 3,3A A-31 A,A-4 B-2 C-1 A-2 A B-2 B C
d. Textile mill, except mill for processing of jute,
burlap or sisal No No No No No No No No No No No SP Yes No
e. Manufacturing, processing, assembly, packaging
or other industrial operation without limit as to
category or product, but the following are expressly
prohibited 40 No No No No No No No No No SP SP52 Yes14 Yes SP
1. Acid Manufacture No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
2. Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
3. Explosives or fireworks manufacture No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
4. Glue manufacture No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
5. Incineration or reduction of garbage,
offal or dead animals 41 No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
6. Petroleum refining No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
7. Smelting of zinc, copper, tin
or iron ores No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
8. Stockyard or abattoir No No No No No No No No No No No No No No
f. Open lot storage of second hand lumber or
other used building material 38,42 No No No No No No No No No No No No Yes No
g. Open lot storage of junk, scrap, paper, rags,
unrepaired or unclean containers, or other
salvage articles 38 No No No No No No No No No No No No Yes No
4-21
4.40 FOOTNOTES TO THE TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
1. All uses except residential uses in Section 4.31 (a)-(h) and (i) 3 shall be subject to the
following limitations:
a. Permitted nonresidential uses must be located in a building containing the
above enumerated residential uses;
b. Permitted nonresidential uses may not occupy more than 40%(forty percent)
of the Gross Floor Area in the building; all remaining GFA must be devoted to
permitted residential uses.
c. The permitted nonresidential uses may only be located on the first floor or
basement of the building.
d. No accessory parking shall be provided for any nonresidential use.
2. Provided that in Residence A districts the exterior design of the structure is not
changed.
3. Planning Board Special Permit for developments specified in Section 11.12.
4. Deleted
5. Planning Board special permit for dwellings specified in Section 4.26.
6. No in the Office 1 District.
7. Subject to the following provisions:
(a) Hotels and motels shall be prohibited in Residence C or Residence C-1 districts;
(b) Hotels and motels shall be permitted as of right in Residence C-3A districts and in
Residence C-2, 2A, 2B, and 3 districts where at least fifty (50) [percent of the
area of the lot upon which the hotel or motel is located, and the point of entry from
a street for all vehicular access to the hotel or motel, is located within the Harvard
Square Overlay District the Central Square Overlay District or the Massachusetts
Avenue Overlay District.
(c) Hotels or motels shall be permitted by special permit from the Board of Zoning
Appeal (BZA) in Residence 2, 2A, 2B, and 3 districts, where paragraph (b) above
does not apply. In granting such special permit the BZA shall find that the
proposed location and its surrounding neighborhood is predominately institutional
or commercial in use, and specifically not a low-density residential area. The
Board shall further find that the physical development of the site for hotel use will
be similar to, and compatible with, the existing (or potential) site development
pattern on surrounding sites for other uses permitted in the applicable zoning
district or districts; and that the operation of the hotel or motel, with regard to
delivery of goods, the kind and volume of vehicular trips to and from the site, and
the numbers of people visiting the site on foot, among other factors, is compatible
with the use of adjacent properties for uses permitted in the applicable zoning
district or districts. In making these findings the Board shall consider the
following, among other considerations:
1. The scale of the building in the immediate neighborhood;
4-22
2. The extent of non-residential development in the neighborhood, including the
size of buildings, the specific uses, the kind and number of vehicular trips
generated by those uses;
3. The density of residential use on adjacent lots and within the immediate
neighborhood;
4. The details of operation of the proposed hotel or motel use including the
kinds and number of vehicle trips to the site, including service trips;
5. The extent of access to arterial streets that customarily accommodate or
provide direct service to non-residential uses;
6. The nature of side development on adjacent sites including setbacks from
property lines, location and quantity of vehicular parking, the presence of
accessory activities such as loading facilities, waste storage facilities,
mechanical service equipment, landscaped green spaces, etc.
8. No towers in Industry A-1 Districts.
9. Yes in a Residence C-3A District subject to the limitations specified in Section 5.31.
10. Except in a Business B District, this use shall be subject to the limitations specified in
Section 4.27.
11. The Following provisions, which modify the Table of Use Regulations, shall apply to
certain uses and development in the Open Space District.
1. The establishment or development in an Open Space district of these uses,
and those enumerated in Paragraph (b) below, shall be reviewed in
accordance with the requirements of Section 4.25
2. The following modifications to the Table of Use Regulations shall apply:
a. Except that in the Open Space district a yacht, rowing or similar club
or association, related to recreational boating use on a lake or river,
shall be permitted by special permit. [Section 4.33h(1)]
b. Provided, however, that the theater or hall for public gathering is
operated under the aegis of a nonprofit agency or organization and is
open to the general public. [Section 4.35h]
In an Open Space district the following Commercial Recreation uses only shall be
permitted, by Special Permit: a golf course; yacht club or marina; boat docks, ticket
offices and other support facilities for ferry services, boat rentals and boat cruises
services. [Section 4.35i]
12. Yes in an Office 2 District provided that the establishment is located within a building
principally containing uses listed in Subsection 4.34 and that the total gross floor area
of all establishments included under items 4.35e and 4.35f in this table do not exceed
ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the building. However, this ten (10)
percent floor area limitation shall not apply to a cafeteria or other eating/drinking
facility which is accessory to permitted uses in a building or associated group of
buildings in the same ownership and which is intended primarily for employees of
those uses and their guests.
13. No in the Business B-1 and Business B-2 Districts.
4-23
14. Board of Zoning Appeal special permit in the Industry B-2 District.
15. Provided that in Residence A districts the exterior design of the structure is not
changed.
16. See also Section 4.26.
17. Provided that in the Residence A districts the exterior design of the structure is not
changed unless a special permit is granted by the Planning Board.
18. Where not an accessory use, and no repairs, servicing, or sale of gasoline is carried
out.
19. Unless explicitly stated to the contrary elsewhere in this Ordinance, all bulk, height,
yard, lot area, setback, open space, parking, sign and building coverage
requirements shall be considered reasonable regulations under Section 3, Chapter
40A, G.L., and shall apply to the uses in this Subsection 4.33a.
20. Noncommercial research facilities shall include laboratories and other research
facilities or educational institutions which supply services for a fee to persons other
than enrolled students. No manufacturing shall be permitted on the premises unless
the noncommercial research facility is located within a district that would customarily
permit such manufacturing under the provisions of Subsection 4.37 or 4.38 of the
Table of Use Regulations.
21. May include related teaching facilities and offices for its medical staff not to exceed
twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the hospital.
22. Where facilities are primarily used by faculty and students and where the public is
admitted on payment of a fee.
23. Where all display and sales are conducted within a building or where a permit has
been issued by City Council for an outdoor sale, and where no manufacturing
assembly, or packaging occur on the premises, except in Industrial districts as
permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.
24. Provided that the establishment is located in a structure also containing retail uses,
and that no establishment shall exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet gross floor area.
25. Provided that at least fifty (50) percent of such merchandise is sold at retail on the
premises and that all display and sales are conducted within a building.
26. Provided that only nonflammable solvents are used for cleaning and not more than
nine (9) persons are employed.
27. Provided that no alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises. Such
establishments shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in
the Industry A-1 districts.
28. Such establishments shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
in Industry A-1 districts.
29. Provided that, in Business A and B zones, all animals are kept indoors and that no
noise or odors are perceptible from adjoining lots.
30. Conducted entirely within a building and provided no major repairs are made.
4-24
31. Where not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area is used for
assembling, packaging, or storage of merchandise.
32. Provided that in Business and Industry C districts all lubrication and repairs are
carried out within the building and further provided that in Industry C districts, the
service station will be located within or attached to a parking garage or other
structure as an accessory use.
33. Provided that no such article exceeds two hundred (200) pounds in weight and
provided that no manufacturing or processing is carried out.
34. Provided that the following restrictions shall apply.
(a) in Industry A, A-1, A-2, and B-2 districts any fully assembled product regularly
produced shall not exceed two hundred (200) pounds in weight.
(b) in Industry A, A-1, A-2, B-2 and C districts no process shall involve coating
with rubber,
(c) all dust, fumes, odors, smoke or vapors are effectively confined to the
premises or disposed of so as to avoid air pollution and,
(d) any noise, vibration or flashing is not normally perceptible without instruments
at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the premises in Industry A-1 districts, at a
distance of one hundred (100) feet from the premises in Industry A, A-2, B-2,
and Industry C districts or at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the
premises in Industry B and B-1 districts.
35. Provided that such products are made from purchased paper or purchased
paperboard and that there is no manufacture or process of pulp, waste paper or
waste paper products.
36. Provided that all work is carried out inside the building.
37. Provided that in Business, Industry A-1 and Industry C districts all servicing and
repairs are carried out inside the building.
38. Provided that the area so used is surrounded by a six foot high wall or tight fence.
39. Provided that all dust incident to storage or handling is effectively confined to the
premises or so disposed of so as to avoid air pollution and that the area so used is
surrounded by a six foot high wall or tight fence.
40. Subject to the Building Department and Health Department regulations and further
provided that
(a) all dust, fumes, odors, smoke or vapor are effectively confined to the premises
or so disposed of as to avoid air pollution, and
(b) any noise, vibration or flashing are not normally perceptible without
instruments at a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the premises, fifty
(50) feet from the premises in an Industry A-1 district or one hundred (100)
4-25
feet from the premises in an Industry A-2, Industry B-2 or an Industry C district.
41. Except such processing as may be conducted by the City of Cambridge.
42. Storage of flammable liquids or gas permitted by the Building Code.
43. Except that in Residence C and C-1 districts this use shall be subject to the
regulations of Section 4.50, Institutional Use Regulations.
44. Unless explicitly stated to the contrary elsewhere in this Ordinance, all bulk, height,
yard, lot area, setback, open space, parking, sign and building coverage
requirements shall be considered reasonable regulations under Section 3, Chapter
40A, G.L., and shall apply to all uses and facilities which have educational purposes
and which are protected by said statute.
45. This use designation shall include all uses and facilities listed in Subsection 4.56(c)4,
5, and 6.
46. Any dormitory, fraternity, or sorority which is not exempt by statue shall not be
allowed in the Office 1 district and shall require a special permit from the Board of
Zoning Appeal in the Office 2 and Industry B districts. Such uses shall only be
permitted as part of a planned unit development (PUD) in the Industry C district.
47. Local government shall include all nonresidential facilities and activities of the City of
Cambridge, the Cambridge Housing Authority, Cambridge Redevelopment Authority
and their component agencies, but shall not include public schools.
48. This use designation shall include facilities for cultural and ethnic heritage
appreciation.
49. But not including a tower facility as a principal use, serving multiple operators, or as a
freestanding structure on a lot.
In reviewing a special permit application for mobile communications facilities in
particular, the Board of Zoning Appeal shall consider the following in reaching its
determination:
1. The scope of or limitations imposed by any license secured from any state or
federal agency having jurisdiction over such matters.
2. The extent to which the visual impact of the various elements of the proposed
facility is minimized:
(1) Through the use of existing mechanical elements on a building's roof or other
features of the building as support and background,
(2) Through the use of materials that in texture and color blend with the
materials to which the facilities are attached, or
(3) Other effective means to reduce the visual impact of the facility from off the
site.
3. Where it is proposed to erect such a facility in any residential zoning district, the
extent to which there is a demonstrated public need for the facility at the
proposed locations, the existence of alternative, functionally suitable sites in
nonresidential locations, the character of the prevailing uses in the area, and the
prevalence of other, existing mechanical systems and equipment carried on or
above the roof of nearby structures. The Board of Zoning Appeal shall grant a
4-26
special permit to erect such a facility in a residential zoning district only upon a
finding that nonresidential uses predominate in the vicinity of the proposed
facility's location and that the telecommunication facility is not inconsistent with
the character that does prevail in the surrounding neighborhood.
In granting a special permit the Board of Zoning Appeal shall set forth in its decision
under which circumstances or procedures, if any, the permittee shall be allowed to
replace and upgrade its equipment without the necessity of seeking a new special
permit.
50. Subject to the requirements of Section 4.28.
51. Permitted in the Industry B-1 district as the use would be permitted as of right or by
special permit in the Business B district subject to the following limitations:
(a). The retail use is located on the ground floor or in the basement of a building
containing other uses,
(b) The retail use constitutes no more than 25% of the GFA of the building in
which it is located, exclusive of GFA devoted to parking uses,
(c) The retail use fronts on a public street and has a direct public access to that
street, and
(d) No separately leased establishment may exceed 10,000 square feet in GFA.
52. Uses so permitted in existence as of July 1, 1988 may continue and expand, within
the dimensional limits of Section 5.34, without the granting of a special permit.
53. No in Business C-1 districts.
54. Any dimensional or other relief from the provisions of this Ordinance required to
construct or locate a municipal library use shall be permitted by grant of a special
permit from the Planning Board. In granting such a special permit, where the library
is proposed to be located within an Open Space zoning district, the Planning board
shall, in addition to the criteria set forth in Section 10.43, find that there will be no
substantial reduction in the recreational and/or open space use, excluding parking
areas and roadways. Where the Board does find there will be a substantial reduction
in the recreational and/or open space use the special permit shall be granted upon
assurance by the City Manager that he will offset such reduction by increased
recreational and/or open space uses at another location, subject to necessary
appropriations.
55. The provisions of Article 5 and Article 6 of this Ordinance shall not apply to the
construction or location of a municipal police or fire station.
57. Subject to the provisions of Section 22.70.
58. deleted
4-27
4.50 INSTITUTIONAL USE REGULATIONS
4.51 Legal Authority. In accordance with Chapter 565 of the 1979 General Court, and as
amended by Chapter 387 of the Acts of 1980, the use of land for institutional purposes in
residentially zoned districts which require a lot of one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet or more per dwelling unit shall be governed by the provisions of this Section
4.50.
4.52 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 4.50 to protect lower density residential
neighborhoods from unlimited expansion of institutional activities, to reduce pressures for
conversion of the existing housing stock to nonresidential uses, to minimize the
development of activities which are different from and incompatible with activity patterns
customarily found in lower density residential neighborhoods and to provide a framework
for allowing those institutions which are compatible with residential neighborhoods to
locate and expand there. This Section 4.50 is intended to accomplish these purposes in
a manner consistent with the findings and objectives of the Community Development
Department’s Cambridge Institutional Growth Management Plan (1981).
4.53 Approach. This Section 4.50 establishes special use regulations for institutional activities
in the Residence A-1, A-2, B, C and C-1 zoning districts. These regulations encompass
the full range of institutional uses. Each use is regulated based on its expected physical
impacts on nearby residences, on the existing or recent use of the lot or structure
proposed for such use, and on the location of the lot either within or outside of an area in
which there has already been extensive institutional development.
4.54 Institutional Overlay District. The designation Institutional Overlay District is hereby
established on the Zoning Map as provided for in Subsection 3.12. An Institutional
Overlay District delimits an area where there has been extensive contiguous development
of institutional use types subject to regulation under this Section 4.50. Institutional
Overlay Districts are defined in order to identify areas where prior development patterns
create a precedent for more flexible institutional use regulation than in areas where non
institutional uses predominate. The conditions regarding development of new or
expanded institutional uses under Subsections 4.55 and 4.56 are determined in part by
whether a lot is located inside or outside an Institutional Overlay District. The boundaries
of these districts are drawn based on several physical factors; consequently, for purposes
of definitional clarity, they encompass areas both inside and outside zoning districts
subject to use regulation under this Section 4.50. Regardless of the location of an
Institutional Overlay District boundary, the special institutional use regulations of this
Section 4.50 shall only apply within the Residence A-1, A-2, B, C and C-1 districts. The
following Institutional Overlay Districts are hereby established on the Zoning Map.
4.54.1 The Harvard, Radcliffe, Lesley District
4.54.2 The Episcopal Divinity School District.
4.54.3 The Observatory Hill District.
4.54.4 The Mount Auburn Hospital District
4.54.5 The Shady Hill School, and Buckingham, Browne, and Nichols School District.
4-28
4.54.6 The Matignon School District
4.54.7 The Cambridge Street Health Center District
4.54.8 The Massachusetts Institute of Technology District.
4.55 Existing Lot Status. The institutional use of land or structures for each category of
institutional activity in a Residence A-1, A-2, B, C and C-1 district shall be governed by the
Table of Institutional Use Regulations in Subsection 4.56. The institutional use regulation
in the table shall be the same in the aforementioned five (5) zoning districts, but shall
differ according to: (1) the applicable use category, (2) the location of the lot in relation to
the Institutional Overlay Districts, and (3) the status of the lot in relation to its existing or
recent use. If two or more of the lot status types listed below would pertain to the
proposed development of an institutional use, then the more restrictive designation
among the types of lot status for the use would apply. The column heading in Subsection
4.56 refers to the types of lot status listed in Subsection 4.55.1 and applies to institutional
development whether by conversion of an existing structure or lot or by new construction
or new use of a lot.
4.55.1 The Existing Lot Status pertaining to the proposed institutional development shall be
defined according to one of the following three types:
(1) A lot which contains a residential use listed in Subsection 4.31, or which is vacant
and which within the twenty-four (24) month period prior to the date of permit
application, but subsequent to March 23, 1980, contained such residential use;
(2) A lot which contains any use other than those residential and institutional uses listed
in Subsection 4.31 or 4.33, or which is vacant and did not within the twenty-four (24)
month period prior to the date of permit application, but subsequent to March 23,
1980, contain a use listed in Subsection 4.31 or 4.33; or
(3) A lot which contains an institutional use listed in Subsection 4.33, or which is vacant
and which within the twenty-four (24) month period prior to the date of permit
application, but subsequently to March 23, 1980, contained such institutional use.
4-29
4.56 TABLE OF INSTITUTIONAL USE REGULATIONS
Inside Institutional Outside Institutional
Overlay Districts Overlay Districts
Existing Lot Status Existing Lot Status
Use Categories (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3)
a. Religious Purposes
1. Place or Worship SP4 Yes Yes No SP Yes
2. Rectory, parsonage SP4 Yes Yes No SP Yes
3. Convent, monastery SP4 Yes Yes No SP Yes
4. Social or recreational center SP4 Yes Yes No SP SP5
5. Other use with religious purposes SP4 Yes Yes No SP Yes
b. Use of Land or Structure for Educational Purposes
on Land Owned or Leased by the Commonwealth or any
of its Agencies, Subdivisions or Bodies Politic Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
c. Use of Land or Structure for Educational Purposes
on Land Owned or Leased by Entities not included
in Subsection 4.56b
1. Pre-school, day care center or kindergarten SP4 Yes Yes No SP Yes
2. Primary School SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
3. Secondary School SP4 SP SP No No No
4. College or university athletic facility,
auditorium, theater or similar facility, any of which
is customarily accessible to the general public on
a paid admission fee or other basis SP4 SP SP No No No6
5. College or university laboratory or research
facility customarily involving radioactive
materials and other controlled substances,
high Intensity electromagnetic radiation or
chemical or biological processes potentially
entailing a high level of danger to the
public health and safety. SP4 SP SP No No No
6. Other College or university facility 1 SP4 SP Yes No No No6
7. Vocational or other schools SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
8. Dormitory, resident fraternity or sorority SP4 SP SP No No No6
d. Non-Commercial Research Facilities
1. Laboratory or other research facility
customarily involving research with
radioactive materials, controlled substances,
high intensity electromagnetic radiation or
chemical or biological processes potentially
entailing a high level of danger to the
public health and safety SP4 SP SP No No No
2. Private library, study center or
other research facility SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
e. Health Care Facilities
1. Hospital SP4 SP SP No No No
2. Infirmary SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
3. Nursing or Convalescent home SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
4-30
Inside Institutional Outside Institutional
Overlay Districts Overlay Districts
Existing Lot Status Existing Lot Status
Use Categories (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3)
4. Clinic not affiliated with any other institution SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
5. Clinic affiliated with a hospital or an
accredited university medical school SP4 SP SP No No No6
6. Clinic connected to a community center SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
7. Other health care facility SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
f. Social Service Facilities
1. Social service center SP4 Yes Yes No SP SP5
2. Community Center SP4 SP SP No No No6
g. Local Government 2
1. Administrative office SP4 SP SP No No No6
2. Fire or police station SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
3. Museum SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
4. Municipal service facility SP4 SP SP No No No
5. Public park, playground, or public
recreation building SP4 Yes Yes SP4 Yes Yes
6. Municipal Library Yes8 Yes8 Yes8 Yes8 Yes8 Yes8
h. Other Governmental Facility Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
i. Other Institutional Uses
1. Club, lodge, or other fraternal or
sororal meeting facility SP4 SP Yes No SP SP5
2. Museum or noncommercial gallery 3 SP4 Yes Yes No SP SP5
3. Cemetery SP4 Yes Yes No Yes Yes
4. Institutional use not listed in
any other category SP4 SP SP No SP SP5
FOOTNOTES TO TABLE OF INSTITUTIONAL REGULATIONS
1. Other college or university facility shall include administrative offices, faculty and staff
offices, teaching and research facilities not included in Subsection 4.56c(4) or c(5),
libraries, museums, dining halls and service facilities including facilities listed in
Subsection 4.56c(4) which are not accessible to the general public.
2. Local government shall include all nonresidential facilities and activities of the City of
Cambridge, the Cambridge Housing Authority, Cambridge Redevelopment Authority
and their component agencies, but shall not include public schools.
3. This use designation shall include facilities for cultural and ethnic heritage
appreciation.
4. The Board of Zoning Appeal shall grant a special permit for this use only if the
applicant demonstrates that he will act to replace indefinitely the dwelling units
removed from the lot or converted to institutional use with an equivalent number of
units, not previously on the housing market, at another location or locations within the
4-31
City of Cambridge, before the units are removed or converted, and only if the
applicant adequately provides at his own expense for the relocation of the occupants
of the existing units to comparable units within the City of Cambridge. In every case,
this replacement housing shall include units suitable for and available to low and
moderate income households in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the total
number of units to be replaced. The remaining replacement units shall be
comparable to the units removed. Comparability shall be determined by dwelling unit
mix in terms of number of bedrooms, special facilities (such as handicapped access
or common areas), amenities, including those existing in the surrounding
neighborhood and range of price/rent levels. The Board of Zoning Appeal may
require that the applicant submit whatever evidence it deems necessary to determine
that the replacement units will be comparable and the applicant is bound to provide
such units. Otherwise the special permit will not be issued. Replacement units shall
be available for occupancy before the existing dwelling units are removed or
converted and shall remain available as low and moderate income and comparable
units unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeal. No building or
demolition permit for the proposed institutional development shall be issued until the
replacement units are available for occupancy and the occupants of the existing units
have been relocated.
5. This use is allowed as of right if the pre-existing institutional use of the lot is in the
same use table category in Subsection 4.56, otherwise a special permit from the
Board of Zoning Appeal shall be required. Such special permit shall be granted only
if the Board determines that the use will have fewer adverse impacts on the
neighborhood than the pre-existing institutional use. In making this determination,
the Board shall consider and comment on the physical attributes of the use, including
those evaluated in the Cambridge Institutional Growth Management Plan. The Board
may require the applicant to submit whatever documentation it deems necessary, to
assist it in making said determination.
6. This use may be allowed upon issuance of a special permit by the Board of Zoning
Appeal if the pre-existing institutional use of the lot is in the same use table category
in Subsection 4.56 or if the Board determines that the use will have fewer adverse
impacts on the neighborhood than the pre-existing institutional use. In making this
determination, the Board shall consider and comment on the physical attributes of
the use, including those evaluated in the Cambridge Institutional Growth
Management Plan. The Board may require the applicant to submit whatever
documentation it deems necessary to assist it in making said determination.
7. Subject to the provision of Section 11.20.
8. Any dimensional or other relief from the provisions of this Ordinance required to
construct or locate a municipal library use shall be permitted by grant of a special
permit from the Planning Board. In granting such a special permit, where the library
is proposed to be located within an Open Space zoning district, the Planning Board
shall, in addition to the criteria set forth in Section 10.43, find that there will be no
substantial reduction in the recreational and/or open space use, excluding parking
areas and roadways. Where the Board does find there will be a substantial reduction
in the recreational and/or open space use the special permit shall be granted upon
4-32
assurance by the City Manager that he will offset such reduction by increased
recreational and/or open space uses at another location, subject to necessary
appropriations.
4.57 Special Permit Criteria. The Board of Zoning Appeal shall grant a special permit for a use
in Subsection 4.56 only if it determines that the benefits of the proposed use at that
location will outweigh it detriments. In addition to any particular determinations which
must be made under footnotes 4, 5, or 6 of said Subsection and Subsection 10.43,
“Special Permit Criteria”, the Board shall consider and address the following factors as
appropriate:
Benefits
1. The building design or site plan would be compatible with the neighborhood.
2. The institution would be accessible to or primarily oriented toward neighborhood
residents.
3. The institution would fulfill an identified neighborhood need.
4. The institution would fulfill an identified citywide need.
5. Institutional use would be particularly appropriate on the lot given previous use of the
lot.
6. Institutional use would be particularly appropriate on the lot given institutional use of
adjacent or nearby lots.
7. Residential development would not be feasible or reasonably practical on the site.
8. The proposed institutional use would create a stronger buffer or a more gentle
transition between residential and nonresidential areas.
9. The proposed institutional use would result in a net improvement to the neighborhood
by being more compatible than the previous use of the lot.
Detriments
1. Development of the institutional use would substantially contravene the objectives of
the Cambridge Institutional Growth Management Plan.
2. The intensity of the institutional use would be substantially greater than the use
intensity of residences in the neighborhood, including traffic, building bulk, parking
demands, etc.
3. The activity patterns, including pedestrian and vehicle travel to and from the
institution would differ from existing neighborhood activity patterns so as to adversely
impact the neighborhood.
4. Development of an institutional use would eliminate existing dwelling units.
5. Development of an institutional use would eliminate nonresidential services or
activities which are beneficial to the neighborhood.
4.58 Special Permit Procedures. Applications for a special permit from the Board of Zoning
Appeal under Subsection 4.56 shall be subject to the general procedural requirements
specified in Article 19.000.
4.58.1 Applications shall include all of the following and shall be submitted in triplicate.
4-33
1. A completed Special Permit Application form.
2. A completed Property Ownership Certificate.
3. An accurately scaled map showing existing conditions on the lot(s) on which the
institutional development is proposed. Said map shall indicate property lines, existing
structures and major landscaped features including trees in excess of three inch
caliper, parking areas and driveways.
4. A description of the current use of said lot(s) or of the use within the previous twentyfour
(24) months if the lot or structures are vacant.
5. A written description of the proposed use of the lot including the intensity of use,
expected activity patterns, and probable users.
6. A statement of how the anticipated physical attributes of the use will be similar to or
different from those predicted for that category of use generally in the Cambridge
Institutional Growth Management Plan.
7. If germane to the proposal, a plan for replacing dwelling units to be displaced by the
institutional use as required by footnote 4 of Subsection 4.56.
8. A list of any zoning violations which would customarily necessitate variances from the
requirements of this Ordinance.
4.58.2 No application shall be accepted by the Board of Zoning Appeal until all of the information
required in this Subsection 4.57 is submitted. Any changes in the application following
submittal, other than those requested by the Board of Zoning Appeal, or its agent, shall
require resubmittal of an application for a special permit. During the course of the special
permit application, the Board of Zoning Appeal may require the applicant to provide any
additional information which it deems is necessary and reasonable to determine that
criteria of Subsection 4.57 will be satisfied.
4.60 SHORT-TERM RENTALS
4.61 Purpose. This Section 4.60 “Short-Term Rentals” is intended to make the operation of
short-term rentals legal for Cambridge residents, protect the safety of renters and
residents, ensure that the primary use remains residential, and ensure that short-term
rentals will not be a detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding residential
neighborhood.
4.62 Definitions
a. Short-term rental. Any rental of a residential dwelling unit, or of a bedroom within a
dwelling unit, in exchange for payment, as residential accommodations for a duration
of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
b. Short-term renter. Any person or persons occupying a dwelling unit, or a bedroom
within a dwelling unit, as a short-term rental for a duration of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days.
c. Short-term rental operator. The person or persons offering a dwelling unit or bedroom
for short-term rental, who may be either the owner or the primary leaseholder of the
dwelling unit with the written permission of the property owner and the condominium
association if applicable
4-34
d. Operator-occupied short-term rental. The short-term rental of a dwelling unit, or of no
more three (3) individual bedrooms within such dwelling unit, that is the primary
residence of its operator.
e. Owner-adjacent short-term rental. The short-term rental of a dwelling unit that is not
the primary residence of the operator, but is located within a residential building with a
total of four or fewer dwelling units where all dwelling units in the building are owned
by the operator, and one of the dwelling units in the building is the primary residence
of the operator.
4.63 Applicability. The requirements of this Section 4.60 shall apply to all districts where
residential uses are allowed, but shall not apply to principal transient accommodations.
4.64 Requirements. Short-term rentals are permitted as an accessory residential use in
existing dwellings in all districts where residential use is permitted, subject to the following
requirements:
1. Only operator-occupied short-term rentals and owner-adjacent short-term rentals are
permitted.
2. All short-term rental operators shall register with the Inspectional Services
Department prior to short-term rental use and occupancy in conformance with Section
4.67 below.
3. A dwelling unit or bedroom offered for short-term rentals shall comply with building
code requirements for occupancy.
4. A dwelling unit or bedroom offered for short-term rentals shall comply with all
standards and regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Inspectional
Services.
5. A short-term rental operator may make available no more than one (1) dwelling unit
for operator-occupied short-term rentals, which may include the separate short-term
rental of no more than three (3) individual bedrooms, and one (1) dwelling unit for
owner-adjacent short-term rentals.
6. Operators of short-term rentals shall remit to the appropriate body all fees and taxes
as required by the City and/or State authorities.
7. Short-term rental operators shall maintain liability insurance appropriate to cover the
short-term rental use.
8. An owner-adjacent short-term rental may be rented only as a whole unit to one party
of short-term renters at any one time and not rented as separate bedrooms to
separate parties.
9. An operator-occupied short-term rental during which the operator is away from the
dwelling unit for more than seven (7) consecutive days may be rented only as a whole
unit to one party of short-term renters at any one time and not rented as separate
bedrooms to separate parties.
4-35
10. The number of individual bedrooms made available for operator-occupied short-term
rentals within a dwelling unit shall not be greater than the number of lawful bedrooms
in the dwelling unit.
11. Renting for an hourly rate, or for rental durations of less than ten (10) consecutive
hours, shall not be permitted.
12. Commercial meetings and uses are prohibited in short-term rentals.
4.65 Procedural Requirements.
1. The following information shall be provided to all short-term renters and posted in all
owner-adjacent short-term rentals in a manner to be determined by the Inspectional
Services Department:
a. Instructions for disposal of waste per the City’s recycling and composting
programs.
b. An emergency-exit diagram in all bedrooms used for owner-adjacent short-term
rentals and on all egresses from the dwelling unit.
c. Contact information for the short-term rental operator, or when the operator is not
present, the contact information for a locally available contact designated to
respond to all emergencies and problems that may arise during the rental period,
whether from renters, neighbors or municipal authorities.
d. The certificate of registration for the short-term rental.
2. The operator of an owner-adjacent short-term rental shall keep accurate books and
records, make them available upon request of the Inspectional Services Department,
and maintain such books and records for a period of three years.
4.66 Regulations. The Commissioner of Inspectional Services shall have the authority to
promulgate regulations to carry out and enforce the provisions of this Section 4.60 “Short-
Term Rentals.”
4.67 Registration.
1. All dwelling units offered for short-term rentals shall register with the City and secure
a certificate of registration according to standards set forth by the Commissioner of
Inspectional Services, and pay all associated fees. The certificate of registration shall
require the operator to agree to abide by the requirements of this Section 4.60. If the
operator is not the owner of the property, the operator shall provide written evidence
that the owner and the condominium association if applicable has consented to the
short-term rental use of the property. All operators shall provide the City with proof
that one of the units in the structure is used as the operator’s primary residence,
either by: 1) providing proof of enrollment in the Cambridge residential tax exemption
program, or 2) providing an affidavit, signed under the pains and penalties of perjury,
stating that the dwelling being used for short-term rental is the operator’s primary
residence, a property title or tenancy agreement along with a photo ID, and a
government or utility correspondence with operator’s name and address issued within
the last three (3) months.
4-36
2. Prior to issuing or renewing a certificate of registration, the Inspectional Services
Department shall conduct an inspection to verify that each dwelling unit and bedroom
to be rented to short-term renters:
a. Meets all building code requirements for occupancy.
b. Meets all other requirements of this Section 4.60 “Short-Term Rentals” and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services.
c. It is the responsibility of the short-term rental operator to renew its certificate of
registration every five years or upon change of operator or owner.
4.68 Effective Date. The provisions of this Section 4.60 “Short-Term Rentals” shall take effect
on April 1, 2018. Beginning on October 1, 2017, or on an earlier date as may be
determined by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, the City may receive
applications for registration, conduct inspections, and issue certificates of registration for
short-term rentals to operators who apply before the effective date.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
5-1
ARTICLE 5.000 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
5.10 GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.20 STANDARDS FOR DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.30 DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.40 TRANSITION REQUIREMENTS
5.50 SPECIAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.10 GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.11 No building or structure shall be built nor shall any existing building or structure be
enlarged which does not conform to the regulations as to maximum ratio of floor area
and lot areas, minimum lot sizes, minimum lot area for each dwelling unit or equivalent,
minimum lot width, minimum dimensions of front, side and rear yards and maximum
height of structures, in the several districts as set forth in Article 5.000, Section 5.30
except as hereinafter provided and except in the Cambridge Center MXD District which
shall be governed by the requirements of Section 14.30.
5.12 The lot or yard areas required for any new building or use may not include any part of a
lot that is required by any other building or used to comply with any requirements of
this Ordinance, nor may these areas include any property of which the ownership has
been transferred subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance if such property
was a part of the area required for compliance with the dimensional requirements
applicable to the lot from which such transfer was made.
5.13 In the case of multiple buildings on a lot, the minimum distance between such buildings
shall not be less than the sum of the heights of the buildings divided by six, or ten feet,
whichever is greater. In determining compliance with this section, portions of buildings
exempted by Section 5.23 shall not be counted in computing building height.
5.14 For residential uses permitted in Residence A, B, C, and Office districts which are not
divided into dwelling units, each one thousand square feet of gross floor area of the
building shall be considered equivalent to one dwelling unit for purposes of computing
minimum lot area.
5.15 No lot or development parcel shall be changed in size, shape, or ownership so that the
dimensional requirements or off street parking and loading requirements prescribed in
this Ordinance are no longer satisfied. This paragraph shall not apply where a portion
of the lot or development parcel is acquired for a public purpose. This paragraph shall
not apply to townhouse development, as governed by Section 11.10.
5.20 STANDARDS FOR DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.21 Lot area and width
5.21.1 On lots of less than the required area for the district in which they are located and
which have been duly recorded by plan or deed with the Registry of Deeds before the
date of the first passage of the applicable provisions of this or any prior Ordinance the
5-2
minimum lot size and lot width regulations need not apply, but the floor area ratio and
the minimum lot area regulations for each dwelling unit shall be applicable. In case of
such lots of less than the required width the sum of the two required side yards need
not be more than thirty (30) percent of the lot width, except that each side yard shall be
a minimum of seven feet, six inches (7’ 6”).
5.21.2 No building shall be erected on a lot which does not have at least twenty (20) feet of
frontage on a street. This paragraph does not apply to townhouse developments. This
requirement shall not be applicable in the Cambridge Center MXD District.
5.22 Private Open Space
5.22.1 Private open space shall be provided on every lot used for residential purposes except
for those in the Cambridge Center MXD District, and shall be a percentage of the lot
area as set forth in Section 5.31. An area designated as private open space must
have both a width and a length of at least fifteen (15) feet, except for balconies, and
may not have a slope greater than ten (10) percent. With the exception of balcony
areas, private open space shall be accessible to all occupants of a building; not less
than one half of the required private open space shall be provided at ground level or
within ten (10) feet of the level of the lowest floor used for residential purposes. Areas
at other levels, such as balconies, decks, and roofs, of garages and buildings, which
are accessible to all occupants of buildings, which are not used as walkways or
corridors, and which have both a width and a length of at least six (6) feet and a
minimum area of seventy-two (72) square feet, may be calculated as private open
space, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total private open space.
5.22.2 Where nonresidential and residential uses are mixed in a building, the required
minimum private open space for residential use shall be calculated in relation to the
portion of the lot which the residential floor area is to the total floor area in the building.
5.22.3 Special Requirements in Residence A-1, A-2, B, C, and C-1
At least fifty (50) percent of the required Private open space in these districts shall
meet all of the requirements of Section 5.22.1 above. At least fifty (50) percent of the
required Private open space shall meet the definition of Permeable Open Space and
shall not be subject to the dimensional limitations of Section 5.22.1 as applied to
Private open space.
5.23 Height Exceptions. The provisions of this Ordinance governing the height of buildings
and structures in all districts shall generally not apply to (a) chimneys, water towers, air
conditioning equipment, elevator bulkheads, skylights, ventilators and other necessary
features appurtenant to buildings which are usually carried above roofs and are not used
for human occupancy, (b) to domes, towers, or spires above buildings if such features are
not used for human occupancy and occupy less than ten (10) percent of the lot area, (c)
to wireless or broadcasting towers and other like unenclosed structures which occupy less
than ten (10) percent of the lot area, (d) to Wind Turbines, subject to the requirements
and limitations set forth in Section 22.70 and (e) to elements of a Solar Energy System,
5-3
as defined in Section 22.60 of this Zoning Ordinance, that would ordinarily be located on a
rooftop where they would have direct exposure to sunlight.
However, building elements enumerated in (a) above shall be limited in height where they
are placed on a building located in a non-residential district, which district abuts a
Residence A-1, A-2, B, C, C-1, C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B district. In these instances the
following height limitations shall apply to those building elements:
1. The elements must be below one or more forty-five (45) degree bulk control planes.
Each bulk control plane shall begin, in the vertical dimension, at the maximum height
limit permitted in the non-residential zoning district. In the horizontal dimension, the
plane shall begin at the residential/non-residential zoning district line: however, where
that line lies within a street, the plane shall begin at the front lot line, located nearest
the zoning district line, of the lots on which the building is sited. Thereafter the bulk
control plane shall rise from its beginning over the non-residential zoning district.
(See illustrative figure 5.23)
2. The limitations in Paragraph 1 above may be waived by special permit from the
Planning Board upon a finding by the Board that the additional height is necessary. In
making that determination the Planning Board shall consider the special and unique
requirements of the use that the elements are serving, any special constraints
imposed by the site upon which the building is located, the nature and character of
development in the adjacent residential district, and the extent to which successful
efforts are made to minimize the visual and acoustical impact of the elements on
neighbors.
5.24 Yards
5.24.1 Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed. Awnings,
arbors, fences, flagpoles, recreational and laundry drying equipment and similar
objects shall not be considered obstructions when located within a required yard.
Objects or structures intended exclusively for bicycle parking meeting the requirements
of Article 6.000, which may be uncovered, partially covered or fully enclosed, shall not
be considered obstructions provided that such objects or structures are not used for
motor vehicle parking, general storage or any other use, and further provided that any
such structure exceeding six feet (6’) in height conforms to the requirements for an
accessory building in Section 4.21. In addition, objects or equipment located in a
required yard that are necessary for or appurtenant to a Public Bicycle-Sharing Station
shall not be considered obstructions. Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes for
emergency use only are permitted to encroach on yard areas.
5.24.2 Projecting eaves, chimneys, bay windows, balconies, open fire escapes and like
projections which do not project more than three and one half (3 1/2) feet and which
are part of a building not more than thirty-five (35) feet in height, and unenclosed steps,
unroofed porches and the like which do not project more than ten (10) feet beyond the
line of the foundation wall and which are not over four (4) feet above the average level
of the adjoining ground, may extend beyond the minimum yard regulations otherwise
provided for the district in which the structure is built.
5-4
5.24.3 On lots abutting streets on more than one side, the front yard requirements of each of
the abutting streets shall apply regardless of designated front lot lines. Any remaining
sides shall be subject to side yard requirements.
5.24.4 Measurements for minimum yards which are determined by formula shall be made in
the following manner:
(1) “H” is the height of the building. “L” is the length of the wall measured parallel to
the corresponding lot or street line. The front yard is measured from the street line, or
building line where such has been established, except where otherwise indicated
herein. For buildings of forty (40) feet or less in height the denominator in the yard
formulas in the Tables in Section 5.30 may be increased by two subject to the
minimum yard requirements set forth in footnotes a, b and c of Tables 5-1 and 5-2.
(2) Where a building consists of various roof levels an average height, or “H”, may be
used in the required yard formula. Average height is determined by adding the
products of the height of each roof level facing the given lot line, (H1, H2, etc.) times
the length of each roof level (L1, L2, etc.) and dividing the sum by the sum of the length
of the levels (L1, L2, etc.) (see formula below)
AVERAGE HEIGHT =
(H1 x L1) + (H2 x L2)
L1 + L2
(3) Where a building presents a variety of vertical planes to any given lot or street
line, no plane shall be closer to the street or building line or lot line than permitted by
the application to such plane of the appropriate formula in the tables of dimensional
requirements in Section 5.30. For all planes set forward of the setback line required by
said tables for the building if it were constructed in a single vertical plane, other planes
must be set behind the setback line so calculated. The result shall be that the sum of
the products of the setback required for each plane times the facing area of each plane
respectively shall be at least as great as the product of the setback required by the
appropriate table for the building if it were constructed in a single vertical plane times
the facing area of the building if viewed as a single plane. (see illustration below):
The product of (setback1 x facing area1) + (setback2 x facing area2)
MUST EQUAL OR EXCEED the product of (single plane setback) x
(single plane facing area)
5.25 FAR Exceptions for Parking and Loading Facilities
5.25.1 Loading Facilities. Areas used for off-street loading purposes shall be exempt from the
requirements as to Floor Area Ratio but shall conform to all other requirements of the
district in which it is located.
5.25.2 Parking Facilities in Structures. The floor area of an underground parking garage and the
floor area of the underground portion of a structure devoted in whole or in part to parking
automobiles, shall not be counted as Gross Floor Area and shall be exempt from the
requirements as to floor area but shall conform to all other requirements of the district in
5-5
which it is located. All other parking in structures shall be subject to the requirements as
to Floor Area Ratio.
5.25.21 Area of Parking Facility. For the purposes of this Section 5.25 the area of parking in a
structure shall include all parking spaces, access drives, aisles and other elements of the
parking facility and shall include any portion of a parking facility located at grade beneath
a building but not otherwise enclosed.
5.25.22 Definition of Underground. For the purposes of this Section 5.25 only, “underground “
shall mean either of the following:
(1) The location of the entire parking facility below the finished grade of the ground
abutting the structure, or the underground portion thereof, which grade is maintained
naturally without any structural support. No more than two access drives, which in
combination total no more than 30 feet in width, shall be permitted to be above the
finished grade and still be considered to be located underground.
(2) The location of a portion of the facility above finished grade to the following extent:
(1) the mean height of that portion of the parking facility above finished grade around
the entire perimeter of the facility does not exceed four (4) feet, which grade is
maintained naturally without any structural support (in no case, however, shall the
height above mean grade for that portion of the facility facing a public street exceed
four feet), and (2) the roof or top of the facility shall be either set beneath other, nonparking
facility portions of the structure, landscaped or otherwise finished to serve as
a pedestrian plaza, open space amenity, recreation area or pedestrian circulation.
The height above mean grade shall be measured to the roof of the facility, or to the
ceiling should the facility be set entirely below other non-parking elements of a
building.
5.25.3 Exemption for Existing Parking Facilities. Structured parking facilities in existence on or
before September 15, 2000, or constructed and occupied at a later date pursuant to a
building or special permit in conformance with all provisions of Chapter 40A issued prior
to the effective date of the provisions of this Section 5.25, shall not be subject to the
requirements as to Floor Area Ratio.
5.25.4 Exceptions to the Provisions of this Section 5.25
5.25.41 Exemption for Residential Parking Spaces. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
5.25.2 above, the following structured parking located above ground, accessory to a
residential use, shall not be calculated as part of the Gross Floor Area on the lot:
(1) One parking space located within a townhouse unit or a one, two or three family
dwelling.
(2) A freestanding parking structure containing no more than one parking space per
dwelling unit up to a maximum of three parking spaces on a lot containing a one,
two or three family dwelling.
(3) One parking space per dwelling unit, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) spaces, for
multifamily dwellings.
5-6
5.25.42 Where an above ground parking facility in a structure is proposed to be constructed (a) in
the 100-year flood plain, identified as the Zone A flood hazard area (See Section 11.70),
or as determined by credible evidence and calculations from a registered professional
engineer or (b) on a contaminated site that is listed by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection under the Massachusetts Contingency Plan (310 CMR 40.00)
with a Release Tracking Number and has been tier classified, the Planning Board may
grant a special permit to waive the limitations of this Section 5.25 so that the parking
facility is not subject to the requirements in this Ordinance as to Floor Area Ratio provided
only the minimum number of parking spaces required for the uses on the site are
provided. In granting such a special permit, the Planning Board shall find the following:
(1) Where in a flood hazard area, the construction of a parking facility
underground is (a) not technically feasible due to the requirements of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. ch. 131, s.40, (b) would require
construction that would violate requirements or limitations of the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, (c) would, in the view of the Cambridge Conservation
Commission, seriously compromise the wetlands protection objectives of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act), and (d) would result in costs of
construction that are significantly greater than would otherwise be typical for the
location were it not in a flood hazard area; or
(2) Where the site is contaminated, the construction of a parking facility
underground (a) would, in the opinion of a Licensed Site Professional, pose
significant risks to public health or the environment through disturbance of
hazardous materials and could not be reasonably mitigated in accordance with
state and federal regulations, (b) require construction that is prohibited by state or
federal regulations related to hazardous wastes, and (c) would result in costs of
construction that would render the project financially unfeasible; and
(3) The above ground facility is designed so as to reduce its actual or perceived
bulk through, among other possible techniques, limiting the number of parking
spaces it contains, placement of portions of the facility below grade where
feasible, or its location relative to actively occupied portions of the construction.
Construction above grade is discouraged that would increase the amount of
impervious area on the lot.
5.26 Conversion of Dwellings. No new dwelling unit created by the conversion of an existing
dwelling into a greater number of units or by addition or enlargement of an existing dwelling
shall be permitted unless the requirements of minimum lot area for each dwelling unit,
maximum ratio of floor area to lot area, private open space and off street parking are
satisfied for all dwelling units (in existence and proposed) in the dwelling after the
conversion or enlargement.
5.27 Calculation for lot in two or more zoning districts. The maximum residential density (lot area
per dwelling unit) and gross floor area allowed on lots located in two or more zoning districts
shall be calculated using the formulas specified in this Subsection 5.27.
5-7
5.27.1 The total number of dwelling units allowed shall be the sum of the total dwelling units
allowed in each district, determined by adding the lot area in each district divided by
the minimum lot area per dwelling unit for each district.
Max # dwelling units = Lot area in district 1
district 1 min. lot area/du + Lot area in district 2
district 2 min. lot area/du
Where the computation of the total number of dwelling units allowed in each district
results in two fractional numbers and where the sum of the resulting remainders from
both districts equals or exceeds one, an additional unit shall be permitted.
5.27.2 The maximum gross floor area shall be the sum of the total allowed gross floor area in
each district, determined by adding the lot area in each district multiplied by the
maximum allowed floor area ratio (FAR) for each district.
Maximum Gross Floor Area = (Lot area in district 1 x district 1 FAR) +
(Lot area in district 2 x district 2 FAR)
5.28 Special Dimensional Standards Applicable to Dwellings
5.28.1 Dwellings in Non Residential Districts. A dwelling shall be subject to the dimensional
standards generally applicable in the district set forth in the Tables of Dimensional
Requirements in Section 5.30, except as provided for below.
a. A dwelling in a Business A district shall be subject to the same dimensional
requirements and other restrictions as a dwelling in a Residence C-2B district, except that
the height limitation on lots abutting Hampshire Street shall be sixty-five (65) feet.
b. A dwelling in a Business A-1 district shall be subject to the same dimensional
requirements and other restrictions as a dwelling in a Residence C-1 district.
c. A dwelling in a Business B district shall be subject to the same dimensional
requirements and other restrictions as a dwelling in a Residence C-3 district.
5.28.2 Conversion of Non Residential Structures to Residential Use
Where it is proposed to convert an existing principal use structure, designed and built for
non residential use, to residential use (excluding Transient Accommodations and Trailer
Park or Mobile Home Park listed in Section 4.31 (i-j)), the dimensional standards
generally applicable in the district as set forth in the Tables of Dimensional Requirements
in Section 5.30 and other applicable regulations in this Ordinance, including permitted
uses, Section 4.30 – Table of Use Regulations, shall apply. However, where some or all
of those requirements cannot be met, including any use, dimensional or procedural
requirement that may apply in the base district, the following provisions shall apply to such
conversion after issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board. The provisions in this
Section 5.28.2 shall apply in all zoning districts with the exception of districts with an Open
Space designation.
5-8
Intent of this Section:
(a) To allow the economic reuse of buildings that may be substantially out of compliance
with the dimensional requirements of the zoning district within which they are located,
especially as they are converted to residential use.
(b) To encourage the preservation of buildings of historic or cultural significance by
providing opportunities for reuse of the structures.
(c) To establish a framework of development standards and criteria within which existing
non-residential buildings that are out of scale and character with surrounding
residential uses can be converted to housing of an appropriate style and density while
limiting potential negative impacts on neighbors.
5.28.20 Allowed Uses
The Planning Board may permit uses not otherwise allowed in the base zoning district,
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
(a) The permitted uses shall be limited to the following:
(1) All residential uses listed in Section 4.31 (a-h), but specifically excluding
Transient Accommodations and Trailer Park or Mobile Home Park listed in
Section 4.31 (i-j).
(2) The following institutional uses: Religious uses (4.33.a); Public or non-profit
educational uses (4.33.b.1); Private preschool, day care, kindergarten (4.33.b2);
Local government or other government facility (4.33.f, 4.33.g); Private museum,
library, non-commercial gallery (4.33.h.2).
(3) The following office uses: Office of an accountant, attorney, or other non-medical
professional (4.34.b); Real estate, insurance or other agency office (4.34.c);
General office use (4.34.d).
(4) Any uses allowed as accessory uses to the permitted principal uses.
(b) All permitted non-residential uses shall be limited to the ground floor or basement of
the building. The Planning Board may permit non-residential uses to occupy other
floors of the building only after determining that the location and design of such
spaces, including access and egress, will not impact the privacy or security of
residential occupants. However, the total floor area occupied by non-residential uses
shall not exceed the floor area of the ground floor and basement.
(c) The Planning Board shall determine that any proposed non-residential uses are
generally compatible with residential uses in the area, including the dwelling units
located within the same building, and will not cause harm or nuisance to surrounding
uses.
5-9
(d) The Planning Board shall determine that by permitting non-residential uses, there will
be a compensating reduction in the number of dwelling units that would otherwise be
permitted, and that the proposed non-residential uses will balance the potential
adverse impacts of additional residential units, such as demand for nighttime parking.
5.28.21 Gross Floor Area
The Gross Floor Area permitted shall be that which is the result of the application of the
FAR permitted in the district in which the structure is located, or the existing Gross Floor
Area of the structure itself, whichever is greater. However, the Planning Board may permit
additional Gross Floor Area to be added to the non residential structure without limit
provided all construction creating additional Gross Floor Area occurs within the physical
limits of the existing structure. Where it is proposed to add Gross Floor Area above what
would normally be allowed in the zoning district, the Planning Board shall determine that
such additional floor area is necessary to accommodate a reasonable arrangement and
layout of residential units within the existing structure.
If Gross Floor Area is added to an existing structure such that the resulting Gross Floor
Area is greater than twice what would be allowed under normal zoning district regulations
(including the Inclusionary Housing provisions of Section 11.200 if applicable), then half
the amount of Gross Floor Area added to the existing structure such that it exceeds twice
the normal district limit shall be deducted from the total Gross Floor Area of the structure
for the purpose of calculating the maximum permissible number of dwelling units under
Subsection 5.28.22 below.
For projects of at least 30,000 square feet or twenty (20) dwelling units for which the total
Gross Floor Area is greater than twice what would be allowed under normal zoning district
regulations (including the Inclusionary Housing provisions of Section 11.200 if applicable),
no more than seventy percent (70%) of the project’s total Gross Floor Area shall be
occupied by living space within private dwelling units, and the remaining Gross Floor Area
shall be occupied by common areas such as hallways, stairways, lobbies,
fitness/recreational spaces, common storage areas, above-grade parking facilities,
laundry or other resident services, or approved non-residential uses.
5.28.22 Dwelling Units
The number of dwelling units permitted shall be the number of dwelling units allowed
under normal zoning district regulations (including the Inclusionary Housing provisions of
Section 11.200 if applicable).
However, the Planning Board may permit a greater number of dwelling units, with the
maximum permissible number of units determined by dividing the Gross Floor Area of the
structure as permitted in Section 5.28.21 above, after subtracting any Gross Floor Area
occupied exclusively by non-residential uses as permitted under Section 5.28.20, by
1,100 square feet for the first ten (10) units and by 1,900 square feet for any additional
units.
5-10
If a portion of the dwelling units meet the definition of Elderly Oriented Housing
(notwithstanding the number of such units within the building), the Planning Board may
permit the number of units to exceed the allowed maximum only for the specific purpose
of accommodating such units, which may be smaller than conventional housing units.
5.28.23 Yard Requirements
The required yards shall be those of the structure existing at the time of the conversion to
residential use. However, any construction occurring outside the limits of the existing
structure shall be subject to the yard requirements of the district in which the structure is
located.
5.28.24 Maximum Height
The maximum height shall be that height permitted in the district in which the structure is
located, or the building height, whichever is greater. However, any construction that
occurs outside the existing limits of the structure, other than construction exempt from the
height limit as set forth in Section 5.23, shall be subject to the maximum height limit of the
district in which the structure is located.
5.28.25 Private Open Space Requirements
The Private open space requirement shall be that required in the district in which the
structure is located, except as modified herein.
The dimensional and locational limitations for Private open space set forth in Section 5.22
shall not apply; any combination of at-grade private open space and decks and balconies
at other levels shall be permitted as shall walks intended for non vehicular use. However,
in every case where those requirements of Section 5.22 waived by this Paragraph (a) are
not met, all portions of the surface of the lot shall be Green Area as defined in Article
2.000 that are (1) not covered by the building or (2) devoted to the minimum area
necessary to provide at grade, conforming parking spaces and the minimum necessary
circulation and driveways for no more than one parking space per dwelling unit. The
amount of Private open space required may be reduced by the Planning Board should the
Board find that full compliance cannot reasonably be expected given the existing
development of the lot and the provision of parking necessary to serve the dwelling units.
However, where open space requirements are not met, the Applicant shall explore the
use of portions of the interior of the building to provide recreational opportunities not
possible on the exterior.
5.28.26 Conforming Additions
Conforming additions to such non-residential structures shall be permitted without
reference to the limitations set forth in Section 8.22 for such additions to non-conforming
structures.
5-11
5.28.27 Required Parking
Off-street parking shall be provided as required in the Schedule of Parking and Loading
Requirements, Section 6.36. In instances where 6.36 does not apply due to the proposed
use not being allowed in the base zoning district, required off-street parking for approved
residential uses shall be provided at a rate of one space per dwelling unit, and required
off-street parking for non-residential uses shall be determined by the Planning Board after
reviewing the requirements for that use within other zoning districts.
5.28.28 Criteria for Approval of a Special Permit
In acting upon this special permit, the Planning Board shall consider the standards and
criteria set forth in Sections 10.43, 10.47 and 10.47.1 of this Ordinance in addition to the
following review standards.
5.28.28.1 Criteria Applicable to All Projects
(a) Provision of Parking. Where it is proposed to add dwelling units above the limits
established in the base zoning regulations, the Board shall evaluate the impact of
increased numbers of dwelling units above that normally permitted in the district on
the demand for on-street parking by residents and visitors to the proposed building,
particularly in neighborhoods where off street parking is limited.
In reaching a determination, the Board may require that the Applicant provide
elements of a Parking Analysis as set forth in Section 6.35.3 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Where a project is subject to additional criteria as specified in Section 5.28.28.2
below, a Parking Analysis shall be required to be included with the Special Permit
Application.
(b) Privacy Considerations. Where significant variations from the normally required
dimensional standards for the district are proposed, the Board shall evaluate the
impact on residential neighbors of the new housing use and any other proposed use
as it may affect privacy. The location and size of windows, screening elements,
decks, entries, security and other lighting, and other aspects of the design, including
the distribution of functions within the building, shall be reviewed in order to assure
the maintenance of reasonable levels of privacy for abutters. In reviewing a proposed
development plan, the Board shall consider, among other factors, the potential
negative impacts of the new activity on abutters as a result of the location, orientation,
and use of the structure(s) and its yards as proposed.
(c) Reduction in Private Open Space. Where it is proposed to reduce the amount of onsite
Private Open Space below that required in the applicable district, the Board shall
evaluate the proposal in light of the following:
(1) The extent to which screening and buffering from neighbors will be accomplished
(2) The quality and viability of the proposed open spaces as they are designed
(3) The tradeoff in benefits and negative impacts of the loss of green space in order
to provide the required amount of parking, including consideration of the feasibility
5-12
of alternate parking arrangements that might produce additional green area, such
as placing some or all parking within the structure
(4) The availability of common recreational spaces within the building to compensate
for the loss of usable outdoor open space
(d) Community Outreach. The Planning Board shall consider what reasonable efforts
have been made to address concerns raised by abutters and neighbors to the project
site. An applicant seeking a special permit under this Section 5.28.2 shall solicit input
from affected neighbors before submitting a special permit application. The
application shall include a report on all outreach conducted and meetings held, shall
describe the issues raised by community members, and shall describe how the
proposal responds to those issues.
5.28.28.2 Additional Criteria Applicable to Larger Projects
Where the proposed project includes more than 10,000 Gross Square Feet or more than
ten (10) dwelling units, and the proposed Gross Floor Area or number of dwelling units is
above the maximum allowed under base zoning regulations, the Board shall evaluate the
proposal in light of the following:
(a) The implications of the size or number of additional dwelling units on the anticipated
demand for parking. In order to assist the Planning Board in evaluating parking
impacts, an applicant for a special permit shall be required to submit a Parking
Analysis, as set forth in Section 6.35.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, as part of the special
permit application.
(b) The appropriateness of the proposed layout of floor space within the building for a
multifamily residential use, with attention to the typical range of unit sizes and types
that would be expected for housing in the neighborhood. Considerations may include
the suitability of proposed unit configurations for a variety of households, the extent to
which unusual unit sizes or shapes may impact parking or overall quality of life for
neighbors, and the availability of customary amenities for residents such as storage,
utilities, common rooms and recreational facilities.
(c) The potential mitigating effects of the proposed occupancy of dwelling units. For
instance, units designed for elderly residents or live/work spaces for professionals or
artists may provide desirable housing options for Cambridge residents with fewer
adverse impacts on parking or neighborhood character.
5-13
5.30 DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.30.1 Rules for Applying Certain Provisions of the Tables of Dimensional Requirements
5.30.11 FAR and Height. Where two numbers appear in Column (1) – Maximum Ratio of Floor
Area to Lot Area and Column (6) Maximum Height in Feet, the first number shall apply to
all permitted uses in the district except Residential Uses, Section 4.31 a-h, and Dormitory
(but excluding resident fraternity or sorority) Uses, Section 4.33 b(7), both of which shall
be governed by the second number.
5.30.12 Calculation of Permitted Gross Floor Area on a Lot
Where two numbers regulate the permitted FAR on a lot, the Gross Floor Area of any
uses proposed on the lot shall be determined by the following formula:
Gross Floor Area Permitted = [(A x FAR1) x Lot Area] + [(B x FAR2) x Lot Area]
Where A equals the percentage of Gross Floor Area in the building to be used for
nonresidential use(s), and
Where B equals the percentage of Gross Floor Area in the building to be used for
residential and dormitory use(s), and
Where A + B = 100% (or 1.0) or less, and
FAR1 equals permitted FAR for nonresidential uses, and
FAR2 equals permitted FAR for residential and dormitory uses.
5-14
5.31 Residential Districts
1. The following dimensional requirements, set forth in Table 5-1 and modified
elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall be applicable to development in residential districts:
[Note: The height limitations set forth in the following table are subject to exceptions for
mechanical equipment and certain architectural features as outlined in Section 5.23.
Reference should be made to Section 5.23 for a complete understanding of the actual
height of building elements permitted in the Zoning Ordinance.]
Table 5-1. Table of Dimensional Requirements - Residential Districts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Max. Ratio of Minimum Min. Lot Area Minimum Minimum Yard in Feet Maximum Min. Ratio of
Floor Area to Lot Size for Each D.U. Lot Width Height Private Op. Sp.
District Lot Area in Sq. Ft. in Sq. Ft. in Feet Front Side Rear in Feet to Lot Area
Res. A-1 0.5 8,000 6,000 80 25 15(sum of 35) 25(c) 35 50%
Res. A-2 0.5 6,000 4,500 65 20 10 (sum of 25) 25(c) 35 50%
Res. B 0.5 (j) 5,000 2,500(j) 50 15 7’6” (sum of 20) 25(c) 35 40%
Res C.(i) 0.6 5,000 1,800 50
H+L(a)
4
H+L
5 4
H+L(c)
35 36%
(min. 7’6”
sum of 20)
Res. C-1 0.75 5,000 1,500 50
H+L(a)
4
H+L
5
(n)
4
H+L(c)
35 30%
Res. C-1A 1.25 5,000 1,000 50 10
H+L
7
(l) H+L
5
(l) 45 15%
Res. C-2 1.75 5,000 600 50
H+L(a)
4
H+L
5 4
H+L(c)
85 15%
Res. C-2B 1.75 5,000 600 50
H+L(a)(k)
4
H+L(k)
5
H+L(c)(k)
4 45 15%
Res. C-2A 2.5 5,000 300 50
H+L(b)(g)
5
H+L(g)
6
H+L(c)
5 60 10%(h)
Res. C-3 3.0 5,000 300 50
H+L(b)
5
H+L
6 5
H+L(c)
120 10%
Res. C-3A 3.0(d) 5,000 300 50
H+L(b)(e)
5
H+L(f)
6
H+L(c)
5 120 10%
Res. C-3B 3.0/4.0 5,000(m) 300 50 10 none none 120 10%
2. Footnotes
(a) Measured from the centerline of the street, but in no case may a building be nearer
the street than ten (10) feet.
(b) Measured from the centerline of the street, but in no case may a building be nearer
the street line than five (5) feet
(c) In no case may a building be nearer the rear lot line than twenty (20) feet in
Residence C-2, C-2B, C-2A, C-3, C-3A, C-3B districts. In Residence C and C-1
districts, no building may be nearer the rear lot line than twenty (20) feet plus one
additional foot of rear yard for each four feet that the depth of the lot exceeds 100
feet, up to a maximum of thirty (30) feet. In Residence A-1, A-2, and B districts, no
5-15
building may be nearer the rear lot line than twenty-five (25) feet plus one additional
foot of rear yard for each four feet that the depth of the lot exceeds one hundred
(100) feet, up to a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet. For purposes of this Footnote C,
the lot depth shall be that distance measured along a line perpendicular to the front
lot line and extending to that point on the rear lot line most distant from the front lot
line.
(d) The maximum ratio of floor area to lot area for buildings containing principal uses
specified in Section 4.34 shall not exceed 1.25.
(e) For buildings subject to the floor area ratio limitation specified in footnote (d) above,
the minimum front yards may be reduced to no less than five (5) feet measured from
the street line.
(f) For buildings subject to the floor area ratio limitation specified in footnote (d) above,
the minimum side yards may be reduced to no less than five (5) feet measured from
the street line.
(g) In no case may a building on any lot which abuts or is separated only by a public or
private way from a Residence A-1 and A-2, B, C, C-1, C-2, or C-2B district be nearer
the street line or side line of the lot than the minimum front and side yard
requirements for the residential district which said lot abuts or from which it is
separated by a way. However, such increased setback requirements shall only
apply to any part of a building which is located within one hundred and twenty five
(125) feet of a Residence A-1, A-2, B, C, C-1, C-2, or C-2B district.
(h) The minimum ratio of private open space to lot area required for a lot which abuts/or
is separated only by a public or private way from a Residence A-1, A-2, B, C, C-1, C-
2 or C-2B district shall be equal to the amount of private open space required in the
residential district which said lot abuts or from which it is separated by a way.
(i) The dimensional requirements of the Residence C-1 district as detailed in this
Section 5.31 shall apply in the Residence C district for structures in existence as of
December 1, 1986 under the following limitations and conditions:
(1) Any increase in floor area or numbers of units, provided all construction occurs
within the limits of the existing structure: or
(2) For any construction without limit as to cost (notwithstanding any contrary
provisions of Section 8.23) of a nonconforming structure destroyed or damaged
by fire or other catastrophe provided the structure as restored shall not be
greater in lot coverage or volume, or shall not extend further into required yards,
than the original structure; all other provisions of Section 8.23, however, shall
continue to apply.
(j) Applicable to the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area. For those
portions of any lot exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet, the applicable
Maximum Ratio of Floor Area to Lot Area shall be 0.35 for all permitted residential
uses and the Minimum Lot Area for Each Dwelling Unit shall be four thousand
(4,000) square feet. However, for any lot in existence as of June 30, 1995 that is
subsequently subdivided into two or more lots, the total amount of gross area and
number of units on the subdivided lots, in total, shall at no time exceed that
5-16
permitted by this footnote (j) on the lot before the subdivision occurred. Unless
otherwise permitted by special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeal, the gross
floor area and dwelling units permitted on each subdivided lot shall be in the same
ratio as that lot's area is to the area of the unsubdivided lot. Nothing in this footnote
(j) shall prohibit the subdivision of a Townhouse Development conforming at the
time of its construction, as permitted in Section 11.10.
(k) Yard Requirements in the Residence C-2B District
1) Setbacks - In the Residence C-2B District, buildings shall comply with these
yard requirements by being set back above and below ground.
2) Green Area - general
Two of the yards on a lot shall consist exclusively of green area as defined in
section 2.000. Contrary to the provisions of said definition, hard surfaced
walks and terraces shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of
each yard. At a minimum, green area setback shall consist of permanently
maintained densely planted trees and shrubs that may be expected to form
within three (3) years after the time of planting a continuous unbroken, year
round visual screen. Every effort shall be made to retain the best existing
trees in said setbacks to meet the requirements this section in whole or in
part. Plans for landscaping and maintenance shall be approved by the
Committee on Public Planting as appointed by the City Manager. No
Certificate of Occupancy may be granted until landscaping under the terms of
this section is completed.
(3) Lots with more than four yards. If the shape of a lot creates a situation
where there are more than four yards, this green area requirement shall apply
to half of the yards, rounded up in the instance of an odd number of yards.
(4) Lots in two or more zoning districts. Where a zoning district boundary line or
lines split a lot, a lot partially in the Residence C-2B district shall comply with
provisions elsewhere in this zoning ordinance with regard to lots in two or
more zoning districts, except that the setback and green area requirements of
this footnote shall apply to all parts of the lot regardless of zoning district.
(5) Lots abutting more restrictively zoned districts. When any lot abuts a more
restrictively zoned district or districts, all yards abutting the more restrictively
zoned district)s) shall be designated as yards required to comply with the
green area requirements of this footnote. This provision shall apply to that
quantity of abutting yards numbering up to and including the maximum
number of green area yards required by this footnote. The total number of
green area yards required on a lot shall not be changed by the provisions of
this subsection (5).
(6) Pedestrian and vehicular access.
(a) When a yard used to satisfy the Green Area Open Space requirement of
this footnote is a front yard, the Green Area Open Space may be
interrupted by not more than one path for pedestrian access to the
5-17
building. Said pedestrian path shall be constructed perpendicular to the
lot line and shall not be more than eight (8) feet wide. The green area
yard may also be interrupted by not more than one driveway constructed
perpendicular to the lot line and which is not more than twelve (12) feet
wide.
(b) The sum of the width of the said pedestrian path and driveway may not
exceed the setback provided by the smallest of the yards provided on
the lot.
(c) The areas allowed to be used for access under this subsection (6) shall
be counted as part of the twenty-five (25) percent of the total required
green area which is allowed to be use for hard surfaced walks and
terraces for the front yard in which the access areas are constructed.
(7) Townhouse Development When a lot is used for townhouse development,
the provisions of this footnote shall apply to the lot before subdivision into
townhouse lots. Subdivision into townhouse lots shall be done in such a
manner as to not affect the application of this footnote to the entire
unsubdivided lot. In particular, the pedestrian path and driveways allowed.
(l) These requirements may be reduced to a minimum required setback of ten (10) feet
with the grant of a special permit from the Planning Board provided that the yard is
suitably landscaped to effectively buffer the building walls from abutting lots.
(m) For purposes of calculating FAR and for no other purpose, notwithstanding the
definition of Lot in Article 2.000, a Lot in the Residence C-3B district may contain
non-contiguous parcels provided that all parcels are held in identical ownership, are
all located within the Residence C-3B district of any abutting Business B district, and
further provided that development on any contiguous portion of the lot does not
exceed an FAR of 4.0.
(n) In a Residence C-1 District, no building plane (excluding projections as permitted by
Section 5.24.2) may be nearer than seven feet, six inches (7’6”) to a side lot line.
3. Setback exceptions
(a) In a Residence A-1 or A-2 district a dwelling need not set back more than the
average of the setbacks of the buildings, other than accessory buildings, on the lots
adjacent thereto on either side, but in no case may any part of a building or
accessory building extend nearer to any street line, or building line if such has been
established, than fifteen (15) feet. A vacant lot or lot occupied by a building set back
more than twenty-five (25) feet in a Residence A-1 district and more than twenty (20)
feet in a Residence A-2 district shall be considered as though occupied by a building
set back twenty-five (25) feet and twenty (20) feet respectively.
(b) In a Residence B district a dwelling need not set back more than the average of the
setbacks of the buildings, other than accessory buildings, on the lots adjacent
thereto the on either side, but in no case may any part of a building or accessory
building extend nearer to any street line, or building line if such has been
established, than ten (10) feet. A vacant lot or a lot occupied by a building set back
5-18
more than fifteen (15) feet shall be considered as though occupied by a building set
back fifteen (15) feet.
(c) In a Residence C, C-1, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, or C-3A district if a building is
hereafter erected on a lot adjacent to a building having a blank wall directly on the
side lot line, the new building may be so designed and erected that it will be flush
with that portion of the blank wall of the former building which extends along the lot
line; otherwise, however, not less than the required side yard shall be provided; in
any case the required side yard shall be provided for the remainder of the full lot
depth. In case a side wall contains windows or in case any part of a side blank wall
of an existing building shall be set back from the side lot line, then a building
hereafter erected on the lot adjacent to such an existing building shall be set back
from the side lot line in accordance with the provisions thereof.
5.32 Office Districts
1. The following dimensional requirements, set forth in Table 5-2 and modified
elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall be applicable to development in Office districts: [Note:
The height limitations set forth in the following table are subject to exceptions for
mechanical equipment and certain architectural features as outlined in Section 5.23.
Reference should be made to Section 5.23 for a complete understanding of the actual
height of building elements permitted in the Zoning Ordinance.]
Table 5-2. Table of Dimensional Requirements - Office Districts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Max. Ratio of Minimum Min. Lot Area Minimum Minimum Yard in Feet Maximum Min. Ratio of
Floor Area to Lot Size for Each D.U. Lot Width Height Private Op. Sp.
District Lot Area in Sq. Ft. in Sq. Ft. in Feet Front Side Rear in Feet to Lot Area
Office 1 0.75 5,000 1,200 50
H+L(a)
4
H+L
5 4
H+L(c)
35 15%
Office 2A 1.25/1.5 5,000 600 50
H+L(a)
4
H+L
5 4
H+L(c)
60/70 15%
Office 2 1.50/2.0 5,000 600 50
H+L(a)
4
H+L
5 4
H+L(c)
70/85(d) 15%
Office 3 2.0/3.0 5,000 300 50
H+L(b)
5
H+L
6 5
H+L(c)
90/120 10%
Office 3A 2.0/3.0 5,000 300 50
H+L(b)
5
H+L
6 5
H+L(c)
90/120 10%
2. Footnotes
(a) Measured from the centerline of the street, but in no case may a building be nearer
the street line than ten (10) feet.
(b) Measured from the centerline of the street, but in no case may a building be nearer
to the street line than five (5) feet.
(c) In no case may a building be nearer the rear lot line than twenty (20) feet.
(d) deleted
5-19
5.33 Business Districts
1. The following dimensional requirement, set forth in Table 5-3 and modified
elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall be applicable to development in business districts:
[Note: The height limitations set forth in the following table are subject to exceptions for
mechanical equipment and certain architectural features as outlined in Section 5.23.
Reference should be made to Section 5.23 for a complete understanding of the actual
height of building elements permitted in the Zoning Ordinance.]
Table 5-3 Table of Dimensional Requirements - Business Districts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Max. Ratio of Minimum Min. Lot Area Minimum Minimum Yard in Feet Maximum Min. Ratio of
Floor Area to Lot Size for Each D.U. Lot Width Height Private Op. Sp.
District Lot Area in Sq. Ft. in Sq. Ft. in Feet Front Side Rear in Feet to Lot Area
Bus. A 1.0/1.75 none 600 none none none
H+L(a)
5 35/45 to 65(b) none
Bus. A-1 1.0/0.75 none 1200 none none none
H+L(a)
5 35 none
Bus. A-2 1.0/1.75 none 600 none 5(m) 10(i) 20(j) 45(k) none
Bus. A-3 0.75(f) 5,000 1,500 50 H+L(h)/4 H+L/5 H+L(a)/4 35 30%
Bus. A-4 1.0(p)/1.75 5,000 600 50 H+L/4(p) H+L/5(p) H+L/5(p) 35(p) none
Bus. B 2.75/3.0 none 300 none none none none 80 none
Bus. B-1 1.50/3.25 none 300 none none none(e) none(e) 55/90(c) (d)
Bus. B-2 1.50/3.0 none 300 none none none(e) none(e) 45 (d)
Bus. C 1.25/2.0 none 500 none none none 20(j) 55(g) none
Bus. C-1 2.75/3.0(n) none 450(n) none none none(o) 20(j) 50(g)(l) none
2. Footnotes
(a) In no case may a building be nearer the rear lot line than twenty (20) feet.
(b) As set forth in Section 5.28.1.
(c) The cornice line of the principal front wall plane facing Massachusetts Avenue shall
not exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height at the front lot line. Portions of buildings in
excess of this height shall be set back behind a thirty-five (35) degree bulk control
plane beginning at an elevation fifty-five (55) feet above the Massachusetts Avenue
front lot line. The cornice line of the principal front wall plane facing Green street
shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height at the front lot line. Portions of building in
excess of thirty (30) feet shall be set back behind a forty-five (45) degree bulk
control plane beginning at an elevation thirty (30) feet above the Green Street front
lot line. No building or portion of a building within forty-five (45) feet of the Green
Street front lot line shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
(d) Open space requirements for a lot shall be determined by the mix of uses on the lot.
Where one hundred (100) percent of the principal uses on a lot are residential uses
listed in Subsections 4.31 a, b, d, e, and g, an area equivalent to fifteen (15) percent
of the lot area shall be reserved as private open space. Where one hundred (100)
percent of the principal uses on the lot are other uses, an area equivalent to fifteen
5-20
(15) percent of the lot area shall be reserved as publicly beneficial open space.
Where development on a lot contains both the aforesaid residential uses and other
uses, an area equivalent to fifteen (15) percent of the lot area shall be devoted to
both types of open space in relative proportion to the gross floor areas occupied by
residential uses and other uses. The amount of each type of open space shall be
determined by the formulae below. The results of said formulae notwithstanding, a
minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the area of that portion of a lot within forty-five
(45) feet of a front lot line facing Green Street shall be devoted to landscaped green
space as specified in Subsection 4.27.3. Where more than fifty (50) percent of the
area of that portion of a lot is devoted to landscaped green space, as specified in
Subsections 4.27.2 and 4.27.3, none of such green space shall be counted in
determining compliance with this Subsection 5.332d. Where fifty (50) percent or
less of the area of that portion of a lot is devoted to landscaped green space, such
area may be counted in determining compliance with this Subsection 5.33 2d.
(1) Minimum required total area reserved for both types of open space = lot area
multiplied by .15.
(2) Share of development devoted to residential uses = gross residential floor area
divided by gross floor area of entire development.
(3) Minimum required private open space associated with residential use = total
open space required multiplied by residential share.
(4) Share of development devoted to other uses = other gross floor area divided
by gross floor area of entire development.
(5) Minimum required publicly beneficial open space = total open space
requirement multiplied by other use share.
(e) Where any lot abuts a residential district, buildings above and below ground shall be
set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the zoning district boundary line,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided in Article 6.000 of this Ordinance.
Said setback shall consist exclusively of landscaped green area as defined in Article
2.000. Where the zoning district boundary line splits a lot the minimum twenty (20)
foot setback shall be measured from the lot line(s) located in the residential district.
At a minimum green area setback shall consist of permanently maintained, densely
planted trees and shrubs that may be expected to form within three (3) years after
time of planting a continuous, unbroken, year round visual screen. Every effort shall
be made to retain the best existing trees in said setbacks to meet the requirements of
this section in whole or in part. Plans for landscaping and maintenance shall be
approved by the Committee on Public Planting as appointed by the City Manager. No
Certificate of Occupancy may be granted until landscaping under the terms of this
section is completed.
(f) Subject to the provisions of Footnote 1 in Section 4.40 – Footnotes to the Table of
Use Regulations.
(g) Thirty-five (35) feet [or height permitted in the abutting residential district, but in no
case higher than fifty-five (55) feet] within fifty (50) feet of a residential district line.
Where the zoning district boundary splits a lot the fifty (50) feet shall be measured
5-21
from the lot lines located in the residential district. The height, however, may exceed
thirty-five (35) feet provided the building is set back a minimum distance equal to
two-thirds (2/3) the height.
(h) Measured from the centerline of the street but in no case may a building be nearer
the street than ten (10) feet.
(i) However, for the side yard of any lot abutting another lot (where that lot does not
abut Massachusetts Avenue and where all or a majority of it is located in a
residence district) no building shall be set nearer than twenty feet to (1) either the
residence/Business A-2 zoning district line where the lot line is located in the BA-2
District or (2) the side lot line itself where that lot line is located in the residence
district. Nevertheless, the provisions of the following paragraph shall continue to
apply.
If a building is hereafter erected on a lot adjacent to a building having a blank wall
directly on the side lot line, the new building may be so designed and erected that it
will be flush with that portion of the blank wall of the former building which extends
along the lot line; otherwise no less than the required side yard setback shall be
provided. In the case that any portion of a side wall of the existing building contains
windows or is set back form the property line, then a building hereafter erected on
the lot adjacent to such an existing building shall be set back from the side lot line as
required.
(j) Or two-thirds (2/3) of the height of the rear wall whichever is greater; however in the
Business C and Business C-1 districts no rear yard shall be required where the rear
lot line abuts a lot all of which lies in a business or industrial district.
(k) Provided however that any portion of a building having a height greater than thirtyfive
(35) feet shall be set back of a bulk control plane rising at an angle of forty-five
(45) degree from the plane of the principal front wall and rear wall planes beginning
at a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
Where the parcel has frontage on two or more streets, this setback plane provision
shall apply only to the front wall plane facing the principal abutting arterial street and
to the opposite wall plane facing either a side or front property line.
In addition to the above provisions, that portion of a building located within fifty (50)
feet of a residential zoning district line shall be limited to thirty-five (35) feet where
the maximum height permitted in the residential district is thirty-five (35) feet or less.
(l) The maximum height of a building may be increased to sixty (60) feet provided the
average height of the building is fifty (50) feet (excluding any portion of the building
devoted to parking which is not covered with building included in gross floor area).
The heights of the several parts of the building shall be such that the volume of
building exceeding fifty (50) feet in height shall be equal to or less than the volume
of space lying between the fifty (50) foot height and portions of building less than fifty
(50) feet in height, as illustrated below:
Volume 1 (area of a building at a single height - 1 above fifty feet x the difference
between height - 1 and fifty feet ) + Volume 2 (area of building at a single height - 2
above fifty feet x the difference between the height - 2 and fifty feet ) MUST EQUAL
5-22
OR BE LESS THAN THE SUM OF Volume 1' (area of building at a single height - 1'
below fifty feet x the difference between height 1' and fifty feet ) + Volume 2' (area
of building at single height - 2' below fifty feet x the difference between height - 2'
and fifty feet).
(m) Or the setback of the principal front wall plane of any adjacent building facing the
same street, whichever is less.
(n) Of the total FAR permitted on the lot the maximum ratio of floor area to lot area for
permitted principal uses other than residential uses specified in Section 4.31 shall
not exceed 2.75. The maximum ratio of floor area to lot area for permitted
residential uses specified in Section 4.31 shall be 2.5 as of right; it may be increased
to 3.0 and lot area per dwelling unit decreased to three hundred (300) after the
issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board provided the following conditions
are met:
1. At least seventy-five (75) percent of the gross floor area on the lot is devoted to
residential uses specified in Section 4.31.
2. All parking on site is covered and enclosed.
3. Fifteen (15) percent or more of the lot is green area or other open space
acceptable to the Planning Board.
4. The building shall be subject to mandatory design review.
(o) H+L/6 for all buildings having fifty (50) percent or more of their gross floor area
devoted to residential uses specified in Section 4.31 where the side lot line abuts or
is within fifty (50) feet of a lot residentially used, the majority of which lies in a
residential district.
(p) For development in which all parking is provided entirely below grade, the following
dimensional modifications shall be allowed:
(i) FAR may be increased to 2.0
(ii) Front, Side and Rear yard requirements shall be modified to a minimum
of ten (10) feet. Sites with two front yards that have a radiused front yard
where two streets intersect may be considered as if the adjoining
property lines are projected to intersect. Projecting bays and roof decks
which are located on portions of a building below thirty-five (35) feet in
height shall be eligible for the setback exception allow in Section 5.24.2
even if the structure itself if greater than 35 feet in height.
(iii) Building height for a residential or mixed-use structure may be increased
to a maximum of forth-four (44) feet. However, for any portion of a
structure that abuts a lot in a residential district, the height of the building
shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet within fifteen (15) feet of the lot line.
3. deleted
4. deleted
5. deleted
5-23
6. deleted
7. deleted
8. A special permit may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeal to reduce the
required front yard for a dwelling constructed entirely above a commercial
establishment in any Business district except the Business A-3 district. .
5-24
5.34 Industrial Districts
1. The following dimensional requirements, set forth in Table 5-4 and modified
elsewhere in this Ordinance, shall be applicable to development in industrial districts:
[Note: The height limitations set forth in the following table are subject to exceptions for
mechanical equipment and certain architectural features as outlined in Section 5.23.
Reference should be made to Section 5.23 for a complete understanding of the actual
height of building elements permitted in the Zoning Ordinance.]
Table 5-4 Table of Dimensional Requirements - Industrial Districts
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Max. Ratio of Minimum Min. Lot Area Minimum Minimum Yard in Feet Maximum Min. Ratio of
Floor Area to Lot Size for Each D.U. Lot Width Height Private Op. Sp.
District Lot Area in Sq. Ft. in Sq. Ft. in Feet Front Side Rear in Feet to Lot Area
Ind. A-1 1.25/1.50 5,000 700 50 0 0(b) 0(b) 45 none
Ind. A-2 2.75/4.0 5,000 none 50 0 0(b) 0(b) 70 none
Ind. A 1.25/1.50 none none none none none none 45(d) none
Ind. B-1 1.5/3.0 5,000 none 50 0 0 0 60/70 none
Ind.B-2 0.75 5,000 1,200 50 15 0(b) 0(b) 35 none
Ind. B 2.75/4.0(e) none none none none none none 120 none
Ind. C 1.0 20,000 none 100 0 0(b) 0(b) 45 none
2. Footnotes
(a) deleted.
(b) A side yard setback of H+L
7 and a rear yard setback of H+L
5 shall be required only
for residential uses in new structures and for nonresidential uses abutting
residences, residential or open space districts or public parks and recreation areas.
These requirements may be reduced to a minimum required setback of ten (10) feet
on special permit, provided that the yard is suitably landscaped to effectively buffer
building walls from abutting lots.
(c) Thirty-five (35) foot height limit within one hundred (100) feet of a residential
structure less than thirty-five (35) feet in height or a residential district.
(d) One hundred and thirty (130) feet by special permit for buildings related to storage
and processing of materials permitted in Section 4.37m.
(e) Except that within the area bounded by Binney Street on the north, a line one
hundred and fifty (150) feet easterly of Cardinal Medeioros Avenue on the west,
Broadway on the south, and the railroad right of way on the east, the FAR may be
increased to 3.2 for non-residential uses for an addition to a building in existence as
of June 1, 2001 provided that for each four hundred and fifty (450) square feet of
GFA added above an FAR of 2.75 one existing parking space is permanently
eliminated.
5-25
5.35 Open Space Districts
1. The following dimensional requirements, set forth in Table 5-5, shall be applicable
to development in an open space district: [Note: The height limitations set forth in the
following table are subject to exceptions for mechanical equipment and certain
architectural features as outlined in Section 5.23. Reference should be made to Section
5.23 for a complete understanding of the actual height of building elements permitted in
the Zoning Ordinance.]
Table 5-5 Table of Dimensional Requirements - Open Space Districts
(1) Maximum Ratio of Floor Area to Lot Area: .25
(2) Minimum Lot Size (non-residential): 43,560 square feet
(3) Minimum Lot Width: 150 feet
(4) Minimum Yard:
(a) Front 25 feet
(b) Side 15 feet
(c) Rear 25 feet
(5) Maximum Height: 35 feet
(6) Minimum Ratio of Private Open Space to Lot Area: 60%
5.40 TRANSITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
5.41 Front yard: In an Office, Business or Industrial district no building shall be erected
nearer to the street line than is permitted in the adjacent Residence district within a
distance of fifty (50) feet from the Residence district boundary line, except where such
building is separated by a street from the Residence district.
5.42 Side yard: In Office, Business or Industrial districts no building shall be erected within
ten (10) feet of the side lot line of any abutting lot, all or the major portion of which is in
a Residence district.
5.43 Height: In a Business C district, within fifty (50) feet of a residential zone, no building
shall be erected that is greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
5.50 SPECIAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.51 Lot Size Requirements for Elderly Oriented Housing. The required number of square
feet of lot area per dwelling unit in elderly oriented housing or for each living space in
elderly oriented congregate housing is decreased to one half (1/2) the number of
square feet of lot area per dwelling unit customarily required in Section 5.30 of this
Ordinance.
5.52 Townhouse Development. The dimensional requirements of this article may be
reduced for townhouse developments as governed by the regulations of Article 11.000.
5.53 In Residence A-1 and Residence A-2 districts, only one structure containing a principal
use shall be allowed on a lot.
5-26
In Residence B districts only one structure containing a principal residential use shall
be allowed on a lot except as set forth below:
1. More than one structure containing a principal residential use shall be allowed on a
lot provided all portions of all structures are located no farther than seventy-five
(75) feet from any street line to which the lot abuts. However, those elements of a
structure that are permitted to extend into required yards as set forth in Section
5.24.2, may extend in a similar manner beyond the seventy-five foot limit.
2. By special permit from the Planning Board provided the Board finds
(a) that development in the form of two or more structures on the lot will not
significantly increase or may reduce the impact of the new construction should
it occur in a single structure; or
(b) That two or more structures may provide identifiable benefits beyond that
provided should all construction be in a single structure. In making its findings
the Board shall consider the impact of the new construction on the following:
(1) the extent to which the preservation of a large contiguous open space in
the rear of the lot or series of adjacent lots is achieved through the
provision of a rear yard setback significantly greater than that required and
through the dedication of that rear yard as Green Area, as defined in this
Ordinance,
(2) incentives for the location of buildings and parking facilities in the front half
of a lot in a pattern compatible with the development pattern prevailing in
the neighborhood,
(3) the extent to which two or more structures provides an enhanced living
environment for residents on the lot,
(4) incentives to retain existing structures on a lot, particularly any structure
determined to be a Preferably Preserved Significant structure by the
Cambridge Historical Commission,
(5) the opportunities presented to reduce the visual impact of parking from the
public street and from adjacent lots,
(6) The increased opportunities to reduce the height and bulk as new
construction is deeper into a lot or closer to structures on abutting lots.
In Residence A-1, A-2 and B districts there shall be no limit on the number of those
structures on a lot that contain principal nonresidential uses exclusively, provided
all other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance are met.
5.54 Special Regulations for Municipal Elementary and Middle (“K-8”) Schools. The following
regulations shall apply to the reconstruction, alteration or expansion of existing municipal
K-8 school uses. The regulations of this Section shall apply where development is
proposed on lots where the existing and proposed principal use is a municipal K-8 school;
however, such lots may include other uses customarily associated with a municipal K-8
school such as public recreation, public open space, community center, pre-school and
after school programs or municipal library. Where a regulation in this Section 5.54
5-27
contradicts any regulation set forth elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, including the
requirements of Article 8.000, the regulations of this Section 5.54 shall apply.
5.54.1 The following modifications to the dimensional, parking and other requirements applicable
in the zoning district as set forth in Paragraphs (a-f) below shall be permitted upon
issuance of a Building Permit by the Commissioner of Inspectional Services, subject to
the limitation set forth in Paragraph (g) below:
(a) The maximum permitted Floor Area Ratio shall be the existing Floor Area Ratio for all
buildings on the lot at the time of application for a Building Permit, or the maximum
Floor Area Ratio allowed under the applicable zoning district regulations, whichever is
greater.
(b) Areas located atop the roof of a building that are used as a playground or outdoor
educational space for school-related activities shall not be included in the calculation
of Gross Floor Area or Floor Area Ratio on the lot, provided that the space is
substantially open to the sky (structures covered with web or netting shall not be
considered enclosures).
(c) For any new structures, additions to an existing structure, or portions of a structure
that are demolished and reconstructed in a residential zoning district, the minimum
yard requirements otherwise applicable in the district shall not apply, provided that no
new structure may be nearer than ten (10) feet to any public street or nearer than
fifteen (15) feet to any other abutting lot line; however, for portions of a lot located
within an Open Space zoning district, the minimum yard requirements in the base
zoning district shall apply. For existing portions of a structure which are neither
demolished nor expanded, the required yards shall be those of the structure existing
at the time of application for a Building Permit.
(d) For any new structures, additions to a structure, or portions of a structure that are
demolished and reconstructed in a residential zoning district, the maximum building
height shall be forty-five (45) feet, or the maximum height allowed under zoning
district regulations, whichever is greater; however, for portions of a lot located within
an Open Space zoning district, the maximum height in the base zoning district shall
apply. For existing portions of a structure which are neither demolished nor
expanded, the height of the existing structure shall be permitted.
(e) The minimum required number of off-street motor vehicle parking spaces shall be the
number of legally existing off-street parking spaces on the lot or the minimum number
of off-street parking spaces required by Article 6.000, whichever is fewer. Where
existing parking spaces are proposed to be reconstructed or relocated, those spaces
shall conform to the location, design and layout requirements of Article 6.000.
(f) The minimum required number of off-street loading bays shall be the number of
legally existing off-street loading bays on the lot or the minimum number of off-street
loading bays required by Article 6.000, whichever is fewer. Where loading bays are
proposed to be reconstructed or relocated, those loading bays shall conform to the
location, design and layout requirements of Article 6.000.
(g) The provisions set forth in Paragraphs (a-f) above shall apply only if there is no net
reduction in the area of Public Recreational Open Space on the lot. For the purposes
of this Section 5.54, Public Recreational Open Space shall be defined as any
contiguous outdoor space having both a width and length of at least twenty-five (25)
feet that is available for customary recreational use by the general public and that
5-28
meets the definition of Public Open Space as set forth in Article 2.000 of this Zoning
Ordinance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the definition of Public Open
Space, areas beneath unenclosed structures that are accessory to outdoor public
recreational uses, such as play structures, shading devices or player dugouts, may be
counted as Public Recreational Open Space. Public Recreational Open Space may
be altered or relocated on the lot, provided that the total area of space meeting the
definition herein is not decreased.
5.54.2 Where it is proposed to reconstruct, alter or expand an existing municipal K-8 school use,
any dimensional, parking or other zoning requirements, including those set forth in
Section 5.54.1 above, may be waived upon the granting of a special permit by the
Planning Board, subject to the conditions and limitations set forth below.
(a) The Floor Area Ratio on the lot shall not exceed the existing Floor Area Ratio on the
lot, except that the Planning Board may approve an increase in Floor Area Ratio to
1.25 for any portion of the lot located within a residential zoning district (but excluding
portions of the lot located within an Open Space zoning district).
(b) For portions of a lot located within an Open Space zoning district, the minimum yard
requirements in the base zoning district shall continue to apply to any new buildings or
additions to buildings.
(c) In a residential zoning district, the maximum height of any new building or addition to
a building shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet, except that the Planning Board may
approve heights of up to sixty-five (65) feet for portions of a building located at least
fifty (50) feet from any lot line. In an Open Space zoning district, the height of any new
building or addition to a building shall not exceed the maximum height allowed in the
base zoning district.
(d) The minimum off-street parking requirement shall not be waived except upon
issuance of a special permit for Reduction in Required Parking under Section 6.35.1.
The Planning Board may approve a reduction in the number of required loading bays
upon finding that the proposed loading bays are sufficient to serve the school use.
New parking spaces and loading bays shall conform to the location, design and layout
requirements of Article 6.000.
(e) The net area of Public Recreational Open Space on the lot, as defined in Subsection
5.54.1, Paragraph (g) above, shall not be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) of
the existing area. In approving any net reduction in Public Recreational Open Space,
the Planning Board shall make a determination that the proposed Public Recreational
Open Space shall provide benefits to the general public that are at least
commensurate with the existing Public Open Space on the lot.
(f) In addition to the General Special Permit Criteria set forth in Section 10.43 and the
Citywide Urban Design Guidelines set forth in Section 19.30, the Planning Board shall
make a determination that the proposed changes to the lot have been designed to
minimize or mitigate adverse impacts on neighboring residential properties. In making
this finding, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
(i) Arrangement of building height and bulk within the lot.
(ii) Access and egress for pedestrians, bicycles and motor vehicles, including pick-up
and drop-off areas for buses and cars.
5-29
(iii) Location and screening of functions such as parking, loading, trash handling and
mechanical equipment.
(iv) Current impact of existing buildings and existing patterns of use on the site.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
6-1
ARTICLE 6.000 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS AND NIGHTTIME CURFEW ON LARGE
COMMERCIAL THROUGH TRUCKS
6.10 INTENT AND APPLICABILITY
6.20 OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
6.30 PARKING QUANTITY REQUIREMENTS
6.40 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE OF OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES
6.50 PARKING PLAN INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
6.60 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
6.70 APPLICATION OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
6.80 REQUIRED AMOUNT OF LOADING FACILITIES
6.90 LOCATION AND LAYOUT OF LOADING FACILITIES
6.100 BICYCLE PARKING
6.10 INTENT AND APPLICABILITY OF PARKING, BICYCLE PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS
6.11 Intent. It is the intent of this Article 6.000 to reduce traffic congestion, noise, vibrations,
fumes and safety hazards caused by large commercial trucks, thereby promoting the
safety, health and welfare of the public, by establishing requirements for off street
parking, bicycle parking and loading and restrictions on the use of City street during the
night-time by large commercial trucks with points of origin and destinations outside the
City of Cambridge in order to implement the purposed of the The Zoning Act, Section 2A
of Chapter 808, and Article 1.000. Section 1.30 of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance,
including:
? to lessen congestion in the streets
? to conserve health
? to conserve the value of land and buildings
? to prevent pollution of the environment
? to protect residential neighborhoods from incompatible activities, and
? to preserve and increase the amenities of the city.
The number of parking and loading spaces required herein varies according to type,
location and intensity of development in the different zoning districts, and to proximity of
public transit facilities. This Article 6.000 requires development of adequate parking
facilities to meet the reasonable needs of all building and land users without establishing
regulations which unnecessarily encourage automobile usage. The parking and bicycle
parking standards contained herein are intended to encourage public transit, bicycle
usage and walking in lieu of automobiles where a choice of travel mode exists. It is also
the purpose of this Article to allow flexibility in providing required parking through shared
or off site arrangements in order to accommodate the automobile in the urban
environment in a less disruptive way. Development regulations and design standards
have been established to reduce hazard to pedestrians on public sidewalks, to ensure
6-2
the usefulness of parking, bicycle parking and loading facilities, and where appropriate,
to avoid potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses, and to enhance the visual
quality of the city.
6.12 Applicability. The off street parking and loading provisions of this Article 6.000 shall apply
as follows:
(a) For new structures erected and new uses of land established or authorized after the
effective date of this Article 6.000 or any amendment thereto, as well as for external
additions of Gross Floor Area to existing structures for any use, accessory off street
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations for the
districts in which such structures or uses are located.
In the case of an addition of Gross Floor Area to an existing structure (lawfully
erected prior to the effective date of this Article 6.000 or any amendment thereto),
which addition contains nonresidential uses, off street parking and loading facilities
shall only be required when the total of such additions occurring from the effective
date of this Article 6.000 or any amendment thereto increases the Gross Floor Area
of the existing structure by fifteen (15) percent or more. If such an increase occurs,
additional off street parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided
for the total increase in intensity subsequent to the effective date of this Article 6.000
or any amendment thereto.
(b) When the intensity of an existing use within any existing structure (or lot in the case
of 6.36.7 l and m and 6.36.8 f and g) is increased through addition of dwelling units,
floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified in Section 6.30
or Section 6.60 (but not including any uses in a new external addition to that
structure, which shall be subject to the provisions of Paragraph (a) above), off street
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for such increase in
intensity of use.
However, a nonresidential use lawfully established prior to the effective date of this
Article 6.000 or any amendment thereto shall not be required to provide off street
parking and loading facilities for such increase unless and until the aggregate
increase in units of measure shall equal fifteen (15) percent or more of the units of
measurement existing upon said effective date. If such an increase occurs,
additional off street parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided
for the total increase in intensity subsequent to the effective date of this Article 6.000
or any amendment thereto.
(c) When the use of an existing structure (but not including the use of a new external
addition to that structure, which shall be subject to the provisions of Paragraph (a)
above) is changed to a new nonresidential use, off street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required in the schedule of parking requirements in
Subsection 6.36 and the schedule of loading requirements in Subsection 6.60. Any
maximum requirements specified in Subsection 6.36, as well as minimum
requirements, shall be applicable to such changes in use.
However, if said structure was lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this
Article 6.000 or any amendment thereto, additional off street parking and loading
6-3
facilities shall be required only to the extent that the required amount for the new
nonresidential use would exceed the amount required for the previous use if said
previous use were subject to the schedule of parking and loading requirements.
In either case, the first four (4) spaces required need not be provided.
(d) When the nonresidential use of an existing structure is changed to a residential use,
off street parking facilities shall be provided as required in the schedule of parking
requirements in Subsection 6.36. Any maximum requirements specified in
Subsection 6.36, as well as minimum requirements, shall be applicable to such
changes in use.
(e) Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided according to the requirements set
forth in Section 6.100. Wherever the term “parking” is used in this Zoning Ordinance
without specific reference to bicycles, such term shall refer to parking for motor
vehicles and not bicycles.
However, if said structure was lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this Article
6.000 or any amendment thereto and the nonresidential use of the structure is proposed
to be changed to an Affordable Housing Project as herein defined, additional off street
parking facilities shall be required as provided above, except that for that portion of the
Project consisting of Affordable Units additional off street parking shall be provided at the
rate of 60% of the parking otherwise required in Section 6.36.
For purposes of this Section 6.12 (d) an Affordable Housing Project shall be a residential
development in which at least fifty percent (50%) of the dwelling units are considered
Affordable Units for occupancy by Eligible Households as defined in Section 11.200 of
the Zoning Ordinance.
6.13 Scope of Off Street Parking Regulations. All accessory parking facilities shall conform to
all regulations set forth in this Article governing the use, design and operation of such
facilities. However, the provisions of this Article 6.000, notwithstanding, any special
parking requirements for townhouse developments specified in Section 11.10, for
planned unit developments specified in Article 13.000, for projects in the Mixed Use
Development District specified in Article 14.000 or for special permits specified
elsewhere in this Ordinance shall be applicable for those projects.
6.14 Restoration. When an existing structure or use is restored and resumes operation after
being destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, or other catastrophe, off street parking,
bicycle parking and loading facilities shall be provided at least equivalent to that in
existence at the time of such destruction or damage. If the extent of such damage is
such that the cost of restoration is fifty (50) percent or more of the replacement value of
the structure or use, then parking, bicycle parking and loading facilities meeting the
requirements of this Article 6.000 shall be provided. However, in no case shall it be
necessary to replace or continue any parking, bicycle parking or loading facilities which
were in excess of those required by the schedules of parking and loading requirements
for equivalent amounts of new uses or construction.
6.15 Existing Parking Facilities. Accessory off street parking facilities established after March
15, 1961, shall not hereafter be reduced below - of if already less than, shall not be
6-4
further reduced below - the minimum requirements under the provisions of this Article
6.000. Accessory off street parking facilities in existence as of March 15, 1961 shall only
be required if such facilities have been used to satisfy parking requirements after March
15, 1961.
6.16 Dedicated Off Street Parking Facilities. Required off street parking facilities which after
development are later dedicated to and accepted by the City and maintained by the City
for off street parking purposes, shall be deemed to continue to serve the structures or
uses to meet the requirements for which they were originally provided.
6.17 Compatibility with the E.P.A. Clean Air Regulations In addition to the regulations
contained in this Article, all off street parking facilities must comply with restrictions
contained in the Transportation Control Plan for the Metropolitan Boston Interstate Air
Quality Control Region as promulgated by the United State Environmental Protection
Agency to the extent the same are in force and effect.
6.18 Compatibility with Handicapped Access Rules. In addition to the regulations contained in
this Article 6.000, all off street parking facilities must comply with the currently applicable
“Rules and Regulations of the Architectural Barriers Board of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts” to the extent the same are in force and effect.
6.20 OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
6.21 Use. All accessory parking facilities provided in accordance with this Article shall be
maintained exclusively for the parking of motor vehicles so long as the use exists which
the facilities were designed to serve. Such facilities shall not be used for automobile
sales, dead storage, or repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind, with the
exception of emergency service when needed. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this Ordinance, parking facilities maintained in accordance with this Article 6.000 may
be used by Carsharing Vehicles subject to the provisions and limitations set forth in
Section 6.24 of this Zoning Ordinance.
6.22 Location. All accessory off street parking facilities shall be located in accordance with
the provisions of subsections 6.22.1, 6.22.2 and 6.22.3. For purposes of this Section
6.22 lot shall also mean the Development Parcel of any Planned Unit Development
regulated by the provisions of Article 12.000 and Article 13.000 without regard to a lot or
lots that may initially constitute the Development Parcel or any lot or lots created within
the Development Parcel subsequent to the approval of the PUD by the Planning Board.
6.22.1 Accessory off street parking facilities may be located on the same lot as the use being
served or on another lot that has the same or less restrictive zoning classification as the
lot on which the use being served is located in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) (1) said other lot is contiguous to the lot on which the use being served is located;
or
(2) said other lot is within three hundred (300) feet of the lot on which the use being
served is located and the use being served is nonresidential; or
6-5
(3) said lot is within three thousand (3000) feet of the lot on which the use being
served is located, such use is an institutional use listed in Subsection 6.36.3b
and said use is located within a five acre area containing one or more lots,
contiguous except for streets, owned by a single institution; and
(b) said lot is not now and was not within the past five (5) years the location of a
preferably preserved significant building (as defined in the General Ordinances of
Cambridge) as determined by the Cambridge Historical Commission.
(c) however, no off site accessory parking facilities shall be allowed to meet the
requirements for Subsection 6.36.5h “Theatre or hall for public gatherings”.
6.22.2 The Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit for off site accessory parking not
allowed in Subsection 6.22.1 (a) provided that convenient and safe access from the
parking facility to the use being served is provided in accordance with the following
conditions:
(a) No off site accessory parking facility may be located on a lot which has a more
restrictive zoning classification than the lot on which the use being served is located.
(b) Off site accessory parking facilities shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of
the lot being served for residential uses and within one thousand (1000) feet of the
lot for other uses.
6.22.3 [PARAGRAPH DELETED]
6.22.4 Accessory off street parking spaces required under the provisions of this Article 6.000
need not be in the City of Cambridge.
6.22.5 Distance Measurements For Parking Facilities. In all cases where distance
measurements between a lot and off site parking facilities or other specified area are
specified in this Article 6.000, such distance shall be measured as a straight line from the
nearest point for the lot on which the off site accessory parking is located, to the nearest
transit station entrance, or to the nearest street line or other boundary of another
specified area.
6.23 Control of Off Site Parking Facilities. Where accessory parking facilities are allowed on
land other than the lot on which the use being served is located said other land shall be
in identical ownership or binding commitments shall exist to guarantee, to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Buildings or to the special permit granting authority,
that the off site parking will continue to be available for the period during which the use or
uses that the parking serves may be expected to be in existence. Such commitments
shall be evidenced by negotiated lease agreement, recorded covenant or comparable
legal instrument. Such instrument shall be duly recorded at the Middlesex County
Registry of Deeds and certification of such recording provided to the Superintendent of
Buildings or the special permit granting authority.
6.24 Carsharing Provisions. The provisions of this Section 6.24 shall govern the allowed use
parking spaces for Carsharing. Where the provisions of this Section 6.24 may conflict
with any requirements set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance, the provisions of this
Section shall control.
6-6
6.24.1 Intent. This Section 6.24 is intended to allow the limited use of parking spaces for
Carsharing as a means to provide mobility options for Cambridge residents, employees
and visitors who may not possess a private automobile, thereby promoting City goals by
increasing mobility, reducing reliance on automobile ownership and use, and lessening
the total demand for parking spaces.
6.24.2 Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, Carsharing shall mean the use of parking
spaces by Carsharing Vehicles and Carsharing Organizations, as defined below:
(a) Carsharing Vehicle shall be defined as a private motor vehicle that is made
available to members of a Carsharing Organization primarily for hourly or other
short-term use through a self-service fully automated reservation system, but no
by mean of a separate written agreement that is entered into each time a vehicle
is transferred to a customer. A Carsharing Vehicle must be owned, maintained or
administered by a Carsharing Organization.
(b) Carsharing Organization shall be defined as a membership-based entity with a
distributed fleet of Carsharing Vehicles that charges a use-based fee related to a
specific vehicle.
6.24.3 General Limitations
(a) Carsharing Vehicles shall only be allowed in parking facilities that are lawfully
established and conforming to the dimensional and other requirements of Article
6.000, or, if not, are lawfully non-conforming.
(b) A Carsharing Vehicle authorized to this Section 6.24 shall be properly registered
with the Registry of Motor Vehicle.
(c) A Carsharing Vehicle located within an authorized parking facility shall be
maintained for active use by authorized operators and not stored for other
purposes. No sales, servicing, dead storage, repair, administrative or similar
functions shall occur and no personnel shall be employed on the site except for
occasional short-term maintenance of vehicles (such as interior vacuuming)
unless otherwise permitted by the use regulations in the zoning district.
(d) Carsharing Vehicles administered by a Carsharing Organization shall be
routinely accessed directly by users without any assistance or supervision by
company personnel.
(e) All owners of that portion of a lot accommodating the operation or parking of a
Carsharing Vehicle, or their legally authorized representative, including a
condominium association where applicable, shall be required to grant permission
for the operation or parking of a Carsharing Vehicle on their property.
(f) Parking spaces devoted to Carsharing Vehicles shall be registered with the
Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department (TPTD), which shall keep a
recorded of the address, location, number of spaces, property ownership, and
Carsharing Organization if applicable, and certify that such spaces may
6-7
accommodate the operation of Carsharing Vehicles in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules, or regulations. If any such spaces are relocated within a
facility, or if the property ownership or Carsharing Organization is changed, then
the registration with TPTD shall be updated accordingly within one month. TPTD
may promulgate more detailed regulations pertaining to the safe operation as to
which parking spaces on a lot are best suited to Carsharing Vehicles operations.
(g) Prior to assigning parking spaces for use by Carsharing Vehicles, the Carsharing
Organization shall send a written notification to all residential dwellings within
one hundred (100) feet of the facility in which the spaces are located, including
any access and egress drives. Notifications shall be sent to individual dwelling
units or to a residential building manager if applicable, to distributed to residents.
The notification shall, at a minimum, provide contact information for the
Carsharing Organization so that residents may ask questions or report concerns
related to the operation of the Carsharing Vehicles. A copy of notification and a
list of the addresses to which it was sent shall be provided to TPTD upon register
the parking spaces.
6.25.4 Principal Use Parking Provisions
(a) Within principal use parking facilities established under the provisions of Section
4.32(b) (Automobile Parking Lot for Private Passenger Car) or Commercial
Parking Facilities registered with the Department of Traffic, Parking and
Transportation per the provisions of Chapter 10.16 of the Cambridge Municipal
Code, there shall be no limitations on the number of Carsharing Vehicles that
may be maintained for active use at the facility.
(b) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, the maintenance of
Carsharing Vehicles for active use within a principal use or commercial parking
facility in accordance with this Section 6.24 shall not cause any change in the
use designation of that facility or affect any other regulation that may be
applicable to that facility.
6.24.4 Accessory Parking Provisions.
(a) Within parking facilities that are accessory to non-residential uses, there shall be no
limitation on the number of Carsharing Vehicles that may be maintained for active
use at the facility.
(b) Within parking facilities that are accessory to residential uses, the number of parking
spaces maintained for active use by Carsharing Vehicles shall not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of either the minimum number of parking spaces required by zoning or
special permit or the number of parking spaces provided to serve the principal
residential use on the lot, whichever is greater.
(c) Driveways of single-family residential homes may not be used by Carsharing
Vehicles, except when the Carsharing Vehicle is being used by a resident of or visitor
to the single family home.
6-8
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, the maintenance of
Carsharing Vehicles within an accessory parking facility in accordance with this
Section 6.24 shall not cause any change in the use of that facility nor any violation of
the accessory parking requirements applicable to the principal uses served by that
facility, provided that such Carsharing Vehicles are available for use by any occupant
of the principal use that is otherwise qualified to operate a motor vehicle. Where a
Carsharing Vehicle is owned or operated by a Carsharing Organization, ordinary fees
and other terms of service may apply.
6.24.5 Allowed Modifications
(a) Grandfathering. Parking spaces that were lawfully used by Carsharing Vehicles as
of the date of the first publication of notice of the public hearing by the Planning
Board of this Section 6.24 shall be allowed to continue to be maintained for active
use by Carsharing Vehicles regardless of whether or not the limitations of this
Section 6.24 are met. All such parking spaces must be registered with the
Cambridge Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department in accordance with
Section 6.24.3, paragraph (g) within six months of the date of adoption of this
Section.
(b) Special Permit. The Planning Board may approve any modifications to the limitations
set forth in Section 6.24.5 upon issuance of a special permit, which shall be granted
if the Planning Board finds that the requested modification is consistent with the
intent set forth in Section 6.24.1 and conforms to the general special permit criteria
set forth in Section 10.43 of this Zoning Ordinance.
6.30 PARKING QUANTITY REQUIREMENTS
6.31 Required Amount of Parking. Off street parking facilities shall be provided for each use
of a lot or structure in the amount specified in the schedule of parking requirements
contained in Subsection 6.36. Said schedule specifies the amount of accessory off street
parking required for each type of land use listed in “Table of Use Regulations” in this
Ordinance. The amount of required parking is also based on the intensity of
development permitted in the district in which the use is located.
6.31.1 The schedule of parking requirements in Subsection 6.36 specifies the unit of measure
requiring the provision of one parking space. Square footage requirements are geared to
gross floor area. Each unit of measure, however, shall specifically not apply to any
Gross Floor Area devoted to parking facilities, which shall not require the provision of any
accessory parking.
6.31.2 In general the schedule in Subsection 6.36 specifies a minimum requirement, but in
some instances a maximum amount of parking is stipulated [Example: for a general office
use (6.36.4 d) in a Business C district, the minimum requirement is one space per 800
square feet of gross floor area and the maximum is one space per 400 square feet of
gross floor area.] Where there are two such listings the first is the minimum requirement
and the second is the maximum limitation. Relief from both the minimum parking
requirement and maximum parking limitation may be obtained only after the grant of a
6-9
special permit as provided in Section 6.35 below. With the grant of a special permit the
maximum parking limitation may be exceeded provided, however, that the provisions with
regard to gross floor area as set forth in Section 6.31.3 are met.
6.31.3 Any parking spaces provided in excess of the maximum requirements specified in
Section 6.36 shall be counted in determining Gross Floor Area. In such cases a
proportional share of the entire parking facility (not only the area of the spaces) shall be
credited toward Gross Floor Area. The area counted as Gross Floor Area shall be
determined by multiplying the total area of the parking facility by the percentage that the
proposed number of spaces exceeds the maximum allowed number of spaces.
6.31.4 For uses not listed in Subsection 6.36, the Board of Zoning Appeal shall determine the
required amount of parking if it issues a use variance for such use.
6.31.5 All commercial uses shall also be required to provide a parking space for each
commercial vehicle customarily used in conjunction with the operation of such use at
such location.
6.32 Parking Exemptions
6.32.1 Small Business. The minimum amount of parking required by Subsection 6.36 Schedule
of Parking and Loading Requirements shall be waived for any nonresidential use in an
office, business, or industrial district if such use would require four (4) or fewer spaces.
However, such nonresidential use shall be located in a building or row of attached
buildings which contains a total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less of gross
floor area devoted to nonresidential use.
6.32.2 Institutions. Where an institution provides dormitory, fraternity, faculty, employee or other
residence accommodations, the number of parking spaces provided as a result thereof
may be deducted from the requirements established to satisfy the needs of classrooms,
libraries, lecture halls, laboratories, similar educational areas or dining facilities normally
used by such residential occupants. In order to qualify for such deduction, the
institutional applicant shall submit to the Building Department the institution’s current
residential parking plan clearly indicating the location of all existing and proposed
residential parking facilities available at the institution.
6.33 Computation. Where a building or lot is used by two or more activities that fall into
different classes of use in Subsection 6.36, the off street parking required shall be the
sum of the requirements for each individual use. Required parking spaces for accessory
uses shall be determined in the same manner as for principal use. Where the
computation results in a fractional number, only a fraction of one half or more shall be
counted as one. Where the computation of required parking for a building with more than
one class of use results in multiple fractional numbers, such fractions shall be carried to
the final sum.
6.34 Parking Space Size Allocation. In all parking facilities required to have five or more
spaces, a combination of regular and compact spaces may be provide; however, no
more than fifty (50) percent of the required spaces shall be designed for compact cars
(as specified in Subsection 6.42). All off street parking facilities shall contain spaces
designed for handicapped access. The number of such spaces shall be determined by
6-10
the requirements of the currently applicable “Rules and Regulations of the Architectural
Barriers Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.”
6.35 Relief from Parking Requirements. Any required amount of parking may be reduced by
issuance of a special permit from Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided below.
However, handicapped parking required by Subsection 6.34, and commercial vehicle
parking required by Subsection 6.31.5 shall not be reduced from the original requirement.
Bicycle parking requirements may not be modified pursuant to this Section 6.35, and may
be modified only as allowed in Section 6.100. The parking maximum limitation may be
exceeded only with the grant of a special permit from the Planning Board, as provided
below, subject to the provisions with regard to Gross Floor Area as provided in Section
6.31.3.
6.35.1 Reduction of Required Parking. Any minimum required amount of parking may be
reduced only upon issuance of a special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeals. A
special permit shall be granted only if the Board determines and cites evidence in its
decision that the lesser amount of parking will not cause excessive congestion, endanger
public safety, substantially reduce parking availability for other uses or otherwise
adversely impact the neighborhood, or that such lesser amount of parking will provide
positive environmental or other benefits to the users of the lot and the neighborhood,
including specifically, among other benefits, assisting in the provision of affordable
housing units. In making such a determination the Board shall also consider whether or
not less off street parking is reasonable in light of the following:
(1) The availability of surplus off street parking in the vicinity of the use being served
and/or the proximity of an MBTA transit station.
(2) The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the vicinity of the use
being served provided the requirements of Section 6.23 are satisfied.
(3) Shared use of off street parking spaces serving other uses having peak user
demands at different times, provided that no more than seventy-five (75) percent
of the lesser minimum parking requirements for each use shall be satisfied with
such shared spaces and that the requirements of Subsection 6.23 are satisfied.
Example: Office and Theatre uses with peak user demands at different
times. Office requires a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150)
spaces and the theatre requires a minimum of one hundred
(100). Seventy-five (75) percent of the lesser minimum
requirement is seventy-five (75) (75% of 100). Therefore
seventy-five (75) spaces can be shared but twenty-five (25)
(100-25) would still be required, making the total amount or
required parking for both uses (150 + 25) one hundred and
seventy-five (175).
(4) Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to result in a lower level of
auto usage; and
6-11
(5) Impact of the parking requirement on the physical environment of the affected lot
or the adjacent lots including reduction in green space, destruction of significant
existing trees and other vegetation, destruction of existing dwelling units,
significant negative impact on the historic resources on the lot, impairment of the
urban design objectives of the city as set forth in Section 19.30 of the Zoning
Ordinance, or loss of pedestrian amenities along public ways.
(6) The provision of required parking for developments containing affordable housing
units, and especially for developments employing the increased FAR and
Dwelling unit density provisions of Section 11.200, will increase the cost of the
development, will require variance relief from other zoning requirements
applicable to the development because of limitations of space on the lot, or will
significantly diminish the environmental quality for all residents of the
development.
For a project seeking a reduction in required off-street parking for residential uses, a
Parking Analysis shall be required as part of the Special Permit Application as set forth in
Section 6.35.3.
6.35.2 Exceeding Maximum Allowed Parking. Any maximum allowed amount of parking may be
exceeded only upon issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board. Any parking
area in excess of the maximum limitation will have an impact on calculation of gross floor
area as provided at Section 6.31.3. The Planning Board shall grant a special permit to
allow exceedance of a maximum limitation only upon making the following
determinations:
(1) Reasonable parking and transportation demand management measures are being
implemented to reduce the need for the additional off street parking;
(2) The additional spaces reflect parking demand that exceeds that which is common for
this use as categorized in Section 6.36, owing to unique characteristics of the users
or the activity that result in a high level of automobile parking demand;
(3) The additional parking demand cannot reasonably be accommodated through
contract or other arrangement making use of available off-site parking;
(4) The additional parking will provide positive environmental or other benefits to the
users of the lot, to the neighborhood and the City which outweigh adverse effects,
after consideration of the following: congestion, traffic increases on residential
streets, danger to public safety or deterioration of travel conditions for pedestrians,
cyclists or users of public transit.
In its decision the Planning Board shall cite evidence supporting its determinations, and
may impose such conditions as are necessary to mitigate all negative impacts on the
neighborhood and the environment which would otherwise result from the greater
allowed amount of parking.
6.35.3 Parking Analysis
6.35.31 The purpose of a Parking Analysis is to provide quantitative data to assist a special
permit granting authority in considering certain projects. A Parking Analysis shall be
submitted where it is specifically required by any provision of this Zoning Ordinance. A
6-12
special permit granting authority may also request that elements of a Parking Analysis be
provided when considering a project that proposes a deviation from parking requirements
specified in the Zoning Ordinance or an increase in development density above the
maximum allowed as-of-right under base zoning regulations.
6.35.32 Where a Parking Analysis is specifically required by any provision of this Zoning
Ordinance, the proponent shall first consult with the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department to determine the scope and methodology of such an analysis. The results of
the Parking Analysis shall be included in any Special Permit Application for the project.
6.35.33 For residential projects, a Parking Analysis shall include some or all of the following, with
the specific type and level of analysis to be determined by the Traffic, Parking and
Transportation Department based on the relevant characteristics of the proposal:
(a) Estimates of the project’s parking demand, as evidenced by vehicle ownership rates
and peak parking occupancy data for comparable nearby residential projects,
resident parking permit and motor vehicle registration data for the area, and/or other
indicators of parking demand. These estimates should account for daytime and
nighttime parking. Estimates may account for differences in parking demand given
the occupancy of units, such as owner-occupied vs. rental units, market-rate vs.
below-market-rate units, or elderly-oriented vs. conventional units. Estimates may
also account for anticipated vacancy rates.
(b) Maps showing the distance to alternate transportation options in the area, including
MBTA rapid transit stations and bus routes, bike facilities, and car-sharing services.
(c) Studies of on-street parking capacity and utilization in the vicinity of the project. Such
studies should be conducted at night, and should account for the normal activity
hours of other land uses in the area.
(d) Where applicable, inventories and peak occupancy data for nearby off-site parking
that will be available to the project’s residents or visitors, either on a round-the-clock
basis or by way of a shared use arrangement. Private, off-site parking shall only be
applicable to the analysis if a long-term leasing arrangement is proposed to be made.
Shared parking arrangements should be studied thoroughly to determine the
minimum amount of parking required to satisfy the demand from all proposed land
uses during any given time period.
(e) A description of measures that will be implemented to reduce demand for private
automobile use, such as the availability of car-sharing programs and/or incentives for
residents or employees to walk, bicycle, or use public transportation, and estimates
of the anticipated impact of those measures on parking demand.
6.36 Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements. Off street parking shall be provided as
shown in the following table. Where one entry is given in the table, it is the minimum
requirement. All square foot measurements refer to gross floor area unless specified
otherwise. The abbreviation “d.u.” means dwelling unit. The abbreviation n/a means not
applicable. In cases where a requirement is expressed in number of seats, twenty (20)
6-13
square feet of public floor area shall equal one seat if there are no fixed seats. One
column of the table contains the loading requirement standard applicable under Section
6.80 for each use and two columns refer to the Long-Term Bicycle Parking and Short-
Term Bicycle Parking requirements applicable under Section 6.107 for each use.
6-14
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Land Use Category
Open Space,
Res A-1, A-2,
Res B
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A-4,Ind A-1, Ind
B-2, Ind C
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-2B, Bus A
(res)
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B,
Ind A-2, Ind B,
Bus B-1, B-2
Loading
Facility
Category
Long-Term
Bicycle
Parking
(6.107.2)
Short-Term
Bicycle
Parking
(6.107.3)
6.36.1 Residential Uses
a. Detached dwelling occupied by not more 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. n/a R1 R1
than one family
b. Two family dwelling 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. n/a R2 R2
c. Existing one-family detached dwelling 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u.1 1 per d.u.1 1 per d.u.1 n/a R1 R1
converted for two families
d. Townhouse development2 1 per d.u.3 1 per d.u.3 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. n/a R2 R2
e. Elderly oriented housing, elderly oriented
congregate housing
1 per 2 d.u.’s4 1 per 2 d.u.’s4 1 per 2 d.u.’s4 1 per 2 d.u.’s4 n/a R3 R3
f. Existing dwelling converted for elderly
oriented congregate housing
1 per 2 d.u.’s4 1 per 2 d.u.’s4 1 per 2 d.u.’s4 1 per 2 d.u.’s4 n/a R3 R3
g. Multifamily dwelling n/a 1 per d.u.3 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. n/a R2 R2
h. Existing dwelling converted for more than n/a 1 per d.u.1 1 per d.u.1 1 per d.u.1 n/a R2 R2
two families
i. Transient and nonfamily accommodations
1. Tourist house in an existing dwelling n/a 1 per d.u. + 1 per 1 per d.u. + 1 per 1 per d.u. + 1 per n/a R5 R5
4 guest rooms 4 guest rooms 4 guest rooms
2. Hotel n/a 1 per 2 sleeping
rooms5
1 per 2 sleeping
rooms5
1 per 2 sleeping
rooms5
E R5 R5
3. Motel n/a 1 per motel unit5 1 per motel unit5 1 per motel unit5 E R5 R5
4. Lodging House n/a 1 per 4 bedrooms 1 per 4 bedrooms 1 per 4 bedrooms E R4 R4
+ one + one + one
j. Trailer park or mobile home park n/a 1 per d.u. 1 per d.u. n/a n/a R2 R2
6.36.2 Transportation, Communication &
Utility Uses
a. Bus or railroad passenger station n/a 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 900 sq. ft. n/a N5 N3
b. Automobile parking lot or parking garage n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a P P
for private passenger cars
c. Railroad freight terminal, railroad yards n/a n/a n/a 1 per 2400 sq. ft. A N5 N5
and shops
6-15
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
d. Truck or bus terminal, yard or building for n/a n/a 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 2400 sq. ft. A N5 N5
storage or servicing of trucks, trailers or
buses; parking lot for trucks
e. Radio and television transmission station, n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. of 1 per 800 sq. ft. of 1 per 1000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
including towers office space office space of office space
f. Radio and television studio n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. D N1 N5
g. Telephone exchange, transformer station, n/a6 1 per 600 sq. ft. of 1 per 800 sq. ft. of 1 per 1000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
substation, gas regulator, or pumping office space office space of office space
station
6.36.3 Institutional Uses
a. Religious Purposes
1. Place of worship 1 per 5 seats or 1 per 8 seats or 1 per 15 seats or 1 per 20 seats or F N5 N3
100 sq. ft. of
public floor area7
100 sq. ft. or
public floor area7
300 sq. ft. of
public floor area7
400 sq. ft. of
public area7
2. Rectory, parsonage 1 per dwelling unit 1 per dwelling unit 1 per dwelling unit 1 per dwelling unit n/a R1 R1
3. Convent, monastery 1 per 4 sleeping 1 per 4 sleeping 1 per 4 sleeping 1 per 4 sleeping n/a R4 R4
rooms rooms rooms rooms
4. Social or recreation center 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1500 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. F N5 N3
5. Other use with religious purposes 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1500 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. F N5 N3
b. Educational Purposes
1. Preschool, day care center kindergarten 3 per 2 instructional rooms, or 1 per 5 seats in the main auditorium, whichever is F E1 E1
greater
2. Primary School 3 per 2 instructional rooms, or 1 per 5 seats in the main auditorium, whichever is F E1 E1
greater
3. Secondary School 5 per instructional room or 1 per 5 seats in the main auditorium, whichever is F E1 E1
greater
4. College or university athletic facility, n/a 1 per 5 seats or 1 per 15 seats or 1 per 20 seats or F E215 E315
auditorium, theater or similar facility, any 100 sq. ft. public 300 sq. ft. public 400 sq. ft. public
of which is customarily accessible to the floor area floor area floor area
general public on a paid admission fee or
other basis.
6-16
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
5. College or university laboratory or n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. F E2 E2
research facility customarily involving 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 1200 sq. ft.
radioactive materials and other controlled
substances, high intensity
electromagnetic radiation or chemical or
biological processes which could entail a
high level of danger to the public health.
6. Other college or university faculty
a. Dining halls, canteens and similar 1 per 20 seats 1 per 20 seats 1 per 40 seats 1 per 60 seats E E2 E3
eating facilities
b. Administrative faculty and staff offices, 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft 1 per 1000 sq. ft 1 per 1800 sq. ft. F E2 E2
teaching facilities, libraries, museums, 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 300 sq. ft 1 per 500 sq. ft 1 per 1200 sq. ft.
service facilities and facilities not
specified in 6.36.3-4, 5, or 8.
7. Vocational or other schools n/a 6 per instructional 6 per instructional 6 per instructional F E1 E1
room room room
8. Group residential and related facilities
a. Dormitories n/a 1 per 4 beds + 1 1 per 8 beds + 1 1 per 8 beds + 1 E R4 R4
b. Fraternities and sororities n/a 1 per 2 beds 1 per 4 beds 1 per 4 beds E R4 R4
c. Non-Commercial Research Facilities
1. Laboratory or other research facility n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. F N2 N5
customarily involving research with 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 670 sq. ft.
radioactive materials, controlled
substances, radiation or chemical or
biological processes potentially entailing a
high level of danger to the public health
and safety
2. Private library or study center 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 1200 sq. ft. F N5 N3
3. Other noncommercial research facilities n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. F N2 N5
1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 670 sq. ft.
d. Health Care Facilities
6-17
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
1. Hospital n/a 1 per 3 beds plus 1 per 4 beds plus 1 per 5 beds plus E N3 N4
1 per emergency 1 per emergency 1 per emergency
or outpatient or outpatient or outpatient
examining table, examining table, examining table,
bed or facility bed or facility bed or facility
2. Infirmary n/a 1 per 6 beds 1 per 8 beds 1 per 10 beds E N3 N4
3. Nursing home, convalescent home n/a 1 per 6 beds 1 per 8 beds 1 per 10 beds E N3 N4
4. Clinic not affiliated with any other n/a 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. E N3 N3
institution
5. Clinic affiliated with a hospital or n/a 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. E N3 N3
accredited university medical school
6. Clinic connected to a community center 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. E N3 N3
7. Other health care facilities n/a 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. E N3 N3
e. Social Service Facilities
1. Social service center 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. F N5 N3
2. Community center 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. F N5 N3
3. Community residence n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 E R4 R4
4. Personal Care lodging house n/a n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 E R4 R4
f. Local government
1. Administrative office n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. F N1 N3
1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 670 sq. ft.
2. Fire or police station 2 per engine 2 per engine 2 per engine 2 per engine n/a N3 N5
company for fire; company for fire; company for fire; company for fire;
1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 1 per 1000 sq. ft.
per 300 sq. ft. for per 300 sq. ft. for per 400 sq. ft. for 1 per 670 sq. ft.
police police police for police
3. Library or museum 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 800 sq. ft. F N5 N3
4. Municipal service facilities 1 per 2 1 per 2 1 per 2 1 per 2 A N1 N3
employees employees employees employees
5. Public parks, playgrounds or public 0 0 0 0 n/a N515 N315
recreation building
g. Other governmental facilities n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a N3 N5
h. Other institutional uses
6-18
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
1. Club, lodge or other fraternal or sororal 1 per 6 members 1 per 6 members 1 per 8 members 1 per 10 members F N5 N3
meeting facility based on based on based on based on
maximum rated maximum rated maximum rated maximum rated
capacity capacity capacity capacity
2. Museum or noncommercial gallery 600 sq. ft. 600 sq.. ft. 1000 sq. ft. 1800 sq. ft. F N5 N3
(including facilities for cultural and ethnic
heritage appreciation)
3. Cemetery 0 0 0 0 n/a N5 N5
4. Other institutional use n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 F n/a6 n/a6
6.36.4 Office and Laboratory Use
a. Office of a physician, dentist or other
medical practitioner not located in a clinic
listed under Subsection 4.33(d) n/a
n/a 1 per 300 sq. ft.
1 per 150 sq. ft.
1 per 400 sq. ft.
1 per 200 sq. ft.
1 per 500 sq. ft.
1 per 330 sq. ft.
F N1 N5
b. Office of an accountant, attorney, or other
nonmedical professional person n/a
n/a 1 per 500 sq. ft.
1 per 250 sq. ft.
1 per 700 sq. ft.
1 per 350 sq. ft.
1 per 900 sq. ft.
1 per 600 sq. ft.
F N1 N5
c. Real estate, insurance or other agency
office n/a
n/a 1 per 500 sq. ft.
1 per 250 sq. ft.
1 per 700 sq. ft.
1 per 350 sq. ft.
1 per 900 sq. ft.
1 per 600 sq. ft.
F N1 N5
d. General office use n/a n/a 1 per 800 sq. ft.
1 per 400 sq. ft.
1 per 800 sq. ft.
1 per 400 sq. ft.
1 per 1000 sq. ft.
1 per 500 sq. ft.
F N1 N5
e. Bank, trust company or similar financial
institution
(ground floor)
n/a
1 per 400 sq. ft.
1 per 200 sq. ft.
1 per 600 sq. ft.
1 per 300 sq. ft.
1 per 800 sq. ft.
1 per 530 sq. ft.
F N1 N3
f. Technical office for research development
laboratory or research facility subject to
the restrictions in Section 4.21(m)
(upper floor)
n/a
11 per 600 sq. ft.
1 per 300 sq. ft.
1 per 1050 sq. ft.8
1 per 525 sq. ft.
1 per 800 sq. ft.
1 per 400 sq. ft.
1 per 1050 sq. ft.8
1 per 525 sq. ft.
1 per 1000 sq. ft.
1 per 670 sq. ft.
1 per 1340 sq. ft.8
1 per 670 sq. ft.
F
F
N1
N2
N5
N5
6.36.5 Retail Business and Consumer Service
Establishments
a. Store for retail sale of merchandise
1) Establishment providing convenience
goods12
n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft.
1 per 500 sq. ft.
1 per 1400 sq. ft.
1 per 700 sq. ft.
1 per 1800 sq. ft.
1 per 1200 sq. ft.
B N4 N1
6-19
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
2) Other retail establishments n/a 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 700 sq. ft. 1 per 900 sq. ft. B N4 N2
1 per 250 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft.
b Place for the manufacturing, assembly or n/a 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. A N5 N5
packaging of consumer goods
c. Barber shop, beauty shop, laundry and n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1400 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. D N4 N2
dry cleaning pick-up agency, shoe repair, 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 700 sq. ft. 1 per 1200 sq. ft.
self service laundry or other similar
establishment
d. Hand laundry, dry cleaning or tailoring n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1400 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. D N4 N2
shop 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 700 sq. ft. 1 per 1200 sq. ft.
e. Lunchroom, restaurant, cafeteria 1 per 5 seats9 1 per 10 seats9 1 per 15 seats9 1 per 10 seats C N3 N1
n/a 1 per 2.5 seats 1 per 5 seats
f. Establishments where alcoholic beverages
are sold and consumed and where no
dancing or entertainment is provided.
1) Lunchroom, restaurant or cafeteria n/a 1 per 5 seats9 1 per 10 seats9 1 per 15 seats9 C N3 N1
1 per 2.5 seats 1 per 5 seats 1 per 10 seats
2) Bar Saloon, or other establishment
serving alcoholic beverages but which is
not licensed to prepare or serve food
1 per 5 seats9
n/a
1 per 10 seats9
1 per 2.5 seats
1 per 15 seats9
1 per 5 seats1 per
10 seats
1 per 10 seats C N3 N1
g. Bar or other establishment where alcoholic n/a 1 per 5 seats 1 per 10 seats 1 per 15 seats C N3 N1
Beverages are sold or consumed and 1 per 2.5 seats 1 per 5 seats 1 per 10 seats
where dancing and entertainment is
provided. Dance hall or similar place of
entertainment
h. Theatre or hall for public gathering n/a 1 per 5 seats 1 per 10 seats 1 per 15 seats F N5 N1
1 per 2.5 seats 1 per 5 seats 1 per 10 seats
i. Commercial recreation n/a 1 per 6 persons 1 per 6 persons 1 per 6 persons F N4 N1
based on based on based on
maximum maximum maximum
permitted capacity permitted capacity permitted capacity
j. Mortuary, undertaking or funeral n/a 4 per chapel, 4 per chapel, 4 per chapel, F N4 N2
establishment parlor parlor parlor
or reposing room or reposing room or reposing room
k. Printing shop, photographer’s studio 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 700 sq. ft. 1 per 900 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft. F N4 N2
n/a 1 per 250 sq. ft. 1 per 350 sq. ft.
l. Animal Services
6-20
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
1) Veterinary establishment, kennel n/a 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 500 sq. ft. F N3 N3
1 per 150 sq. ft. 1 per 200 sq. ft. 1 per 330 sq. ft.
2) Pet shop or similar establishment n/a 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 700 sq. ft. 1 per 900 per F N4 N2
1 per 250 sq. ft. 1 per 350 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft.
m. Sales place for new and used cars, vehicle n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1400 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. C N5 N5
rental agencies 1 per 500 sq. ft. 1 per 700 sq. ft. 1 per 1200 sq. ft.
n. Office including display or sales spaces of n/a 1 per 600 sq. ft. 1 per 800 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. C N1 N5
a wholesale jobbing or similar 1 per 300 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft. 1 per 670 sq. ft.
establishment
o. Fast Order Food Establishment n/a n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 C N3 N1
p. Art/Craft Studio13 n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1000 sq. ft. n/a N1 N5
6.36.6 Open Air or Drive In Retail and Service
a. Sales place for flowers, garden supplies, n/a 1 per 330 sq. ft. 1 per 450 sq. ft. 1 per 600 sq. ft. D N415 N215
agricultural produce conducted partly or 1 per 170 sq. ft. 1 per 230 sq. ft. 1 per 400 sq. ft.
wholly outdoors, commercial greenhouse
or garden
b. Automobile oriented fast order food
service establishments
n/a n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 C N315 N115
c. Drive in bank and other retail or consumer
service establishment where motorist does
n/a n/a6,10 n/a6,10 n/a6,10 D N115 N515
not have to leave his car
d. Outdoor amusement park, outdoor sports
facility conducted for profit
n/a n/a6 n/a6 n/a6 n/a N415 N115
e. Open air or drive in theatre or other open n/a n/a 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. n/a N415 N115
air place of entertainment of lot area of lot area
f. Sale of new or used cars conducted partly n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 1400 sq. ft. 1 per 1800 sq. ft. C N515 N515
or wholly on open lots, or rental agency for of sales area of sales area of sales area
automobile, trailers, motorcycles,
conducted partly or wholly outdoors
g. Automobile service station where no major n/a 2 spaces per bay 2 spaces per bay 2 spaces per bay D N515 N515
repairs are made but not less than
1 space10
but not less than
1 space10
but not less than
1 space10
6-21
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
h. Car washing establishment using
mechanical equipment for the purpose of
n/a n/a6,10 n/a6,10 n/a6,10 D N515 N515
cleaning automobiles and other vehicles
i. Place for exhibition, lettering or sale of n/a 1 per employee 1 per employee 1 per employee D N515 N515
gravestones plus 1 per plus 1 per plus 1 per
establishment establishment establishment
6.36.7 Light Industry, Wholesale, Business
and Storage
a. Assembly or packaging of articles n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
b. Manufacture, processing, assembly and
packaging the following:
1. Clothing but not the manufacture of the n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
cloth or other material of which the cloth is
made
2. Food products, including bakery n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
confectionery and dairy products
3. Drugs n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
4. Electrical, electronic and n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
communication instruments
5. Engineering, laboratory and scientific n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
instruments, temperature controls
6. Jewelry, insignia, emblems and n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
badges, lapidary, scale models, dolls,
costume jewelry and costume novelties
7. Lamp shades except of glass or metal n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
8. Leather goods, excluding footwear and n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
saddlery
9. Medical and dental instruments and n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
supplies, optical instruments and lenses
10. Paper and paperboard products n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A. N5 N5
11. Pens and pencils n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
12. Plaster of paris or paper mache n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
products
6-22
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
13. Office machines, including cash n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
registers, computing machines and
typewriters, scales and balances
14. Umbrellas, parasols and canes n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
15. Watches, clocks, watchcases, n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
clockwork mechanisms
c. Bottling of beverages n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
d. Distribution center, parcel delivery center, n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 2400 sq. ft. A N5 N5
delivery warehouse
e. Laundry, dry cleaning plant n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
f. Printing, binding, published and related n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
arts and trades
g. Auto body or paint shop n/a 2 per bay 2 per bay 2 per bay A N5 N5
h. Automotive repair garage n/a 2 per bay 2 per bay 2 per bay A N5 N5
i. Food commissary n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
j. Wholesale business and storage in roofed n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 2400 sq. ft. A N5 N5
structure, but not including wholesale
storage of flammable liquid, gas or
explosives
k. Storage warehouse, cold storage plant, n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 3000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
storage building
l. Open lot storage of new building materials, n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 3000 sq. ft. A N515 N515
machinery and new metals lot area. lot area. lot area
m. Open lot storage of coal, coke, sand or n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 3000 sq. ft. A N515 N515
other similar material, or such storage in lot area lot area lot area
silos or hoppers
6.36.8 Heavy Industry
a. Dismantling or wrecking of used motor n/a n/a n/a n/a6 A N5 N5
vehicles and storage or sale of dismantled,
inoperative or wrecked vehicles or their
parts
6-23
Res C, C-1, C-1A,
Off 1, Bus A Bus. C, C-1, Ind Ind B-1, Res C-3,
Open Space,
(Comm), Bus A-
1, A-2, Bus A-314 ,
A, Off 2, 2A, Res
C-2, C-2A, Res
C-3A, C-3B, Off
3-A, 3, Bus B, Loading
Long-Term
Bicycle
Short-Term
Bicycle
Res A-1, A-2, A-4,Ind A-1, Ind C-2B, Bus A Ind A-2, Ind B, Facility Parking Parking
Land Use Category Res B B-2, Ind C (res) Bus B-1, B-2 Category (6.107.2) (6.107.3)
b. Rendering or preparing of grease, tallow, n/a n/a n/a 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
fats, and oils, manufacturing or shortening,
table oil, margarine and other food oils, but
not including garbage, dead animals, offal
or refuse reduction
c. Stone cutting, shaping, and finishing, in n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 3000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
completely enclosed buildings
d. Textile mill, except mill for processing of n/a n/a n/a 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
jute, burlap, or sisal
e. Manufacturing, processing, assembly, n/a 1 per 1200 sq. ft. 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. A N5 N5
packaging or other industrial operation, but
the following are expressly prohibited
1. Acid manufacture
2. Cement, lime, gypsum manufacture
3. Explosives or fireworks manufacture
4. Glue manufacture
5. Incineration or reduction of garbage,
offal or dead animals
6. Petroleum Refining
7. Smelting of zinc, copper, tin or iron
ores
8. Stockyard or abattoir
f. Open lot storage of second hand lumber n/a 1 per 1600 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 3000 sq. ft. n/a N515 N515
or other used building material of lot area of lot area of lot area
g. Open lot storage of junk, scrap, paper, n/a 1 per 1000 sq. ft. 1 per 2000 sq. ft. 1 per 3000 sq. ft. n/a N515 N515
rags, unrepaired or unclean containers or of lot area of lot area of lot area
other salvage articles
6-24
Parking Table Footnotes
1. Required parking may be reduced if a special permit is granted by the Board of Appeals upon
determination that the criteria of Subsection 6.35 will be satisfied.
2. See also Section 11.16.
3. Special permit granting authority may require visitor spaces in excess of the minimum
requirement.
4. The requirement for elderly oriented housing may be reduced below the requirement specified
in the table but not below one space per four dwelling units.
5. Additional parking spaces shall be provided for public restaurants in excess of two thousand
(2000) square feet for a hotel or motel containing up to one hundred (100) rooms, in excess of
five thousand (5000) square feet for one containing between one hundred and one (101)
rooms and two hundred and fifty (250) rooms, and eight thousand (8,000) square feet in one
containing more than two hundred and fifty (250) rooms. The number of such spaces shall
equal fifty (50) percent of the requirement for such uses specified in Subsection 6.36.5.
Additional parking spaces shall also be provided for function rooms in an amount equal to one
space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area contained in such rooms.
6. The amount of parking and bicycle parking required for this use shall be at the discretion of
the special permit granting authority. In making its determination of required parking, the
Board shall consider the size of the staff customarily occupying the premises, the nature of
the client, resident, or customer population and the extent to which additional off street
parking will be detrimental to the physical character of the neighborhood.
7. The required number of spaces shall be reduced by not more than fifty (50) percent if the
place of worship is located within five hundred (500) feet of any public parking facility or any
other parking facility where an equivalent number of spaces are available without charge
during the time of services.
8. The requirement for areas devoted to fabrication shall be based on the parking requirement
for the applicable industrial use category listed in Subsection 6.36.7 or 6.36.8.
9. This requirement shall not apply to accessory employee cafeterias.
10. A queue line for five (5) cars shall be provided for each window, bay, or other service
providing unit. Such unit shall not block any parking spaces and shall be in addition to other
applicable requirements.
11. A queue line for three (3) cars or comparable loading or live parking area shall also be
provided for dropping off and picking up students.
12. Providing that the establishment is located in a structure also containing nonretail uses, and
that no establishment shall exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross
floor area.
13. In Residence C, C-1, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A districts the amount of parking required for
this use may be reduced at the discretion of the Board of Zoning Appeal in accordance with
Section 4.28.
14. No accessory parking or loading shall be required for any permitted nonresidential use in
Business A-3 district.
15. Also see Subsection 6.107.4 regarding bicycle parking for Open-Air Uses.
6-25
6.37 Bicycle Parking. Refer to Section 6.100.
6.40 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE OF OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES
6.41 Purpose. The regulations governing the design and maintenance of off street parking
facilities are intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of the users of the parking
facility and of abutting properties, including pedestrians and motorists. Therefore, the
regulations herein provide for internal and perimeter landscaping, planting, walls, fences
and other improvements to reduce noise, glare or reflection from autos, lights, fumes and
the like, and minimum standards for parking space and aisle dimensions to ensure safe
traffic circulation within the parking facility and from entrances and exits.
6.42 Dimensions for Off Street Parking Spaces. The minimum dimensions for off street parking
spaces, exclusive of drives and maneuvering spaces, shall be as follows:
Minimum
Equivalent Equivalent Vertical Angel of Width of
Space 90° Width 90° Depth Clearance Parking Aisles
Regular 8 1/2 feet 18 feet 7 1/2 feet 60° 22 feet
Compact Car 7 1/2 feet 16 feet 7 1/2 feet 60° 20 feet
Handicapped 12 feet 18 feet 7 1/2 feet 60° 22 feet
6.43 Access for Off Street Parking Facilities. Off street parking facilities shall have maneuvering
areas and appropriate means of vehicle access to a street and shall be so designed as not
to constitute a nuisance, hazard, or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
6.43.1 All parking spaces within the Business B-1 and Business B-2 districts shall be both
covered and enclosed. All vehicle access for office and retail uses in those districts shall
be from Massachusetts Avenue or from a side street perpendicular to it that will allow
traffic flow toward Massachusetts Avenue. The open area of any lot in the Business B-1
and Business B-2 districts devoted to vehicular movements such as driveways shall be not
more than the minimum necessary for vehicular access to covered and enclosed parking.
6.43.2 The layout of parking spaces shall permit entering and exiting without moving any other
vehicles parked in other spaces except where more than one space is provided for any
dwelling unit, such spaces may be located in tandem to the required parking spaces for
that dwelling unit.
6.43.3 Curb cuts for off street parking facilities shall comply with the following standards:
(a) In Residential districts, the maximum width of a curb cut shall be twenty (20) feet at
the street line.
(b) In Open Space, Business, Office and Industrial districts, the maximum width of a curb
cut shall be thirty (30) feet.
(c) No more than one curb cut per lot for lots with less than one hundred (100) feet of
frontage shall be allowed. A maximum of one curb cut for every one hundred (100)
feet of street frontage or portion thereof shall be allowed for lots having frontage in
excess of one hundred feet.
6.43.4 Driveways for off street parking facilities shall comply with the following standards:
6-26
(a) The minimum width for a one way driveway shall be ten (10) feet.
(b) No driveway curb cut shall be located closer than twenty five (25) feet to a street
intersection or within fifteen (15) feet of a crosswalk.
(c) The grade and design of any driveway providing access to an off street parking facility
shall permit a clear view, to the driver of any car exiting from the facility, of traffic on
the street and of pedestrians.
6.43.5 The Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit modifying the provisions of this
subsections 6.43 in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) The provisions for layout of parking spaces in paragraph 6.43.2 may be modified
where there is a valet parking arrangement for an off street parking facility.
(b) The maximum curb cut width specified in paragraphs 6.43.3 (a) and 6.43.3 (b) may be
modified if the Board determines that an increased curb cut width would facilitate
traffic and safety.
(c) The maximum of one curb cut for every one hundred (100) feet of street frontage as
required in paragraph 6.43.3 (c) may be modified if the Board determines that traffic
and safety would be facilitated by exceeding this maximum.
(d) The distance of driveways from street corners or crosswalks as required in
paragraphs 6.43.4 (b) may be modified if the Board determines that an alternate
arrangement would better facilitate traffic and safety.
6.43.6 The Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit authorizing owners of adjacent
properties to establish common driveways under mutual easements but such special
permit shall not become effective until an appropriate easement has been duly recorded at
the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds.
6.44 Layout of Off Street Parking Facilities. Any parking facility located within a structure,
unless it is completely underground, must conform to the yard requirements for the zoning
district in which it is located. On grade, open parking spaces may be located in required
yards only as provided in this Subsection 6.44.
6.44.1 Setbacks for on grade open parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(a) No on grade open parking space shall be located within ten (10) feet of that portion of
a building wall containing windows of habitable or occupiable rooms at basement or
first story. However, on grade open parking spaces serving one, two, or three family
dwellings may be located within five (5) feet of that portion of such building wall.
(b) Except for one, two, or three family dwellings existing at the time of the effective date
of this Ordinance or amendment thereto, no on grade open parking space or driveway
shall be located within five (5) feet of any side or rear property line.
(c) No on grade open parking space shall be located within a required front yard setback
(d) The area between the required parking setback line and the building or lot line shall be
landscaped and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Subsection 6.48.
6-27
(e) No on grade open parking shall be allowed in a Residence C-2A district within one
hundred and twenty five (125) feet of a Residence A-1, A-2, B, C, C-1, C-2, or C-2B
District.
(f) In an Industry C district, no parking lot shall be located within fifty (50) feet of a
residential district or within twenty five (25) feet of an open space district, a park or
public recreation area or the right of way of a designated parkway.
(g) The Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit to allow for modification of the
requirements in 6.44.1 (a) or (b) if site specific factors favor such modification.
6.44.2 All roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public rights of way and all landscaped areas
shall be protected from vehicular overhang by wheel bumpers, curbs or other suitable
method except those off street parking facilities provided for one, two or three family
dwellings.
6.44.3 Off street parking facilities shall be marked so as to indicate clearly the space to be
occupied by each vehicle, in accordance with the dimensions specified in Subsection 6.42
and including directional arrows and traffic signs as necessary for traffic control. Such
markings shall be maintained so as to be plainly visible.
6.45 Drainage, Surfacing, and Maintenance. All sections of off street parking facilities which are
not landscaped according to the requirements of Subsection 6.48 shall be graded,
surfaced (preferably with durable pervious paving materials such as modular paving
blocks, bricks or similar materials), and maintained to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Buildings to the extent necessary to prevent nuisance of dust, erosion,
or excessive water flow onto any public way or onto another lot.
6.45.1 A parking space for a one, two, or three family dwelling may consist of two parallel paved
strips, each at least eighteen (18) feet long separated by a landscaped area.
6.45.2 Off street parking areas shall be kept plowed, clean and free from rubbish and debris. All
fences, barriers, walls, landscaping and lighting shall be maintained and kept repaired or
replaced with facilities satisfying the requirements of this Section 6.40.
6.46 Lighting. Off street parking facilities which are used at night shall be provided with
adequate lighting installed and maintained in such a manner so as not to reflect or cause
glare on abutting or facing residential premises nor to cause reflection nor glare which
adversely affects safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on nearby streets. A
recommended standard for lighting is a minimum intensity of one (1) foot candle on the
entire surface of the parking facility.
6.47 Screening. Off street parking facilities containing five or more spaces and not in a
structure shall be effectively screened from abutting streets and lots. However, such
screening shall not obstruct vehicle sight distances, entrances and exits.
6.47.1 Screening shall consist of one or a combination of the following:
(a) A strip at least five (5) feet in width of densely planted shrubs or trees which are at
least two (2) feet high at the time of planting and are of a type that may be expected to
form, within three (3) years after time of planting, a continuous, unbroken, year round
visual screen.
6-28
(b) A wall, barrier, or fence of uniform appearance. Such wall, barrier, or fence may be
opaque or perforated provided that not more than fifty (50) percent of the face is open.
The wall, barrier or fence shall be at least four (4) feet and not more than six (6) feet in
height.
6.47.2 The screening as required in this Subsection 6.47 shall be located so as not to obstruct
vehicle sight distances, entrances and exits. Such screening shall not be higher than two
(2) feet within thirty (30) feet of an intersection or ten (10) feet of a driveway. In no case
shall the screening of parking facilities from abutting streets exceed four (4) feet in height.
6.47.3 Every effort shall be made to retain existing trees. Removal of any tree exceeding six (6)
inch caliper to accommodate construction of a parking facility is discouraged.
6.47.4 Perimeter landscaping required for screening may include any landscaped yard area
otherwise required.
6.47.5 Screening shall be continuously maintained so as to effectively serve the purpose for
which it is intended. No advertising devices of any kind shall be allowed on screening.
6.47.6 Screening shall be continuous except for required access.
6.47.7 In residential districts, any on grade, open parking area located in a front yard shall provide
a visual definition of the front lot line and separation of public from private space in keeping
with the appearance and character of the existing streetscape. Such definition shall be
achieved by using a change of ground materials at the front lot line and by installing at
least one of the following: fences, plantings, walls, or stone monuments which mark the
transitions from street or sidewalk to residential lot.
6.47.8 Screening requirements may be waived in the following cases:
(a) If said parking facility is already effectively screened by an existing building, wall,
fence, or hedge on an adjoining lot and within five feet of the common property line,
screening shall not be required so long as such adjoining screening is maintained.
(b) If said parking facility is already effectively screened by a natural terrain feature,
railroad tracks, or change in grade.
(c) If said parking facility abuts another parking facility under different use or ownership, a
landscaped planting strip at least five (5) feet in width may be used in lieu of screening
along the common property line.
6.48 Landscaping. For the purpose of this Section 6.40, landscaping shall consist of any of the
following or combination thereof: grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees;
and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as but not limited to
rocks, pebbles or wood chips, but excluding asphalt or concrete. Required screening
elements as specified in Subsection 6.47.1(a) and (b) may be allowed in perimeter
landscaped areas.
6.48.1 On grade, open parking facilities which contain five (5) or more parking spaces shall be
landscaped in accordance with the following requirements:
6-29
(a) At least five percent of the interior area of the parking facility shall be landscaped.
This does not include the perimeter planting provided for beautification or to satisfy
screening requirements.
(b) Each planting area shall be at least twenty five (25) square feet in area and have no
dimension less than five feet.
(c) Each planting area shall contain at least one tree and the facility as a whole shall
contain at least one tree for every ten parking spaces.
(d) Trees used to satisfy parking lot landscaping requirements shall be a minimum of
three (3) inch caliper at planting and shall be suitable for location in parking lots.
Recommended species are listed in Section 11.16.4(4)(b).
(e) Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible.
(f) Existing and new trees shall be protected by bollards, high curbs or other barriers
sufficient to minimize damage.
(g) Extensive unbroken paved areas in large on grade open parking facilities shall not be
permitted. In parking lots containing twenty five (25) or more spaces, a row shall
contain no more than fifteen contiguous parking spaces without a densely planted
landscaped buffer of at least the dimensions of one space.
6.48.2 No regular certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless an inspection by a
representative of the Inspectional Services Department establishes that the landscaping
meets the requirements provided herein. Pending issuance of a regular certificate of
occupancy, a temporary certificate may be issued for such period as the Superintendent of
Buildings may designate but no longer than one year.
6.49 Design of Bicycle Parking spaces. Refer to Section 6.100.
6.50 PARKING PLAN INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
6.51 Any application for a building permit for construction of a new building or for an alteration of
an existing building increasing the gross floor area or intensity of use, (as specified in
Subsection 6.12b), or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required,
shall be accompanied by one or more plans - drawn to scale and fully dimensioned -
showing any parking, bicycle parking and/or loading facilities to be provided.
6.52 Every such plan for a proposed new, altered, or expanded use which provides five or more
parking spaces shall indicate thereon the location of and provision for:
(1) parking spaces and access routes (6.34 and 6.40)
(2) curbing and wheel stops (6.44.2)
(3) pavement markings (6.44.3)
(4) surfacing (6.45)
(5) screening and landscaping (6.47 and 6.48)
(6) lighting (6.46)
(7) drainage (6.45)
(8) loading areas (6.60)
6-30
(9) other pertinent data reasonably required by the Superintendent of Buildings or his
designee.
6.52.1 Every such plan for a proposed new, altered, or expanded use which provides two or more
Bicycle Parking Spaces as required in Section 6.100 shall provide a plan or plans drawn at
a scale of 1 inch = 10 feet or closer which indicates the location and dimensions of Bicycle
Parking Spaces, including the following information:
(1) classification of Long-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces and Short-Term Bicycle Parking
Spaces (6.102)
(1) clear spacing around Bicycle Racks or interior dimensions of Bicycle Lockers (6.105)
(2) access routes (6.106)
(3) total area (indicated via shading or hatching) dedicated exclusively to bicycle parking
that shall be exempt from Gross Floor Area calculations
(4) other pertinent data reasonably required by the Superintendent of Buildings or his
designee.
6.53 The Superintendent of Buildings may forward a copy of the plan indicating off street
parking and loading arrangements to the Community Development Department and the
Department of Traffic and Parking for review and comment. The departments must return
the plan to the Building Department with written approval or recommended modifications
within a period not to exceed five (5) business days from the date of receipt.
6.54 Any land use involving a fleet of vehicles for operation of the use shall be required to
provide information demonstrating provision of space for such fleet before issuance of an
occupancy permit for said use.
6.55 In the event that the plan for off street parking and loading arrangements requires a special
permit or variance, an applicant for such approvals shall submit the following information to
the permit or special permit granting authority to assist in their determination:
(1) A written statement describing in detail the parking generating characteristic of the
land use.
(2) A plan drawn to scale showing the various uses within respective floor areas of the
building of structure.
(3) The number of employees during largest work shift.
(4) The number of customers, patrons or other visitors expected to be served.
(5) Any other statements to show the actual extent of off street parking space required or
generated by particular use.
6.60 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
6.61 It is the intention of this Ordinance that all buildings and uses requiring the delivery of
goods as part of their function be provided with necessary space for off street loading.
6.70 APPLICATION OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
6-31
6.71 No application for a permit for the erection of a new building, for the activities described in
Subsection 6.12(b) and (c), or for the development of a land use, shall be approved,
unless it indicates a plan for off street loading facilities required to comply with the
regulations set forth in this Article.
6.72 Where a building existing on the effective date of this Ordinance is altered or extended in
such a way as to increase the gross floor area, only the additional gross floor area shall be
counted in computing the off street loading requirements.
6.73 Where a building or lot is used by two activities that fall into different loading facility
categories under Subsection 6.36, the facilities required shall be the sum of the
requirements for the individual loading facility categories, including fractional requirements
as specified in Subsection 6.74 of the different categories. Where a building or lot is used
by three or more activities that fall into different loading facility categories under Subsection
6.36, the facilities required shall be one half the sum of the requirements for the individual
loading facility categories, including fractional requirements as specified in Subsection 6.74
for the different categories.
6.74 The required amount of loading facilities required to serve an institutional use listed in
Subsection 6.36.3b may be calculated in aggregate for a use or uses on a lot and any lot
contiguous thereto. However, such institutional use shall be located within a five (5) acre
area containing one or more lots, contiguous except for streets, owned by a single
institution.
6.75 Where the computation of total required loading bays results in a fractional number, only
the fraction of one half or more shall be counted as one.
6.80 REQUIRED AMOUNT OF LOADING FACILITIES
6.81 Off street loading facilities shall be provided based on the category of land use and the
area of that use.
6.82 The loading facility category shall be as listed in Subsection 6.36. The required number of
loading bays shall be determined by the schedule in Subsection 6.83.
6.83 Minimum Number of Off Street Loading Bays
Gross Floor Area (in thousands of square feet)
Incremental Area for which
Loading Facility Area at which First Area at which Second Each additional Bay is
Category Bay is Required Bay is Required Required Beyond the Second
A 5 40 50
B 10 20 50
C 10 25 40
D 10 40 50
E 10 100 100
F 10 100 200
6.90 LOCATION AND LAYOUT OF LOADING FACILITIES
6-32
6.91 Where a building or lot contains uses requiring compliance with loading facility categories
C, D, E, and F, the first required bay shall be no less than ten (10) feet in width, thirty (30)
feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height. Each additional required loading bay for
categories C, D, E, and F and any loading bay required by categories A and B shall be no
less than ten (10) feet in width, fifty (50) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height,
such requirements to be exclusive of drives and maneuvering space.
6.92 All loading bays, drives, and a maneuvering space shall located entirely on the lot with
immediate and direct ingress to the building intended to be served. A bay need not be
enclosed in a structure provided any yard area used as a loading bay shall not infringe on
front, side, and rear yard requirements as indicated in Article 5.000. All such facilities shall
be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley as well as
maneuvering area, and no driveways or curb cuts shall exceed thirty (30) feet.
6.93 Off street loading bays may be enclosed in a structure and must be so enclosed if located
within fifty (50) feet of a Residence District where the use involves regular night operation,
such as that of a bakery, restaurant, hotel, bottling plant, or similar uses. Any lighting
provided shall be install in a manner that will prevent direct light from shining onto any
street or adjacent property.
6.94 All accessory driveways and entranceways shall be graded, surfaced, drained and suitably
maintained to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Buildings to the extent necessary to
avoid nuisances of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across public ways.
6.95 Loading facilities shall not be reduced in total extent of usability after their installation,
except when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements of the Article. Such
facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as at no time to constitute a
nuisance or hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
6.96 Adoption of the Recommendations of the Regional Truck Study dated September 2001.
All trucks 2.5 tons or more in gross weight traveling on streets under the control and
jurisdiction of the City of Cambridge are prohibited from using any City streets between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for the following signed and designated truck
routes or except when a local delivery or pick-up requires traveling off of the following
signed and designated truck routes:
Brattle Street between Massachusetts Avenue and Eliot Street;
Eliot Street between Brattle Street and Mount Auburn Street;
Mount Auburn Street between Eliot Street and Massachusetts Avenue;
the entirety of JFK Street
the entirety of Main Street
the entirety of Galileo Galilei Way;
Binney Street between Galileo Galilei Way and Land Boulevard;
the entirety of First Street;
Cambridge Street between First Street and the O’Brien Highway;
Broadway between Galileo Galilei Way and the Longfellow Bridge; and
Vassar Street between Main Street and Massachusetts Avenue.
6-33
In addition, the following signed and designated Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) routes
shall be open to Hazardous Material carriers at all times:
the entirety of River Street; and
the entirety of Western Avenue.
All trucks 2.5 tons or more in gross weight traveling on the following streets under the
control and jurisdiction of the City of Cambridge are prohibited from using them at all times,
except for a delivery or pick-up on these streets:
the entirety of Putnam Avenue;
the entirety of Cardinal Medeiros Avenue; and
the entirety of Warren Street.
Nothing herein shall affect in any way restrictions on trucks currently in effect. Nothing
herein shall affect the use of roadways under the control and jurisdiction of the
Metropolitan District Commission or any state numbered routes, including the following:
the entirety of Massachusetts Avenue (Route 2A);
the entirety of Peabody Street (Route 2A);
the entirety of the O’Brien Highway (Route 28);
the entirety of Concord Parkway (Route 2);
the entirety of the Alewife Brook Parkway and a portion of Concord Avenue designated
as Routes 2, 3 & 16;
the entirety of the Fresh Pond Parkway (Routes 2, 3 & 16);
the entirety of Memorial Drive (Routes 2 & 3);
the entirety of Land Boulevard;
the entirety of Aberdeen Avenue (Route 16); and
portions of Huron Avenue and Mount Auburn Street designated as Route 16.
6.100 BICYCLE PARKING
6.101 Purpose. In order to support the ongoing viability of bicycle travel as a transportation
option that mitigates the impacts of automobile use, the following regulations are provided
to ensure that secure, conveniently accessible bicycle parking is provided in adequate
quantity to serve new development and land uses throughout the city.
6.102 General Terms and Standards for Bicycle Parking
6.102.1 Definition and Use. Bicycle parking, as the term is applied in this Zoning Ordinance, shall
refer to the accessory storage of non-motorized bicycles (which may include trailers or
other customary accessories) in a secure manner that allows for quick and convenient
access, storage and removal of the bicycles by users who are making trips to or from the
associated principal use.
6.102.2 Bicycle parking serving a principal use in accordance with this Article shall be maintained
exclusively for the parking of bicycles, and not for the storage of other objects unrelated to
bicycle use or for other purposes, so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve. Bicycle parking facilities designed in accordance with this Article shall
6-34
be available for use at all times when the associated principal use is in operation, except
when access may be restricted for necessary maintenance from time to time.
6.102.3 Wherever else in this Zoning Ordinance the term “parking” is used without specific
reference to bicycle parking, such term shall refer only to parking for motor vehicles and
not to bicycle parking.
6.102.4 Bicycle Parking Spaces. A Bicycle Parking Space shall be defined as an area within which
one intact bicycle may be conveniently and securely stored and removed in an upright
position with both wheels resting upon a stable surface, without requiring the use of a
kickstand, and without requiring the movement of other parked bicycles, vehicles or other
objects to access the space.
6.102.5 Types of Bicycle Parking. Bicycle Parking Spaces may be classified as Long-Term or
Short-Term depending on their characteristics as set forth below.
a. Long-Term Bicycle Parking shall be located within an enclosed, limited-access area
designed so as to protect bicycles from precipitation and from theft. Long-Term Bicycle
Parking shall be intended primarily to serve residents, employees or other persons
who would require storage of a bicycle for a substantial portion of the day, for an
overnight period, or for multiple days; however, it may serve other bicycle users as
needed. Long-Term Bicycle Parking may be provided within the following types of
facilities:
(i) Enclosed spaces within a building, such as bicycle rooms or garages.
(ii) Bicycle sheds, covered bicycle cages, or other enclosed structures designed to
provide secure and fully covered parking for bicycles.
(iii) Bicycle lockers, or fixed-in-place containers into which single bicycles may be
securely stored and protected.
(iv) Weather-protected bicycle parking spaces that are monitored at all times by an
attendant or other security system to prevent unauthorized use or theft.
b. Short-Term Bicycle Parking shall be located in a publicly accessible space near
pedestrian entrances to the uses they are intended to serve. Short-Term Bicycle
Parking shall be intended primarily to serve visitors, such as retail patrons, making
trips of up to a few hours to a particular use; however, it may serve other bicycle users
as needed. Short-Term Bicycle Parking may be provided adjacent to public streets and
sidewalks, or in some cases within the public right of way, as set forth further below in
this Section.
6.103 Applicability of Bicycle Parking Requirements
6.103.1 Bicycle parking requirements shall apply to the following projects, except where exempted
by Subsection 6.103.2 below:
a. The construction of a new building or establishment of a new open-air use on a lot.
6-35
b. An increase of at least fifteen percent (15%) in the number of residential dwelling units
on a lot or in the amount of non-residential Gross Floor Area on a lot from the time of
adoption of this Section 6.100.
c. The conversion of existing Gross Floor Area to a new category of non-residential use,
where such conversion results in at least a fifteen percent (15%) increase in the total
number of bicycle parking spaces that would be required for the entire building by this
Section 6.100.
6.103.2 Notwithstanding the requirements in 6.103.1 above, bicycle parking shall not be required
for the following:
a. Detached one-family or two-family dwellings as set forth in Section 4.31, Paragraphs
(a-c) of this Zoning Ordinance.
b. The enlargement, expansion or conversion of an existing building, where the
difference between the bicycle parking required for the proposed building and the
bicycle parking that would be required for the existing building (under this Section
6.100) equals fewer than two (2) bicycle parking spaces.
c. The enlargement, expansion or conversion of an existing building resulting in a
dwelling containing three (3) or fewer dwelling units.
6.103.3 Where bicycle parking requirements are applicable pursuant to this Section, they shall be
applied to the entirety of any use that is established, expanded or enlarged within a
building or on a lot, and not only to the incremental increase in the intensity of such use.
6.104 Location of Bicycle Parking
6.104.1 Long-Term Bicycle Parking shall be provided within the building containing the use or uses
that it is intended to serve, or within a structure whose pedestrian entrance is no more than
two hundred feet (200’) from a pedestrian entrance to such building. Long-Term Bicycle
Parking serving multiple uses or buildings may be pooled into a single area, enclosure or
facility. Where Long-Term Bicycle Parking is located adjacent to motor vehicle parking or
loading facilities, a physical barrier shall be provided to prevent damage to bicycles by
other vehicles.
6.104.2 Short-Term Bicycle Parking shall be located in one of the two following ways:
a. Private Lot. Short-Term Bicycle Parking on a private lot shall be located within fifty feet
(50’) feet of a pedestrian entrance to the building or buildings containing the use or
uses it serves. For buildings or uses requiring more than eight (8) Short-Term Bicycle
Parking Spaces, some of the required spaces may be located at a greater distance
from the entrances, so long as eight (8) Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces are
available within fifty feet (50’) of any entrance.
b. Public Contribution. If Short-Term Bicycle Parking cannot be reasonably provided on
the lot, a property owner may satisfy the requirements for Short-Term Bicycle Parking
by providing funds for the installation of bicycle parking on public land. The City shall
determine the location and design of such bicycle parking, which may include
permanent bicycle racks, seasonal bicycle corrals or other facilities, and may vary from
the standards set forth in this Section 6.100. The City shall have the right to install
bicycle parking on the sidewalk adjacent to the lot, or may choose to retain the funds
6-36
provided in a Public Bicycle Parking Fund to support the installation or replacement of
public bicycle parking at a future time. In either case, prior to issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with the City which
sets forth the cost of installing the required number of Bicycle Parking Spaces, which
shall be the amount of funds provided by the owner, the timing by which payments are
made, and each party’s responsibilities for ongoing maintenance of the facilities, if
applicable.
6.105 Design and Layout of Bicycle Parking. Required bicycle parking shall be provided in some
combination of Bicycle Racks or Bicycle Lockers according to the standards set forth
below. Other design options may be allowed pursuant to Section 6.108 further below.
6.105.1 Bicycle Racks. Long-Term Bicycle Parking or Short-Term Bicycle Parking requirements
may be satisfied by the installation of Bicycle Racks which meet the design and layout
standards set forth in this Subsection. Installers of Bicycle Racks may consult the City of
Cambridge Bicycle Parking Guide, 2008 or later version, for illustrations of acceptable
Bicycle Rack design and layout.
a. A Bicycle Rack shall mean a fixed-in-place stand, solidly anchored to the ground or
other fixed object, which allows a bicycle to lean against it in an upright position with
both wheels on a level surface. A bicycle shall make contact with the stand at two (2)
points along the length of the bicycle and shall allow one or both wheels to be locked
to the stand by way of a cable, chain, U-lock or shackle. Types of permissible Bicycle
Racks include, but are not necessarily limited to, those commonly known as “Inverted
U-shape,” “Swerve” and “Post-and-Ring” racks. Stands commonly known as “Wave
Racks” do not meet the standards for Bicycle Racks set forth herein.
b. Each Bicycle Rack, if designed to the spacing requirements set forth herein, may
provide up to two Bicycle Parking Spaces, with one Bicycle Parking Space provided on
each side of the Bicycle Rack. If a Bicycle Rack meets the spacing requirements on
one side of the stand but not the other (as may be the case where a Bicycle Rack is
attached to a wall), then it may provide one Bicycle Parking Space,
c. A single interconnected structure may provide parking for more than two bicycles, in
which case the term Bicycle Rack as applied in this Ordinance shall refer to any
vertical element of the structure upon which one or two bicycles may be secured and
which otherwise meets the layout standards set forth herein.
d. To provide adequate space to store and remove a standard bicycle, there shall be at
least three feet (3’) clear horizontal distance from the center point of the Bicycle Rack
in a direction perpendicular to the length of the bicycle, and at least four feet (4’) clear
horizontal distance from the center point of the Bicycle Rack in each direction parallel
to the length of the bicycle.
e. Where twenty (20) or more Bicycle Parking Spaces are required, at least five percent
(5%) of the required spaces must provide an additional two feet (2’) of space parallel to
the length of the bicycle to accommodate tandem bicycles or bicycles with trailers.
f. Bicycle Racks shall generally be arranged either in rows (where bicycles are parked
side-to-side) or in alignment (where bicycles are parked end-to-end). Where Bicycle
Racks are arranged in rows, they shall be spaced at least three feet (3’) apart on6-
37
center. Where Bicycle Racks are arranged in alignment, they shall be spaced at least
eight feet (8’) on-center.
g. In addition to the requirements set forth herein, all Bicycle Racks shall conform to any
applicable federal, state or local requirements for accessibility by disabled persons.
6.105.2 Bicycle Lockers. Long-Term Bicycle Parking or Short-Term Bicycle Parking requirements
may be satisfied by the installation of Bicycle Lockers which meet the design and layout
standards set forth in this subsection.
a. A Bicycle Locker shall mean an enclosed, lockable structure which a single user may
open and close for the purpose of storing one or more bicycles. Although a Bicycle
Locker is allowed to store more than one bicycle, for the purpose of meeting the
requirements of this Section 6.100, a single-use Bicycle Locker may provide only one
Bicycle Parking Space. A lockable structure may provide more than one Bicycle
Parking Space only if it contains Bicycle Racks designed in accordance with the
requirements of 6.105.1 above.
b. A Bicycle Locker shall be secured by means of a lockable door or an object inside the
Bicycle Locker to which the bicycle frame and one or both wheels may be secured by
way of a cable, chain, U-lock or shackle.
c. A Bicycle Locker must allow for a bicycle to stand upright within the locker without
requiring the use of a kickstand.
d. To accommodate a standard bicycle, a Bicycle Locker must provide an interior space
at least two feet (2’) in width and six feet (6’) in length. However, as provided in
6.105.1(d) above, where twenty (20) or more Bicycle Parking Spaces are required, at
least five percent (5%) of the required spaces must accommodate an additional two
feet (2’) of bicycle length to accommodate tandem bicycles or bicycles with trailers.
e. In addition to the requirements set forth herein, all Bicycle Lockers shall conform to
any applicable federal, state or local requirements for accessibility by disabled
persons.
6.105.3 Unacceptable Bicycle Parking Designs. Bicycle Parking Spaces shall not be deemed to
meet the requirements of this Section 6.100 if any of the following are true:
a. Bicycles must be stored lying down or require a kickstand to remain upright.
b. Bicycles must be “hung” with one or both wheels suspended in the air.
c. Bicycles must be lifted off of the ground or floor without any physical assistance
provided.
Otherwise, flexibility in the design of bicycle parking shall be allowed pursuant to the
provisions for modification by special permit as set forth in Section 6.108 below. Such
modifications shall allow for consideration of new or innovative technologies that provide
equal or greater convenience and accessibility to bicyclists when compared to facilities
designed according to the Bicycle Parking Guide standards.
6.106 Access Standards for Bicycle Parking
6.106.1 Primary Access. All Bicycle Parking Spaces must be accessible by way of at least one
clear, stabilized-surface access route. Such access route shall connect to the Bicycle
Parking Spaces from any point or points along the public right of way from which bicyclists
6-38
would be reasonably expected to approach the site, and shall meet the following additional
requirements:
a. The primary access route must be at least five (5) feet in width.
b. If there is a change in grade from the public right-of-way to the Bicycle Parking
Spaces, then the primary access route must have a slope no greater than five percent
(5%), or may have a slope of no greater than eight percent (8%) if level landings are
provided at every thirty (30) feet of linear distance; or access may be provided by
means of an elevator with minimum interior dimensions of eighty (80) inches by fiftyfour
(54) inches.
c. The primary access route must not require lifting bicycles over any steps or stairs.
d. All access routes must be clear of obstructions, which shall include Bicycle Parking
Spaces, motor vehicle parking spaces and loading spaces; however, doors or gates
that must be opened to access the Bicycle Parking Spaces shall not be considered
obstructions so long as they may be conveniently opened and closed by bicycle users.
e. All access routes, along with the Bicycle Parking Spaces themselves, must be
appropriately lighted to allow for safe nighttime use.
6.106.2 Additional Access. So long as there is at least one primary access route meeting the
requirements set forth in Section 6.106.1 above, Bicycle Parking Spaces may be accessed
secondarily by routes that do not meet those exact requirements, such as parking garage
entrance ramps or stairways with adjacent flat stairway channels along at least one edge
of the stairway. However, all access routes must be clear of obstructions as set forth in
6.106.1(d) above.
6.107 Required Quantities of Bicycle Parking
6.107.1 Minimum Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces. The required quantities of Long-Term
Bicycle Parking Spaces and Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces shall be calculated by
independently applying the minimum rates set forth in the Schedule of Long-Term Bicycle
Parking Requirements and the Schedule of Short-Term Bicycle Parking Requirements
below. Each rate shall be multiplied by the intensity of the applicable land use or uses,
measured in Gross Floor Area, number of dwelling units, or other specified unit of
measurement. Wherever the application of such rate results in a fractional value, such
fraction shall be considered one required Bicycle Parking Space. The total number of
Bicycle Parking Spaces required shall be the sum of the required Long-Term Bicycle
Parking Spaces and Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces. Any Bicycle Parking Space that
meets the requirements for both Long-Term Bicycle Parking and Short-Term Bicycle
Parking may contribute to the minimum requirement for one type or the other, but not both.
6.107.2 Schedule of Long-Term Bicycle Parking Requirements. Minimum rates of Long-Term
Bicycle Parking shall apply to specified categories of land use as set forth below. For
specific land uses, the following categories are cross-referenced in the Schedule of
Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Section 6.36 of this Zoning Ordinance. In
the case of any inconsistency between the list of included uses as set forth below and the
categorization set forth in Section 6.36, the categorization in Section 6.36 shall control.
6-39
Category Included Residential Uses Min. Long-Term Bicycle Parking Rate
R1 Single-family dwellings, existing single-family
dwellings converted for two families, two-family
dwellings, rectory or parsonage
No minimum
R2 Townhouse dwellings, multifamily dwellings,
trailer park or mobile home park
1.00 space per dwelling unit for the first
twenty (20) units in a building;
1.05 spaces per dwelling unit for all units
over twenty (20) in a building
R3 Elderly oriented housing, elderly oriented
congregate housing
0.50 space per dwelling unit
R4 Group housing, including: lodging houses,
convents or monasteries, dormitories, fraternities
and sororities
0.50 space per bed
R5 Transient accommodations, including: tourist
houses in an existing dwelling, hotels, motels
0.02 space per sleeping room
Category Included Non-Residential Uses Min. Long-Term Bicycle Parking Rate
N1 Offices, including: medical, professional,
agencies, general, government; radio/television
studios, arts/crafts studios
0.30 space per 1,000 square feet
N2 Technical offices, research facilities 0.22 space per 1,000 square feet
N3 Hospitals and clinics; veterinary clinics; public
safety facilities; restaurants and eating
establishments
0.20 space per 1,000 square feet
N4 Retail stores, consumer service uses,
commercial recreation and entertainment
0.10 space per 1,000 square feet
N5 Transportation and utility uses; religious and
civic uses;
manufacturing, storage and other industrial uses,
auto-related uses
0.08 space per 1,000 square feet
E1 Primary or secondary schools, vocational
schools
0.30 space per classroom or
0.015 space per auditorium seat,
whichever is greater
E2 College or university facilities (excluding
residences)
0.20 space per 1,000 square feet
P Automobile parking lots or parking garages
for private passenger cars
1.00 space per 10 motor vehicle parking
spaces
6.107.3 Schedule of Short-Term Bicycle Parking Requirements. Minimum rates of Short-Term
Bicycle Parking shall apply to specified categories of land use as set forth below. For
specific land uses, the following categories are cross-referenced in the Schedule of
Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Section 6.36 of this Zoning Ordinance. In
the case of any inconsistency between the list of included uses as set forth below and the
categorization set forth in Section 6.36, the categorization in Section 6.36 shall control.
Category Included Residential Uses Min. Short-Term Bicycle Parking Rate
R1 Single-family dwellings, existing single-family
dwellings converted for two families, two-family
dwellings, rectory or parsonage
No minimum
R2 Townhouse dwellings, multifamily dwellings,
trailer park or mobile home park
0.10 space per dwelling unit on a lot
R3 Elderly oriented housing, elderly oriented
congregate housing
0.05 space per dwelling unit
6-40
Category Included Residential Uses Min. Short-Term Bicycle Parking Rate
R4 Group housing, including: lodging houses,
convents or monasteries, dormitories, fraternities
and sororities
0.05 space per bed
R5 Transient accommodations, including: tourist
houses in an existing dwelling, hotels, motels
0.05 space per sleeping room
Category Included Non-Residential Uses Min. Short-Term Bicycle Parking Rate
N1 Convenience and food stores, restaurants and
eating establishments, theaters and commercial
recreation
1.00 space per 1,000 square feet
N2 Retail stores and consumer service
establishments
0.60 space per 1,000 square feet
N3 Passenger transportation; religious and civic
uses; government offices, medical offices and
clinics, agency offices, banks (ground floor only);
veterinary clinics
0.50 space per 1,000 square feet
N4 Hospitals and infirmaries 0.10 space per 1,000 square feet
N5 Non-passenger transportation and utility uses;
laboratories and research facilities; general,
professional and technical offices;
radio/television and arts/crafts studios;
manufacturing, storage and other industrial
uses; auto-related uses
0.06 space per 1,000 square feet
E1 Primary or secondary schools 1.70 space per classroom or 0.085 space
per auditorium seat, whichever is greater
E2 College or university academic or administrative
facilities
0.40 space per 1,000 square feet
E3 College or university student activity facilities 1.00 space per 1,000 square feet
P Automobile parking lot or parking garage for
private passenger cars (6.36.2 b)
No additional requirement for Short-Term
Bicycle Parking; however, if motor vehicle
parking is provided on an open lot, then
required Long-Term Bicycle Parking
Spaces may be converted to Short-Term
Bicycle Parking Spaces.
6.107.4 Open-Air Uses. For any use that occupies land that is open to the air and not enclosed
within a building, the minimum parking rate for the extent of such open-air use shall be
applied per 3,000 square feet of land area instead of per 1,000 square feet of Gross Floor
Area. For such uses, the combined sum of required Long-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces
and Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces may be provided as Short-Term Bicycle Parking
Spaces.
6.107.5 Permitted Flexibility. The quantities of Long-Term Bicycle Parking and Short-Term Bicycle
Parking may be adjusted as-of-right in the following ways:
a. For non-residential uses, up to twenty percent (20%) of the required number of Long-
Term Bicycle Parking Spaces or four (4) spaces, whichever is greater, may be
converted to Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces.
b. For residential uses requiring four (4) Long-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces or fewer, the
required Long-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces may be designed to meet the
requirements for Short-Term Bicycle Parking Spaces, so long as they are covered to
6-41
be protected from precipitation and are located on the same lot as the residential uses
they serve.
6.108 Modification of Requirements by Special Permit
6.108.1 Any requirement set forth in this Section 6.100 may be modified upon the granting of a
special permit by the Planning Board. Given that community standards for bicycle use and
bicycle parking have evolved and may continue to evolve in the future, the intent of this
provision is to provide a mechanism for the review and approval of alternative technologies
and methods for providing bicycle parking that may provide equal or greater benefits to
bicycle users but may not conform to the exact requirements set forth in this Section.
6.108.2 Bicycle Parking Plan Requirements. When seeking a special permit pursuant to this
Section 6.108, the Applicant shall provide a Bicycle Parking Plan as part of the Special
Permit Application. Such plan shall include the proposed quantities and locations of bicycle
parking facilities as well as exact details and specifications of the design and layout of
proposed Bicycle Parking Spaces. The Bicycle Parking Plan shall include a narrative listing
the requirements that are proposed to be modified and explaining how the Bicycle Parking
Plan would benefit from such modifications. The Bicycle Parking Plan may also include
quantitative analyses of expected bicycle usage for the proposed land uses.
6.108.3 Findings and Approval. Upon granting a special permit to modify any requirements of this
Section 6.100, the Planning Board shall make a general determination that the proposal is
consistent with the purpose of this Section 6.100 and that the Bicycle Parking Plan
proposes a quantity, design and arrangement of bicycle parking that will serve bicycle
users in a way that is sufficiently comparable, given the circumstances of the specific
project, to the bicycle parking that would be required under the regulations of this Section
6.100. The Planning Board shall also make specific determinations applicable to the
modifications being sought as set forth below:
a. Where an alternative design or layout of Bicycle Parking Spaces is proposed, the
Planning Board shall determine that such design or layout shall be durable and
convenient for the users whom it is intended to serve. Where new technologies are
proposed, the Board may require that the Applicant demonstrate such technologies for
review by City staff.
b. Where modifications to the location or quantity of bicycle parking is proposed, the
Planning Board shall determine that the Bicycle Parking Plan will satisfactorily serve
the needs of all expected users, based on quantitative and/or qualitative evidence
provided by the Applicant. Such a modification may be appropriate for a campus
master plan or other large development site within which bicycle parking is planned
comprehensively across an area instead of on a specific site-by-site basis.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
7-1
ARTICLE 7.000 SIGNS AND ILLUMINATION
7.10 SIGNS
7.20 ILLUMINATION
7:30 SEVERABILITY
7.10 SIGNS
7.11 Findings and Purpose
7.11.1 Findings
This Article is based upon the following findings:
A. The City of Cambridge has been and is now taking appropriate action, through
exercise of its zoning and other municipal authority, to improve the aesthetics and
physical appearance of the City by means including the regulation of signs.
B. The regulation of signs is necessary in order to preserve and enhance the
substantial governmental interests of the City of Cambridge in its natural, scenic,
historic, cultural, and aesthetic qualities.
C. There is a substantial governmental interest in enhancing the physical appearance of
all parts of the City of Cambridge, including residential, commercial, and industrial
areas.
D. Regulating signs will improve the City's appearance; make the City's commercial,
residential, and industrial areas more attractive for commercial and residential uses
and commercial development; and enhance the economic climate of the City.
E. The regulations set forth in this Article will directly advance the public interest in
aesthetics and other qualities of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of
residential, commercial and industrial buildings and areas; preserving and enhancing
the appearance of public streets, parks and other public properties; and minimizing
the intrusiveness of sign structures.
F. Nonconforming off-premise signs, which traditionally have been used primarily to
advertise commercial goods and services not available on the same premises, have
a significantly greater adverse aesthetic impact than on premises signs because of
their larger sizes, greater heights, less attractive appearances, and/or more intrusive
locations.
G. The public interest is served by use of signs by businesses and services to identify
their premises, or the products or services there available, or to display
noncommercial messages.
H. The City finds that it is in the City's interest to require removal of certain
nonconforming signs after the grace period provided by Section 7.18 has expired.
I. The City in enacting this ordinance does hereby adopt the findings, conclusions, and
recommendations of the Planning Board in its report dated March 7, 1991.
7-2
7.11.2 Purposes
The purposes of this Article are to preserve and enhance the substantial interests of the
City of Cambridge in the appearance of the City; to preserve and enhance the public
interest in aesthetics; to preserve and increase amenities of the City; to control and
reduce visual clutter and blight; and to carry out the authority conferred by General Laws
Chapter 40A.
7.12 Applicability
A. General Applicability
No signs or advertising devices of any kind or nature shall be erected or maintained on
any premises or affixed to the inside or outside of any structure to be visible from the
outside of any structure except as specifically permitted in this Article 7.000.
B. MXD District
The provisions of this Section 7.10 shall not be applicable in the MXD District, Article
14.000 of this Ordinance, during the life of the Kendall Square Urban Renewal Plan, as
amended.
C. Signs in the Public Way
Signs and banners located entirely within a public way are not subject to the provisions of
this Article 7.000 except as may be specifically provided for elsewhere in this Article
7.000.
7.13 Definitions
7.13.1 Sign. Sign shall mean and include any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter,
words, model, banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag, or representation used as, or which
is in the nature of, an advertisement, announcement, or direction and which is designed
to be seen from the outside of a building.
7.13.2 Types of Signs:
A. Free Standing Sign - A sign that is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting
structure and which is not attached to any building or other structure.
B. Projecting Sign - Any sign, other than a wall sign or free standing sign, that is
attached to and projects from a building face. A projecting sign shall include
marquee, canopy, and awning mounted signs.
C. Wall Sign - Any sign affixed in such a way that its exposed face and all sign area is
parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building to which it is attached.
A wall sign shall be considered a projecting sign if the sign face projects more than
twelve (12) inches from the face of the building. Wall signs shall include signs
located on or behind the surface of windows.
7.13.3 Illumination:
A. Natural - natural or ambient light.
7-3
B. External - artificial illumination from a light source which provides light directly onto
the sign face, or portions of the sign face, or its background, which light is then
reflected back to the viewer.
C. Internal - artificial illumination from a light source located behind the sign face and
which transmits light through the sign face or portions of the sign face to the viewer.
Exposed neon tubing and similar lighting shall be considered internal illumination.
D. Indirect - placement of the artificial light device such that the source of light cannot
be seen from a public way.
7.13.4 Premises:
That part of a lot, building or structure occupied by a business, enterprise, institution, or
other person and which is distinct and separate from the place occupied by any other
business, enterprise, institution or other person.
7.13.5 Sign Frontage:
The length of a building, or the length of a separate and distinct first floor establishment,
abutting a street. The length of the building or ground floor establishment shall be that as
defined in Section 5.24.4 of this Ordinance.
7.13.6 Establishment, Ground Floor:
A separate and distinct use, business, enterprise, or institution having a separate public
entrance to the outside of a building, which entrance is at grade or within six feet of grade
as measured at the street line.
7.14 Calculations of Area and Height of Signs
A. For a free-standing sign or sign attached to a building, the area of the sign shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols,
together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are
incidental to the display itself.
B. For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, the area of the sign shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs or symbols,
together with any background of a color different from that of the building.
C. For all signs, where a color or graphic pattern constitutes a Corporate or Brand
Identification (by custom, contract or practice) as illustrated in advertising or in sign
or building designs employed at multiple locations, the full extent of that background
color or graphic pattern shall be calculated as part of the sign area when it is
associated with any logo, lettering, or other graphic element constituting a sign.
D. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a
surface, wall or window, the area of the sign shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectangle or other geometric shape which encompasses all letters and
symbols.
E. Only one face of a two-sided sign shall be counted in computing the area of a sign,
provided the sign faces are parallel and of equal size.
7-4
F. The height of a sign shall be the vertical distance between the top of a sign and the
mean grade of the ground adjoining that portion of the building to which the sign is
attached; or that ground within ten feet of a free-standing sign.
7.15 General Limitations for All Signs Permitted in the City of Cambridge
A. Signs shall be stationary and may not contain any visible moving or moveable parts.
B. All lighting shall be indirect, continuous, and installed in a manner that will prevent
direct light from shining onto any street or adjacent property. Flashing or intermittent
light creating flashing, moving, changing or animated graphics is prohibited, except
that a warning sign, a device intended to tell the time and temperature, or official
traffic and directional signs may have intermittent illumination.
C. No illumination shall be permitted after 11 P.M. in any Residence A, B, C, or C-1
district.
D. No sign, portion of a sign, or structural support for such sign may extend above the
lowest point of the roof of a building, except that for one-story buildings having a
continuous parapet above the lowest point of the roof, signs may be placed below
the highest point of such parapet rather than below the lowest point of the roof.
E. Except as may be provided elsewhere in this ordinance for temporary signs, all signs
shall be permanently mounted on a building or structure or permanently implanted in
the ground. All graphic images on a sign shall be of durable material.
7.16 Permitted Signs
The signs and advertising devices which are permitted in the City of Cambridge are set
out below.
7.16.1 Exempt, Temporary and Noncommercial Signs
The following signs shall be exempt from restrictions as to type, location, height, and size
of signs or limitations as to the total area of signs permitted on a lot or business, as those
limits are set forth in Section 7.16.2. Except as otherwise noted, such signs shall be
naturally or externally illuminated only and shall be subject to all other provisions of this
Article 7.000.
7.16.11 Exempt Signs
A. In all districts:
1. Signs not visible from a public way. (All illumination permitted.)
2. Official traffic and directional signs, including bus and shuttle schedules. (All
illumination permitted.)
3. Other signs in the public way.
4. Signs necessary for public safety and convenience not exceeding six (6)
square feet per sign face, provided such signs contain no advertising.
5. Flags of a city, state or country.
6. Memorials such as grave stones and corner stones.
7-5
7. Historical site plaques installed or approved by a public Agency or duly
established historical society.
8. Window display of merchandise or signs incidental to such display.
9. Signage necessary or appurtenant to the placement or operation of a Public
Bicycle-Sharing Station (All illumination permitted.)
B. In business, office and industrial districts:
1. Permanent nonilluminated signs behind the glass of a window above the
ground floor, provided:
(a) The total area of the sign(s) does not exceed 20% of the area of the
glass of the window;
(b) The window is part of the premises to which the sign is accessory;
(c) The sign consists of individual letters or symbols affixed to the window
or mounted on a clear, transparent background;
(d) The individual symbols or letters do not exceed 6" in height.
2. Permanent nonilluminated signs mounted on awnings on the ground floor of a
building provided:
(a) The total area of the sign does not exceed 2 square feet and the height
of individual symbols or letters does not exceed 6";
(b) The sign consists of individual letters or symbols affixed to the fabric of
the awning;
(c) No other graphic material appears on the awning.
7.16.12 Temporary Signs
A. One for sale or for rent sign not exceeding six (6) square feet in residential districts
or twenty (20) square feet in nonresidential districts and advertising only the
premises on which the sign is located.
B. Building contractor's, promotional, leasing and other similar signs maintained on a
lot during construction on that lot not exceeding in total area that area permitted by
the application of the formula: one (1) square foot for each linear foot of sign
frontage on the lot (after construction), or one hundred (100) square feet in
business, office and industrial districts or twenty (20) square feet in residential
districts, whichever is smaller. However, where a specific sign dimension is
mandated by any city, state, or federal subsidy or support program providing
assistance to the construction on the lot, which sign is greater in area than would
be permitted in this paragraph, then the larger sign shall be permitted.
C. Temporary signs of a noncommercial nature, including political signs of any kind,
not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area.
D. In business, office, and industrial districts, temporary signs pertaining to special
sales or events lasting no more than fifteen days, affixed to the inside of windows,
provided that their total area does not exceed 30% of the area of the window glass
to which they are affixed.
7-6
7.16.13 Non Commercial Signs
In all districts, noncommercial signs which contain only noncommercial messages,
including political messages of any kind, may be displayed, provided the sign does not
exceed ten (10) square feet in area. This Section 7.16.13 shall not limit the effect of
Section 7.17 on the display of noncommercial messages on permitted signs.
7.16.2 All Other Permitted Signs
7.16.21 Signs in Residence Districts
A. Identification Sign for Residential Uses:
Total Area of Signage Permitted per Lot: as permitted below.
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: 1 sq. ft./dwelling unit to a maximum of 10 sq.ft./dwelling
Number of signs: One (1)/dwelling
Height of sign: 4 ft. if free standing; 10 ft. if on a building
Location: On building or a minimum of 3 feet from street line if
free standing.
Illumination: Natural or external lighting only
Limitations: For the display of street number, name of occupant of
the premises, and/or identification of an accessory
professional office or other permitted accessory uses
including customary home occupation.
B. Identification Sign, Bulletin Board or Announcement Board for Permitted
Nonresidential Uses Other than Permitted Hotel and Office Uses.
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: One at 10 sq. ft., one at 20 sq. ft.
Number of signs: Two/building
Height of sign: 4 ft. if free standing
Location: On building or minimum of 1/2 the depth of required front
yard if free standing
Illumination: Natural or external lighting only
C. Signs for Lawfully Maintained Nonconforming Uses.
Total Area of Signage Permitted per Lot: One (1) sq. ft. for each linear foot of sign
frontage on the lot or 10 sq. ft. per ground floor establishment, whichever is less.
However, individual signs shall be further limited as set forth below.
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: 10 sq. ft.
7-7
Number of signs: One per ground floor establishment plus one per building
Height of sign: 20 ft. if attached to building, 4 ft. if free- standing
Location: On building or 1/2 depth of required front yard if free
standing
Illumination: Natural or external lighting only
D. Permitted Hotel and Office Use:
Total Area of Signage Permitted Per Lot: One (1) sq. ft. for each linear foot of sign
frontage on the lot or 200 sq. ft. per building, whichever is less.
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: As permitted in Section 7.16.22
Number of signs: As permitted in Section 7.16.22
Height of sign: As permitted in Section 7.16.22
Illumination: Natural or external lighting only
7.16.22 All Business, Office, and Industrial Districts
Total Area of Signage Permitted per Lot: One and a half (1 1/2) sq. ft. for each linear
foot of sign frontage on the lot for sign frontage located one hundred (100) feet or less
from the street line; provided that the total area of all signs on the exterior of the
building, including free standing signs, shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each
linear foot of sign frontage; or two (2) sq. ft. for each linear foot of sign frontage on the
lot for sign frontage located more than one hundred feet from all street lines from which
the sign frontage is visible. However, signs shall be further limited as set forth below.
A. Free Standing Signs:
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: 30 sq. ft.
Number of signs: Two, provided the total area of all such signs shall not
exceed 30 sq ft. on any lot.
Height of sign: 15 ft.
Illumination: Natural or external lighting only
B. Projecting Signs:
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: 13 sq. ft.
Number of signs: One (1)/ground floor establishment, plus one (1) for any
public building entrance not serving a ground floor
establishment
7-8
Height of sign: 20 ft., provided it is below the sill line of the second floor
windows or the lowest point of the roof, whichever is less
Illumination: Natural or external lighting only
C. Wall Signs:
Maximum Permitted
Area of sign: No individual sign may exceed sixty (60) sq. ft. in area.
However, for any building or ground floor establishment
having a sign frontage less than sixty (60) ft., the
maximum area of any individual sign shall be the product
of the formula: sign frontage x one (1) sq. ft.
Number of signs: Not Limited
Height of sign: 20 ft., provided it is below the sill line of the second floor
windows or the lowest point of the roof, whichever is less
Illumination:
1. Natural or external lighting;
2. Exposed neon or gas ultra-violet tube type lighting behind the
glass of windows, not exceeding five (5) sq. ft. in area;
3. Other internal illumination including any other exposed neon type
lighting not included in (2) above under the following conditions:
a. Either the vertical or horizontal dimension of the sign
does not exceed thirty (30) inches; and
b. The sign:
(1) is located behind the glass of a window, or
(2) is mounted such that the sign face does not extend more
than two (2) inches beyond the plane of that portion of the
building façade to which the sign is attached, or if extending
more than two (2) inches beyond the plane of the building,
only that portion of the sign face consisting of letters and
numerals is illuminated, or
(3) consists of independent, individual letters or graphic
symbols mounted directly to the surface of the building
facade to which the sign is attached or is mounted on an
unilluminated raceway or channel which is then directly
attached to the building facade.
D. Special Use Signs:
1. Wall and Free Standing Signs Accessory to Theaters and Cinemas.
A wall or free standing sign accessory to a theater or cinema which
announces the current program at the theater or cinema shall not be subject
7-9
to the limitations of paragraphs A or C above or of Section 7.16.3, paragraphs
A and B, provided the following conditions are met.
(a) The maximum area does not exceed one hundred (100) square feet for
all signs not meeting the requirements of paragraphs A and C of this
Section 7.16.22.
(b) If internally illuminated, the maximum area shall be limited to forty (40)
square feet for a single theater, plus an additional twenty (20) square
feet for each additional theater served by the same sign, up to the
maximum permitted in paragraph (a) above.
(c) The maximum height of the free standing sign shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet.
(d) The total area of all signs on the lot shall not exceed the Total Area of
Signage Permitted per Lot as limited in this Section 7.16.22.
2. Wall signs for Hotels and Motels. One or more wall signs accessory to a hotel
or motel not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in total area or one
hundred (100) square feet for any individual sign shall not be subject to the
limitations of paragraph C above or of Section 7.16.3, paragraphs A and B,
provided the following conditions are met.
(a) If internally illuminated, the sign shall consist of independent letters or
graphic symbols mounted directly to the surface of the building to which
the sign(s) is attached.
7.16. 23 Special Sign Provisions for Non-Profit Theaters, Other Performance Spaces,
Museums, Galleries, Libraries and Cinemas.
Notwithstanding the limitations of Sections 7.16.21 and 7.16.22 above and Section
7.16.3 below, additional signs shall be permitted on lots containing a theater,
performance space, museum, library or art gallery owned and operated by a non-profit
institution (which institution is granted the educational and religious exemption
provided in Section 3 of Chapter 40A) or municipality for the purpose of identifying
current and future educational programs, lectures, performances, and exhibits open to
the public occurring in those facilities, subject to the following limitations and
conditions:
A. The signs may be any combination of wall, projecting or freestanding signs.
B. The signs shall not be subject to the Area of Sign, Height of Sign and
Number of Signs limitations found in Sections 7.16.21, 7.16.22 and Section
7.16.3.
C. The signs shall be made of cloth, canvas or other similar flexible material
and may only be naturally or externally illuminated.
D. A freestanding sign may not be higher than 25 feet. Signs on a building wall
may not be higher than fifty feet.
7-10
E. Any individual sign shall be temporary in nature and removed at the
conclusion of the event for which it provided notice; at a minimum, however,
such signs shall be replaced at intervals not to exceed one year.
F. The maximum area of individual Freestanding or Projecting Signs shall be
50 square feet; the maximum area of individual Wall Signs shall be 200 square
feet.
G. The total area of signs permitted on the lot shall be determined by the
following:
(a) In non-residential districts the total area of signs on a lot shall be
subject to the limitations for Total Area of Signs Permitted Per Lot as set
forth in Section 7.16.22 for signs on the outside of the building (and shall
be inclusive of any other signs on the lot not employing the provisions of
this Section 7.16.23).
(b) In residential districts, the total area of signs on the lot shall be limited
by the application of the formula of one square foot of sign for each linear
foot of Sign Frontage on the lot for that portion of a building containing
the eligible activity (and shall be inclusive of any other signs on the lot not
employing the provisions of this Section 7.16.23).
H. All other provisions of this Article 7.000 shall continue to apply.
7.16.3 Application of Sign Frontage Formula
Where the total permitted area of all signs on a lot or building is determined by the
product of the formula: sign frontage x one (1), one and one half (1.5), or two (2) sq. ft.,
the following rules shall apply.
A. The total area of signs accessory to a ground floor establishment shall not exceed
that determined by the application of the sign frontage formula to that ground floor
establishment. Where two ground floor establishments occupy the same sign
frontage the total permitted area of signs shall be shared equally by the two
establishments.
B. The total area of all signs on any single building wall shall not exceed that
determined by the application of the formula to the sign frontage for that wall;
provided, a wall having no sign frontage may share the sign area permitted on any
wall of the building having sign frontage.
7.16.4 Sign Area For Lots Having No Buildings
In any district where the number or area of signs permitted on a lot is determined by
the number of buildings located on said lot, one building shall be assumed to be
present for the purposes of Section 7.10 for any use not contained within a building.
Where the total area of signs permitted on a lot is determined by the application of the
sign frontage formula, a maximum of 30 sq. ft. of signs shall be permitted on any lot
having no sign frontage.
7-11
7.16.5 Signs Permitted in Planned Unit Development Districts
The sign requirements of the base zoning district shall apply, except that when
business, office or industrial uses are authorized by the Planned Unit Development
special permit the requirements of Section 7.16.22 shall apply to those portions of the
Planned Unit Development containing those uses, in lieu of the base district
requirements.
7.17 Noncommercial Messages
Any sign permitted under this Article may contain, in lieu of or in addition to any other
copy, any noncommercial message.
7.18 Noncomforming Signs
7.18.1 Signs Required to be Removed
The following nonconforming signs shall be removed within four (4) years from June 10,
1991, or the first date that the sign became nonconforming, whichever is later:
A. Signs located on rooftops.
B. Free standing signs in excess of thirty (30) square feet in area.
C. Wall signs in excess of sixty (60) square feet in area.
D. Projecting signs in excess of ten (10) square feet in area.
7.18.2 Other Signs
A. Nonconforming signs not covered by Section 7.18.1 above may be altered, provided
the basic supporting structure is not altered and further provided that any alterations
made to a sign within the past three (3) years do not exceed fifty (50%) percent of
the current replacement value of the sign.
B. Notwithstanding the limitations of Section 7.18.2 A above, where it is proposed to
replace an existing sign where the ground floor establishment or the building as a
whole contains a total area of legal nonconforming signs exceeding the maximum
permitted under this Article 7.000, said new sign may be installed and may contain
an area of six (6) square feet or that area permitted by the application of the formula:
One (1) sq. ft. x sign frontage of the ground floor establishment, to the establishment
to which the sign is accessory, whichever is greater; provided, the total area of signs
accessory to the ground floor establishment or the building is not increased and all
other size limitations for signs are met.
7.19 Community Development Department Certification
All proposals for signs exceeding twenty-five (25) square feet in area shall be submitted to
the Community Development Department for certification. The applicant for such a sign
certification shall submit all information necessary for the Department to review the
proposed sign for conformance to the requirements of this Article 7.000. The Department
shall, within ten (10) business days, provide the applicant with a certification that the
proposed sign conforms to the requirements of Article 7.000 or shall notify the applicant
that the requirements have not been met. Said certification shall accompany the
application for a building permit for the sign to the Inspectional Services Department.
7-12
7.20 ILLUMINATION
In Residence A, B, C, and C-1 districts no outdoor floodlighting or decorative lighting,
except lighting primarily designed to illuminate walks, driveways, outdoor living areas, or
outdoor recreational facilities, and except temporary holiday lighting in use for not longer
than a four week period in any calendar year, shall be permitted. Any permanent lighting
permitted by the preceding sentence shall be continuous, indirect, and installed in a
manner that will prevent direct light from shining onto any street or adjacent property.
7.30 SEVERABILITY
The City by enacting this Article intends to regulate signs in order to carry out and achieve
the findings and purposes of this Article. The City also wishes to require removal of
certain non conforming signs to the maximum extent lawfully possible and in accordance
with the effective date and removal schedule set forth in Section 7.18.1. Therefore,
should any part of the City's Ordinance be declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then it is the specific intent of the City that the remainder of the Ordinance not
specifically declared invalid shall continue in full force and effect as if and when originally
enacted by the City.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
8-1
ARTICLE 8.000 NONCONFORMITY
8.10 EXISTING BUILDINGS
8.20 NONCONFORMANCE
8.10 EXISTING BUILDINGS
8.11 This Ordinance shall not apply to existing buildings or structures, nor to the existing use of
any building or structure or of land, to the extent to which it is used at the time of first
publication of notice of public hearing by the Planning Board of applicable provisions of
this or any prior Ordinance, but it shall apply to any change of use thereof and to any
alteration of a building or structure when the same would amount to reconstruction,
extension or structural change, and to any alteration of a building or structure to provide
for its use for a purpose or in a manner substantially different from the use to which it was
put before alteration, or for its use for the same purpose to a substantially greater extent.
8.12 Except as herein provided no building or structure or land shall be used and no building or
other structure or part thereof shall be constructed, extended or structurally altered except
in conformity with the State Building Code and with the provisions of this Ordinance
applying to the district in which said building, structure or land is located.
8.20 NONCONFORMANCE
8.21 Any nonconforming structure or use which existed at the time of the first notice of public
hearing by the Planning Board of the applicable provisions of this or any prior Ordinance
or any amendment thereto may be continued or changed to be conforming, but when so
changed to be conforming it shall not be made nonconforming again.
8.22 As provided in Section 6, Chapter 40A, G.L., permits for the change, extension, or
alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming structure or use may be granted as permitted in
Subsections 8.22.1 and 8.22.2 below. Such a permit, either a building permit in the case
of the construction authorized in Section 8.22.1 or a special permit in the case of
construction authorized in Section 8.22.2. may be granted only if the permit granting
authority specified below finds that such change, extension, or alteration will not be
substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming
structure or use.
8.22.1 The following alterations, reconstructions, extensions, and/or enlargements of
nonconforming structures, which do not result in a use for a substantially different
purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially
greater extent than the existing use, or which are undertaken to accommodate a new
conforming use, shall be permitted after the issuance of a building permit by the
Superintendent of Buildings. Any change, extension or alteration of a nonconforming use
shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection 8.22.2.
8-2
a. Conforming construction to a structure located on a lot that is nonconforming due to
its lot size or lot width and where only that lot width and/or lot size is nonconforming,
but which structure meets the requirements of Section 5.21.1.
b. Conforming construction where only the requirements of Article 6.000 are
nonconforming and where no change to those elements regulated by Article 6.000
are required or proposed.
c. Construction occurring entirely within a structure, including structural changes,
provided there is no increase in an existing or creation of a new violation of the
requirements of Article 5.000.
d. Relocation, enlargement, or addition of windows, doors, skylights, or similar openings
to the exterior of a building provided that the facade of the building upon which such
relocation, enlargement, or addition is occurring (1) conforms to the yard
requirements of Article 5.000, or (2) faces a street.
e. Demolition of a structure or portions of a structure that (1) reduces the extent of an
existing nonconformity, or that (2) does not increase or otherwise affect any existing
nonconformity, and that (3) does not create a new zoning violation.
f. Conforming additions, under Article 5.000, to a structure not conforming to the
requirements of Article 5.000 provided that no nonconforming element or aspect of
the nonconforming structure is extended or increased and further provided that the
nonconforming structure is not thereby increased in area or volume by more than ten
(10) percent since the structure first became nonconforming.
g. Repair, reconstruction, or replacement of any lawfully established nonconforming
portions of a building including but not limited to porches, decks, balconies, bay
windows and building additions, provided that the repair, reconstruction or
replacement does not exceed the original in footprint, volume, or area, and further
provided that the area and/or volume of said portions of the building do not exceed
twenty-five (25) percent of the area or volume of the entire building.
h. Construction of a dormer or an addition to a nonconforming one or two family
dwelling which will further violate the yard and height requirements of Article 5.000,
but no other requirements of Article 5.000 including FAR, in the following cases:
1. A dormer or addition to the second story that does not extend horizontally
beyond the vertical walls of the existing first story of the structure.
2. A dormer on the third story no longer than fifteen (15) feet that does not extend
horizontally beyond the vertical walls of the existing second story nor above the
existing ridge line provided that the total linear length of all dormers on the third
story of the building, after the issuance of the permit authorized by this
Subparagraph h 2, does not exceed fifteen (15) feet.
i. Any construction, alteration, reconstruction, extension or enlargement otherwise
permitted in paragraphs (a) through (h) above where the lot is also nonconforming
due to the presence of more than one structure containing a principal residential use
8-3
as prohibited in Section 5.53; or any conforming construction where only the
requirements of 5.53 are nonconforming.
8.22.2 The following changes, extensions, or alterations of a pre-existing nonconforming
structure or use may be granted in the following cases after the issuance of a special
permit. Such a permit shall be granted only if the permit granting authority specified below
finds that such change, extension, or alteration will not be substantially more detrimental
to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use.
a. In an Office, Business, or Industrial District the Board of Zoning Appeal may issue a
special permit for the alteration or enlargement of a nonconforming structure, not
otherwise permitted in Section 8.22.1 above, or the enlargement (but not the
alteration) of a nonconforming use, provided any alteration or enlargement of such
nonconforming use or structure is not further in violation of the dimensional
requirements in Article 5.000 or the off street parking and loading requirements in
Article 6.000 for the district in which such structure or use is located and provided
such nonconforming structure or use not be increased in area or volume by more
than twenty-five (25) percent since it first began to be nonconforming.
b. In an Office, Business or Industrial District the Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a
special permit for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the occupancy of an
existing building designed and built for nonresidential use by any use permitted as of
right in a Business or Industrial District in Article 4.000 of this Ordinance, provided
such new use will be carried out entirely within the existing building and provided the
off street parking and loading requirements in Article 6.000 for the district in which
such building is located will not be further violated.
c. In a Residence District the Board of Zoning Appeal may grant a special permit for the
alteration or enlargement of a nonconforming structure, not otherwise permitted in
Section 8.22.1 above, but not the alteration or enlargement of a nonconforming use,
provided any enlargement or alteration of such nonconforming structure is not further
in violation of the dimensional requirements of Article 5.000 or the off street parking
and loading requirements in Article 6.000 for the district in which such structure is
located and provided such nonconforming structure will not be increased in area or
volume by more than twenty-five (25) percent since it first began to be
nonconforming.
8.22.3 Any alteration or enlargement of a nonconforming structure or of a nonconforming use not
otherwise permitted in Section 8.22.1 and 8.22.2 above shall be a variance.
8.23 If a nonconforming structure or use shall have been destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion or other catastrophe (except one that has been determined by the City to have
been caused intentionally by or on behalf of the owner), such structure may be rebuilt or
restored and used again as previously. If a nonconforming structure or use shall have
been destroyed, damaged, or caused to be moved as the result of a public taking, said
structure or use may be relocated or reconstructed on the lot or on an abutting lot in the
same ownership, provided that said relocation or reconstruction does not result in the
enlargement of the nonconforming use or structure. In either case, the rebuilding,
8-4
restoring, relocation or reconstruction shall not require a special permit provided that it
commences within twenty-four (24) months after such fire, explosion, catastrophe, public
taking, or April 24, 2017 (the date of enactment of this amendment), whichever is later,
and is completed within thirty-six (36) months after such fire, explosion, catastrophe,
public taking, or April 24, 2017 (the date of enactment of this amendment), whichever is
later, and provided that the structure as rebuilt, restored, relocated, or reconstructed shall
not be greater in volume, footprint, or gross floor area, shall not further increase any
nonconformities than those of the original nonconforming structure, and shall not further
violate any dimensional requirements of the Ordinance.
8.24 A nonconforming use of a building or land which has been abandoned or not used for a
period of two years shall not thereafter be returned to such nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when the intent of the owner to
discontinue use is apparent, or when the use has been discontinued for a period of thirty
(30) days, or when the characteristic equipment and furnishings of the nonconforming use
have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment,
whichever shall first occur.
8.25 Construction or operation under a building or special permit shall conform to any
subsequent amendment of this Ordinance unless the use or construction is commenced
within a period of six months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously
and expeditiously as is reasonable.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
9-1
ARTICLE 9.000 PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
9.10 ENFORCEMENT
9.20 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
9.10 ENFORCEMENT
9.11 The Superintendent of Buildings of the City of Cambridge is hereby designated and
authorized as the officer charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance.
9.12 From the time of the effective date of this Ordinance the Superintendent of Buildings shall
not grant a permit for the construction or alteration of any building or structure if such
construction or alteration would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance
whether by the applicant for the permit or by any other party associated with the property
involved; nor shall any municipal officer grant any permit or license for the use of any
building or land if such use would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
No building permit or certificate of occupancy or other permit or license shall be issued for
land or for a building or structure to be erected on land which at the time of application is
dedicated to the provision of off street parking as required by this Ordinance, unless such
new construction or use shall continue to make available the required number of off street
parking spaces in addition to the off street parking facilities required for such new
construction or use, or unless substitute parking facilities which meet the requirements of
Article 6.000 have been first provided. In the event of doubt whether a building permit or
certificate of occupancy should be issued in any particular case the Superintendent of
Buildings shall deny the application therefore.
9.13 Whenever such permit is refused, because of the violation of some provision of this
Ordinance the reason for such refusal shall be clearly stated in writing.
9.14 Every applicant for a building permit for any construction, alteration, or use of any building
or land for which a permit is required by law shall, upon request of the Superintendent of
Buildings, file such written information, plans, specifications, or other data as shall be
deemed necessary for the full and accurate exposition of the proposed construction,
alteration or use with relation to the regulations of this Ordinance. Such material shall be
kept on file in the records of the Office of Superintendent of Buildings.
9.15 The Superintendent of Buildings, upon accurate information in writing from any citizen, or
upon his own initiative, shall institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the name of
the City of Cambridge to prevent, correct, restrain, or abate violations of this Ordinance.
Any person aggrieved by a violation of any portion of this Ordinance may request in
writing that the Superintendent of Buildings enforce the Ordinance. The Superintendent
shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to
act, and the reasons therefore, within fourteen days of receipt of such request.
9.16 (1) Criminal Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this Ordinance may, upon conviction, be fined a sum not to
9-2
exceed three hundred dollars for each offense. Each day, or portion of a day, that any
violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) Noncriminal Disposition. Whoever violates any provision of this ordinance may be
penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in G. L. c. 40, Section 21D. For
purposes of this section, the Commissioner of Inspectional Services and his or her
designee shall be the enforcing officer. The penalty for each violation shall not exceed
three hundred dollars. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate violation.
9.17 In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth. This
Ordinance shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, other
ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less
restrictive.
9.20 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
9.21 No land shall be occupied or used, and no building or structure erected or structurally
altered after January 25, 1944, shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any
purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Superintendent of
Buildings stating that the building and use comply with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Cambridge and of the State Building Code in effect at the time of
issuance. No such certificate shall be issued unless the building and its use and its
accessory uses and the uses of all premises are in conformance with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance and of the State Building Code at the time of issuance. Where a
certificate of occupancy was not issued at the time of occupancy or use permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance and State Building Code in effect at such time began, the
Superintendent of Buildings may issue a validating certificate of occupancy retroactive to
the beginning of the occupancy of use. A certificate of occupancy shall be conditional on
the adequacy of parking space and other facilities as required by this Ordinance and shall
lapse if such space or spaces facilities are used for other purposes.
9.22 A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following in conformity with the
State Building Code and the Zoning Ordinance:
(a) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered.
(b) Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification.
(c) Change in character or the intensity of the use of land.
(d) Any change in use of a nonconforming structure or use.
9.23 In cases where a building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy shall be applied for
at the time of the application for a building permit, and shall be issued within ten days
after the lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed if the proposed use of
the building is permitted by this Ordinance. In cases where a building permit is not
required a certificate of occupancy shall be applied for prior to the happening of any of the
events specified in Section 9.22 and shall be issued prior to any such change of use.
Such certificates of occupancy shall be posted forthwith by the owner of the property in a
9-3
conspicuous place on the premises involved for a period of not less than ten days after
issuance.
9.24 Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate may be
issued for such period as the Superintendent may designate, but not beyond the
completion of the project described in the application for the building permit, provided
there is compliance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance corresponding to the
extent of occupancy.
9.25 The Superintendent of Buildings may issue a certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming
use which is substituted for an existing nonconforming use of the same type (e.g. retail
store for retail store, restaurant for lunch room) and for a nonconforming use which is
substituted for an existing nonconforming use where such substitute use is permitted in
Article 4.000 as a matter of right in the the most restricted Residence district in which a
similar such existing nonconforming use is permitted; provided there is no enlargement of
volume or area and provided such substitution does not occasion any further violation of
applicable regulations of this ordinance.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
10-1
ARTICLE 10.000 APPEALS, VARIANCES, AND SPECIAL PERMITS
10.10
10.11
10.12
10.13
10.14
10.10 BOARD OF ZONING APPEAL
10.20 APPEALS
10.30 VARIANCES
10.40 SPECIAL PERMITS
10.50 REPETITIVE PETITIONS
THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEAL
There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeal, established in accordance with Chapter 40A
of the General Laws and all amendments thereto, which shall consist of five members
and up to seven associate members appointed by the City Manager. The first appointments
shall be made for one-, two-, three-, four-, and five-year terms respectively, and
thereafter one appointment for a five-year term shall be made on or before the first day
of May in each year. No member shall be appointed for more than two successive full
five-year terms. Associate members shall be appointed for two-year terms, the first
appointments being for a one-year term and a two-year term. One associate member
shall be designated by the Chairman of the Board to sit in the place of any member
incapacitated by personal interest or absence, but not otherwise. A member appointed
to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Board shall
annually in the month of January elect a chairman and a vice-chairman.
Members and associate members of the Board of Zoning Appeal shall be bona fide
residents of Cambridge but not City employees during their terms of office. They shall
serve without compensation. No member of the Board of Zoning Appeal shall be a
member of the Cambridge Planning Board, and not more than one member shall be a
member of the Board of Appeal as established under the provisions of the State
Building Code.
The Board of Zoning Appeal shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To hear and decide appeals as provided by Section 8 of Chapter 40A, G.L., and by
Section 10.20 of this Article.
(b) To hear and decide applications for special permits upon which the Board is
empowered to act under Section 10.30 of this Article.
(c) To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the terms of this
Ordinance, including variances for use, with respect to particular land or
structures.
The Board of Zoning Appeal shall consider any appeal, application or petition at a
public hearing held within sixty-five (65) days from the transmittal to the Board of such
appeal, application or petition. The Board shall provide notice of such hearing in the
manner specified in Section 11 of Chapter 40A, G.L.
10-2
10.15 The Board may adopt from time to time such rules of practice and procedure as it may
deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Ordinance, and shall keep
minutes of its proceedings.
10.16 All appeals, petitions or applications to the Board shall be made in writing on forms
prescribed by the Board, shall refer to the specific provision of the Zoning Ordinance
involved, and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the use for which
the special permit is sought, or the details of the variance that is applied for and the
grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the case may
be.
10.17 Every decision of the Board of Zoning Appeal shall be by resolution adopted by the
affirmative vote of at least four members of the Board. Each resolution shall be filed
with the documents pertaining thereto by case number in the office of the
Superintendent of Buildings under one of the following headings: Interpretations,
Special Permits, or Variances. Copies of each resolution shall be filed simultaneously
in the offices of the City Clerk and the Planning Board. Each decision of the Board
shall be made within one hundred (100) days after the date of the filing of an appeal,
application or petition, except in regard to special permits, as provided in Section
10.42.
10.20 APPEALS
10.21 Any party specified in Section 8, Chapter 40A, G.L., aggrieved by reason of his inability
to obtain a permit or enforcement action or by any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Superintendent of Buildings or other permit granting
authority in the enforcement of this Ordinance may appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeal. Within thirty (30) days after the decision which is being appealed, the
aggrieved person may file with the City and the Board of Zoning appeal, a notice of
appeal specifying the ground thereof and shall thereupon pay a fee of fifty dollars to the
City of Cambridge. The Superintendent of Buildings shall forthwith transmit to the
Board of Zoning Appeal all documents and papers constituting the record of the case
in which the appeal is taken.
10.22 Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeal, whether or not
previously a party to the proceeding, or any municipal office or Board, may appeal to
the Superior Court or the Land Court for Middlesex County; provided that such appeal
is filed in said Court within twenty (20) days after such decision is filed with the City
Clerk.
10.30 VARIANCES
10.31 A variance from the specific requirements of this Ordinance, including variances for
use, may be authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeal with respect to particular land
or structure. Such variance shall be granted only in cases where the Board finds all of
the following:
(a) a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would involve a substantial
hardship, financial or otherwise to the petitioner or appellant.
10-3
(b) The hardship is owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or
topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or
structure but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located.
(c) Desirable relief may be granted without either:
(1) substantial detriment to the public good; or
(2) nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this
Ordinance.
10.32 In addition to considering the character and use of nearby buildings and land the
Board, in determining its finding, shall take into account the number of persons
residing or working in such buildings or upon such land, and the present and probable
future traffic conditions. The Board shall also take into account the potential impact of
the development to be authorized by the variance on Registered Solar Energy
Systems as defined in Section 22.60 of this Zoning Ordinance.
10.33 A variance shall be granted only after a public hearing for which notice has been given
by publication and posting as provided in Section 11, Chapter 40A, G.L., and by the
installation of on-site notification panels as required in Section 10.42.1. In any of the
following cases notice of each application to the Board of Zoning Appeal for a variance
shall be transmitted forthwith to the Planning Board which shall within twenty (20) days
of the receipt of such notice transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeal a report
accompanied by any material, maps, or plans that will aid the latter Board in judging
the applications and in determining special conditions and safeguards. The Board of
Zoning Appeal shall not render any decision on an application for a variance until said
report has been received and considered, or until the twenty (20) day period has
expired without receipt of the report whichever is earlier.
(a) Erection or alteration of a building to a height greater than that otherwise
authorized under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(b) A change involving a nonconforming use of land in excess of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
(c) A change involving a nonconforming use of an existing building or building with a
gross floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet or a floor area ratio
more than fifty (50) percent greater than that permitted in the district in which it is
located.
(d) A change involving a commercial or industrial use on a lot not previously used for a
commercial or industrial purpose.
(e) Any other application for a variance with respect to which the Planning Board
certified the Board of Zoning Appeal not later than the date of the public hearing
that the granting of such application would materially conflict with the planning
principles and policies adopted by the Planning Board.
10.34 In granting a variance the Board may attach such conditions, safeguards, and
limitations of time, use and other development features, such as those listed in Section
10-4
10.44, as are determined necessary to protect the surrounding neighborhood including
the continued existence of any particular structure, but excluding any conditions,
safeguards or limitations based upon the continued ownership of the land or structures
to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any owner.
10.35 If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date of
granting of such variance, they shall lapse and may be reestablished only after notice
and new hearing pursuant to this Section 10.30.
10.40 SPECIAL PERMITS
10.41 Granting Authority. Special permits may be granted for the Board of Zoning Appeal or
by the Planning Board as specified elsewhere in this Ordinance. Each of said boards
shall be considered a “special permit granting authority”.
10.42 Procedure. A special permit shall only be issued following a public hearing held within
sixty-five (65) days after filing of an application with the special permit granting
authority, a copy of which shall be given to the City Clerk by the applicant. Notice of
each application to the Board of Zoning Appeal for a special permit shall be transmitted
forthwith to the Planning Board which shall, within thirty-five (35) days of the receipt of
such notice transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeal a report accompanied by any
material, maps, or plans that will aid the latter Board in judging the application and in
determining special conditions and safeguards. The Board of Zoning Appeal shall not
render any decision on an application for a special permit until said report has been
received and considered or until the thirty-five (35) day period has expired without
receipt of the report, whichever is earlier. Failure by a special permit granting authority
to take final action upon an application for a special permit within ninety (90) days
following the date of public hearing on said application shall be deemed to be a grant
of the permit applied for.
10.42.1 Additional Notification Requirements. Any applicant for a variance or special permit
shall be required to erect and maintain in legible condition one or more public
notification panels at the site for which the variance or special permit relief is
requested. The required panels shall be secured by the applicant from the Department
of Inspectional Services for those permits issued by the Board of Zoning Appeal and
shall be secured from the Community Development Department for those permits
issued by the Planning Board. The location of any required panel shall be located on a
site plan included in the application documents, which location or locations shall be
subject to the approval of those respective departments; the mechanics of its
installation shall be described in those application documents. The following
requirements shall apply:
(a) Location and Number. Panels shall be securely mounted on the subject lot at the
street line or within the property, but in any case not more than twenty (20) feet
from the street line. However, wherever located, the panel(s) shall be visible,
easily identifiable, and legible to persons passing by on the public street, without
the necessity of trespass onto private property. For lots having street frontage of
two hundred (200) feet or less, one panel shall be installed, One additional panel
10-5
shall be installed for each additional five hundred (500) feet of street frontage. The
panels shall be exempt from any applicable limitation on accessory signs set forth
in Article 7.000.
(b) Schedule and Duration. The required panels shall be installed as required in this
Section 10.42.1 not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of the public
hearing. They shall be maintained in legible condition until a Notice of Decision
has been filed with the City Clerk by the permit or special permit granting authority.
Panels that are stolen, destroyed, or rendered illegible shall be promptly replaced,
and panels shall be promptly removed after the Notice of Decision has been filed.
(c) Contents of Panels. The text of the panel shall generally contain the name of the
petitioner; a description of the area or premises; street address or other
information adequate to identify the location or area subject of the permit petition;
the date, time and place of the public hearing; the subject matter of the hearing;
the nature of the action or relief requested; the place where the full application may
be inspected; case number of the application; the place where written comments
may be directed; the phone number of the municipal agency or contact person
where further information may be obtained. Reasonable modifications of the text
requirements of this paragraph c shall be permitted to enable the most important
information to be provided in the most legible form.
(d) Graphic and Construction Standards. Panels shall not be less than eighteen (18)
inches by twenty-four (24) inches in dimension; they may be larger. No text on the
panel shall be smaller than 12 point type. Panels shall be made of materials
adequately weather resistant and durable for the time they are required to be
posted.
10.43 Criteria. Special permits will normally be granted where specific provisions of this
Ordinance are met, except when particulars of the location or use, not generally true of
the district or of the uses permitted in it, would cause granting of such permit to be to
the detriment of the public interest because:
(a) It appears that requirements of this Ordinance cannot or will not be met, or
(b) traffic generated or patterns of access or egress would cause congestion, hazard,
or substantial change in established neighborhood character, or
(c) the continued operation of or the development of adjacent uses as permitted in the
Zoning Ordinance would be adversely affected by the nature of the proposed use,
or
(d) nuisance or hazard would be created to the detriment of the health, safety and/or
welfare of the occupant of the proposed use or the citizens of the City, or
(e) for other reasons, the proposed use would impair the integrity of the district or
adjoining district, or otherwise derogate from the intent and purpose of this
Ordinance, and
(f) the new use or building construction is inconsistent with the Urban Design
Objectives set forth in Section 19.30.
10-6
10.44 Conditions. In acting upon special permits the special permit granting authority shall
take into account the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance and, in order to
preserve community values, may impose conditions and safeguards deemed
necessary to protect the surrounding neighborhood, in addition to the applicable
requirements of this Ordinance, such as, but not limited to, the following:
(a) Front, side or rear yards greater than the minimum required by this Ordinance.
(b) Screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises
or from the street by specified walls, fences, planting, or other devices.
(c) Modification of the exterior features or appearance of the structure.
(d) Limitations of size, number of occupants, method or time or operation, or extent of
facilities.
(e) Requirement of number, design, and location of access drives or other traffic
features.
(f) Requirement of off street parking or other special features beyond the minimum
required by this or other applicable codes or regulations.
(g) Control of the number, location, size and lighting of signs.
10.45 Any development application requiring a special permit from the Planning Board that
contains elements requiring a special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeal may be
allowed by the Planning Board within the scope of the Planning Board special permit
and shall not require a separate application to the Board of Zoning Appeal.
10.46 Expiration. A special permit granted under this section shall lapse within two years, not
including such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal to the
Superior Court or to the Land Court as provided in Section 10.22 from the grant
thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause
or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construction was not begun by such date
except for good cause.
10.47 Procedure for Townhouses and Multifamily Dwellings. An application for a special
permit for a townhouse development or for a multifamily dwelling required by Section
4.31 shall also meet the requirements of this Subsection 10.47. Where this
Subsection and Subsection 10.42 are in conflict, this Subsection shall control.
10.47.1 Applications for special permits shall be accompanied by three copies of a
development plan containing the following graphic and written information:
(1) An accurately scaled map showing the existing conditions on the parcel on which
development is proposed and on lots abutting or directly across any street from
said parcel. Said map shall indicate property lines, existing structures and all trees
in excess of 3" caliper.
(2) Information concerning current land use of said parcels (including the number of
existing dwelling units).
(3) Photographs showing conditions on the development parcel at the time of
application and showing structures on abutting lots.
10-7
(4) A site plan of the development parcel, drawn to scale, showing proposed lot
subdivision, if any, the location of proposed buildings, retained and proposed
vegetation, location of parking spaces, driveways, proposed curb cuts and
walkways, proposed treatment of the perimeter of the parcel including techniques
and materials used (screens, fences, walls) and the location of required private
open space.
(5) Front, side and rear elevations for each structure on the lot indicating building
height and heights of buildings on abutting lots.
(6) Quantitative data on the proposed development including floor area ratio, floor
area per unit, number of bedrooms and the amount of private open space
allocated to each unit and reserved for common use of the residents.
(7) A list of any zoning violations which would customarily require variances from the
requirements of this Ordinance.
(8) A Tree Study, certified complete by the City Arborist, as required by the Tree
Protection Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, Chapter 8.66.
10.47.2 No application shall be accepted by the Planning Board until all of the information
required in Subsection 10.47.1 is completed and included in the development plan.
Any changes in the development plan by the applicant following submittal of the
application, other than those which might be negotiated at the pubic hearing, shall
require resubmittal of an application for a special permit.
10.47.3 Upon receipt of the application and development plans, the Planning Board shall
transmit forthwith one copy of the plan to the Traffic Department. Within forty-five (45)
days of receipt of the plan, the Traffic Department shall review said plan and submit a
report and recommendation on the development proposal to the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall not render any decision on an application for a special permit for
a townhouse development or for a multifamily dwelling subject to those requirements
until said report has been received and considered or until the forty-five (45) day period
has expired without the receipt of such report, which ever is earlier.
10.47.4 Criteria for approval of Townhouses and Multifamily Dwellings. In reviewing
applications for townhouse developments and multifamily dwelling, the special permit
granting authority shall consider and address the following site plan criteria as
applicable:
(1) Key features of the natural landscape should be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible. Tree removal should be minimized and other natural features of the site,
such as slopes, should be maintained.
(2) New buildings should be related sensitively to the existing built environment. The
location, orientation and massing of structures in the development should avoid
overwhelming the existing buildings in the vicinity of the development. Visual and
functional disruptions should be avoided.
10-8
(3) The location, arrangement, and landscaping of open space should provide some
visual benefits to abutters and passersby as well as functional benefits to
occupants of the development.
(4) Parking areas, internal roadways and access/egress points should be safe and
convenient.
(5) Parking area landscaping should minimize the intrusion of onsite parking so that it
does not substantially detract from the use and enjoyment of either the proposed
development or neighboring properties.
(6) Service facilities such as trash collection apparatus and utility boxes should be
located so that they are convenient for resident, yet unobtrusive.
10.47.41 Additional Criteria for Townhouses and Multifamily Dwellings in Industry A and A-2
districts, Industry B, B-1 and B-2 districts, and the Industry C district. In addition to the
criteria set forth in Section 11.47.4 above, the following shall be considered by the
Planning Board in these industrial districts:
(1) On balance the location is appropriate for the proposed residential uses, because:
(a) Residential use at the proposed location will not preempt space particularly
suitable for nonresidential uses; and
(b) Existing or anticipated uses on nearby premises will not make residential use
inappropriate because of external impacts such as noise, glare, odors or
safety concerns; and
(c) The proximity of the proposal to other residential development or reasonably
anticipated residential development in the future, helps to establish an amount
of housing sufficient to ensure a viable, supportive and healthy residential
environment; or
(d) The proposal will act as a transition to neighboring residential districts and
uses; or
(e) The proposal is of sufficient scale to create its own supportive residential
environment.
(2) The proposed design includes amenities appropriate to provide a supportive
service environment for the anticipated residential uses.
(3) Other potential benefits can be identified, including:
(a) The proposed residential use may make feasible the preservation of an
historic structure;
(b) The proposed residential use and nearby commercial uses are linked through
work/live arrangements or in other ways.
10.48 As expressly authorized in Section 9 of the Zoning Act M.G.L., Ch 40A, the following
Special Permits, which authorize increases in the permissible density of population or
10-9
intensity of a particular use in the proposed development, shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 11.200 of this Ordinance.
Section 6.35 Reduction in required parking for nonresidential development
Section 20.108 Divergence from dimensional requirements, North Massachusetts
Avenue Overlay District
Section 20.54.2(2) Additional height, Harvard Square Overlay District
Section 20.54.4(2) Waiver of parking and loading requirements, Harvard Square
Overlay District
Section 20.54.5(b) Exemption from yard requirements, Harvard Square Overlay
District
Section 20.63.5 Parkway Overlay District
Section 20.63.7 Divergence from dimensional requirements, Parkway Overlay District
Section 20.95.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio
Section 20.95.2 Maximum Permitted Height
Section 20.95.34 Waiver of Yard Requirements
Section 20.95.4 Dwelling Unit Density
Section 20.304.2(b),(c) Additional height, Central Square Overlay District
Section 20.304.4 Waiver of setback requirements, Central Square Overlay District
Section 20.304.6 Waiver of parking requirements, Central Square Overlay District
Section 17.13.1(b) Additional FAR, Special District I
Section 17.17 Transfer of Development Rights, Special District I
Article 13.000 PUD Districts, all permits.
10.49 Any special permit authorizing new construction or substantial rehabilitation of a
building totaling 25,000 square feet or more shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 22.20 of the Zoning Ordinance.
10.50 REPETITIVE PETITIONS
10.51 No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Board
of Zoning Appeal or Planning Board shall be acted favorably upon within two years
after the date of final unfavorable action unless:
(a) Four members of the Board of Appeal or five members of the Planning Board,
depending upon which board took the original action, vote that there are specific
and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action
was based, and describe such changes in the record of its proceedings;
(b) All but one of the members of the Planning Board consents thereto; and
(c) Notice is given to parties in interest of time and place for the proceedings on such
reconsideration findings.
The granting of “leave to withdraw” after application for a variance or special permit has
been advertised shall be considered unfavorable action.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
11-1
ARTICLE 11.000 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
11.10 TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT
11.20 DELETED
11.30 FAST ORDER FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
11.40 DELETED See Article 22.70
11.50 DELETED See Article 20.000
11.60 DELETED See Article 20.000
11.70 DELETED See Article 20.000
11.80 EMPLOYMENT PLAN COMPLIANCE PROCEDURE
11.90 DELETED
11.100 DELETED See Article 20.000
11.200 AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
11.300 DELETED See Article 20.000
11.400 DELETED See Article 20.000
11.500 PLANNING OVERLAY REQUIREMENTS
11.700 DELETED See Article 20.700
11.800 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
11.10 TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT
11.11 Statement of Purpose. This Section 11.10 has been adopted to encourage the
development of one and two family townhouses. The townhouse development use
created herein is intended to promote development designs that are compatible with
traditional neighborhood development patterns and sensitive to existing streetscapes,
to encourage a townhouse pattern of development where higher densities are
permitted and to discourage the demolition of existing residential structures as well as
the excessive infill of townhouses on lots already containing residential structures.
Provisions for the townhouse development use are intended to overcome obstacles to
the development of one and two family townhouses, by providing special incentives
where appropriate. This section provides guidelines for both as of right and townhouse
developments which require special permit review. The distinction allows for
expeditious review and approvals for smaller scale infill townhouse developments,
while ensuring detailed examination of the site and building plans for larger
developments and consideration of their neighborhood impacts.
11.12 Applicability of Regulations. The development standards specified in this Section
11.10 are applicable only to townhouse developments and do not change the
development standards for other uses in the Residence, Office and Business, and
Industry A-1 districts. Townhouse developments which meet the requirements
specified in Sections 11.14, 11.15, and 11.16 shall be allowed in Residence B, C, C-1,
11-2
C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, C-3B, Office and Business and Industry A-1
districts as follows:
11.12.1 Construction of a townhouse development containing six (6) or more dwelling units in a
Residence B district and Residence C district shall require a special permit.
11.12.2 Construction of a townhouse development containing twelve (12) or more dwelling
units in a Residence C-1, Residence C-1A, Office 1, Office 2, Business A-1, Industry
A-1 or Business A-3 district shall require a special permit.
11.12.3 Construction of a townhouse development in a Residence B, C, C-1, Residence C-1A,
Office 1, Business A-1 or Business A-3 district which contains fewer units than
specified in Section 11.12.1 or 11.12.2 shall require a special permit if both of the
following conditions pertain to the development:
(1) another permit for townhouse development has been granted within the twelve
(12) month period immediately preceding the date of permit application for the lot
on which the development would be located or on an abutting lot;
(2) the townhouse development for which the permit is being sought would increase
the total number of dwelling units on said lot(s) to the threshold specified in Section
11.12.1 or 11.12.2.
11.12.4 Construction of all townhouse development in Industry A and A-2 districts, Industry B,
B-1 and B-2 district, and the Industry C district shall require a special permit granted by
the Planning Board where any one of the following conditions exist:
1) The development exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area;
2) The lot area per dwelling unit proposed is less than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet in an Industry C district six hundred (600) square feet in an
Industry A district, or three hundred (300) square feet in an Industry A-2, Industry
B, or Industry B-1 district; or
3) Twelve units or more dwelling units are proposed where any portion of the
development is located within one hundred (100) feet or a Residence A-1, A-2, B,
C, or C-1 district.
11.12.5 Where a townhouse development is constructed on two or more abutting lots, the
requirements applicable to the development shall be determined as if the parcel were a
single lot.
11.12.6 Where a townhouse development is constructed on a lot or lots with other buildings
existing prior to such development, the dimensional requirements of this Section 11.10
shall apply to those structures or portions of structures on the lot(s) which constitute
the townhouse development.
11.12.7 Where a townhouse development is proposed on a lot on which a preferably preserved
significant building, as determined by the Cambridge Historical Commission under the
11-3
provisions of the Demolition Ordinance #965, has been demolished within the five (5)
years immediately preceding the application for a building permit or a special permit or
where such building is proposed to be demolished to permit the townhouse
development under the provisions of this Section 11.10, the provisions of Subsections
11.14, 11.15, and 11.15.1 - 11.15.4 shall not apply; the townhouse development shall
in such circumstances be subject to the dimensional requirements normally applicable
in the district.
11.13 Special Permit Granting Authority. The Planning Board shall be the special permit
granting authority for any townhouse development included in Section 11.12.1,
11.12.2, or 11.12.3. The Board of Zoning Appeal shall be the special permit granting
authority for special permits required by Sections 11.15.5, 11.16.2, and 11.16.4 for any
townhouse development which does not require a special permit from the Planning
Board.
11.14 Subdivided Lots. A developer, or any subsequent owner, who desires to subdivide a
townhouse development must record a subdivision plan with the Registry of Deeds of
Middlesex County. A copy of the recorded subdivision plan must also be filed with the
Building Commissioner. Subdivided lots may be less than five thousand (5,000)
square feet and must include an individual dwelling, together with front and rear yards
or rights to yards in common areas.
11.15 Dimensional Standards for Townhouse Development. The following development
controls apply to the parcel of land upon which a townhouse development is
constructed and are not applicable to the initial subdivision of the townhouse parcel
into individual lots. The townhouse development parcel as a whole must conform to
these controls. But once satisfied for the total parcel, the controls are waived for the
subsequent subdivision into individual lots. The required minimum lot size for a
townhouse development shall conform to the existing regulations for the district in
which the townhouse development is constructed.
However, modifications to the townhouse development after a subdivision plan has
been recorded in the Registry of Deeds shall be subject to the dimensional standards
as set forth in this Section 11.15 applied to the individual lot lines of the subdivided lots;
modifications that do not so conform may be permitted as set forth below:
a. For any townhouse development, after issuance of a building permit, projecting
eaves, chimneys, bay windows, and balconies that do not project more than three
and one half (3 1/2) feet.
b. For any townhouse development for which a special permit has been granted by
the Planning Board, modifications specifically enumerated in the special permit.
For those modifications not so enumerated, or where the special permit fails to
specifically enumerate allowed modifications, after issuance of a new special
permit (a Major Amendment to the original special permit) by the Planning Board to
allow the proposed modification(s).
11-4
c. For any townhouse development originally constructed as of right, after issuance
of a special permit by the Board of Zoning Appeal.
Where a special permit is required in paragraphs b. and c. above, all owners of lots
that together constitute the original townhouse development parcel shall receive notice
of the special permit public hearing, in the manner provided for in Chapter 40A for
parties of interest; such owners shall be considered parties in interest, however, only
as they are so defined in Section 11, Chapter 40A.
11.15.1 Minimum Lot Width. In a townhouse development there shall be no minimum lot width,
except that in Residence B, Residence C, and Residence C-1 districts the minimum lot
width applicable in the district shall apply.
11.15.2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. In a townhouse development, the maximum permitted
floor area ratio in districts where townhouse developments are permitted shall be as
normally applicable in the district.
11.15.3 Maximum Height. In a townhouse development the maximum permitted height shall
be four habitable stories and the maximum height of the cornice line shall be thirty (30)
feet. Any part of a townhouse structure which projects above the cornice line shall be
set below an imaginary inclined plane beginning at the thirty (30) foot cornice line on
any facade of the structure facing a street or facing any lot line abutting a residentially
zoned lot, and thereafter rising at a forty-five degree (45°) angle. However, portions of
the building may rise above the imaginary inclined plane provided the area of those
portions above the inclined plane projected onto the vertical plane does not exceed ten
(10) percent of the area of the vertical plane lying between the thirty (30) foot cornice
line and the maximum height of the structure, calculated for and limited to each
separate plane.
However, the maximum height of any portion of a townhouse development shall be
forty (40) feet, except that in a Residence B district the maximum height shall be thirtyfive
(35) feet.
11.15.31 In any zoning district that limits building height to thirty-five (35) feet or less, the
maximum permitted height in a Townhouse Development shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
11.15.32 In all other districts the maximum permitted height in a townhouse development shall
be four habitable stores and the maximum height of the cornice line shall be thirty (30)
feet. Any part of a townhouse structure which projects above the cornice line shall be
set below an imaginary inclined plane beginning at the thirty (30) cornice line on any
façade of the structure facing a street or facing any lot line abutting a residentially
zoned lot, and thereafter rising at a forty-five (45) degree angle. However, portions of
the building may rise above the imaginary inclined plane provided the are of those
portions above the inclined plane projected into the vertical plane does not exceed ten
(10) percent of the area of the vertical plane lying between the thirty (30) foot cornice
line and the maximum height of the structure, calculated for and limited to each
separate plane.
11-5
However, the maximum height of any portion of a townhouse development shall be
forty (40) feet, except that in a Residence B district the maximum height shall be thirtyfive
(35) feet.
11.15.4 Yard Requirements. The yard requirements in the district shall be applicable for each
townhouse development.
11.15.5 Minimum Private Open Space. In a townhouse development the minimum ratio of
private open space as defined in Article 2.000 to lot area shall be twenty-five (25)
percent or that amount required in the district, whichever is greater.
(1) The minimum dimension of any area counted toward required private open space
shall be fifteen (15) feet. A ten (10) foot minimum open space dimension may be
allowed on special permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority upon its
determination that the peculiarities of the parcel warrant such a reduction, that the
smaller dimension will result in a superior site design, and that the total amount of
private open space will not be reduced.
(2) Where it is proposed to subdivide a townhouse development in accordance with
the requirements of Section 11.14 then the minimum ratio of private open space to
subdivided lot area shall be that required for the Townhouse Development as a
whole.
Where the townhouse development is not to be subdivided into individual lots and
therefore the private open space in a townhouse development is not to be provided
on subdivided lots but is to be provided on a common basis to be held in joint
ownership by a group of townhouse owners such as a cooperative or an
association, then the minimum ratio of private space to the total lot area in the
townhouse development shall be that required in this Section 11.15.5.
11.16 Parking Standards for Townhouse Development
A Townhouse Development shall be subject to the requirements of Article 6.000
except as they may be modified below.
11.16.1 One off street parking space per dwelling unit in a townhouse development shall be
provided unless a special permit is granted in accordance with Section 11.16.2(4)
below.
11.16.2 Required parking spaces may be located as follows:
(1) Within the townhouse structure or a separate structure on the parcel.
(2) On a lot in accordance with the requirements of Sections 6.20 and 6.40.
(3) On lots not more than two hundred (200) feet away from the building to be served
subject to the conditions set forth in Sections 6.20 and 6.40.
(4) On street in the vicinity of the townhouses if the special permit granting authority
determines that the lack of off street parking for the townhouse development will
not unreasonably reduce the quantity of on street parking in the area. Applicants
11-6
for an exception from off street parking shall submit a report on parking usage and
availability in the vicinity of the development with their permit application.
11.16.3 Landscaping of On Grade Open Parking
(1) On grade open parking areas should be arranged and landscaped to properly
screen cars from adjacent properties as well as from streets and sidewalks and to
diminish the negative environmental impacts of multiple automobiles parked on
site in residential neighborhoods.
(2) Twenty-five (25) percent of the area devoted to on grade open parking shall be
landscaped. The area devoted to on grade open parking shall be that portion of
the lot containing parking spaces, driveways, and landscaped area located
between or adjacent to parking spaces and drives. No portion of the lot required
as a setback between a parking space and a building or a lot line shall be counted
in computing the twenty-five (25) percent landscaping requirement.
(3) Where more than one “area devoted to on grade open parking” exists within a
townhouse development twenty-five (25) percent of each such area shall be
landscaped.
(4) For every two (2) on grade open parking spaces or fraction thereof there shall be a
minimum of one three (3) inch caliper tree located within the area devoted to on
grade open parking.
(a) The special permit granting authority may grant a special permit for a
reduction of this planting requirement upon its determination that such a
reduction will not prevent suitable screening of on grade parking and will
result in a superior site plan. Any reduction shall require a special permit.
(b) The trees required for the landscaping of on site parking areas - whether
such trees are coniferous or deciduous, flowering or nonflowering - should be
tolerant to urban environmental conditions; able to screen parking areas by
virtue of their size, form, density of foliage and spread; and easy to maintain.
A suggested list of trees which meet these criteria is:
Deciduous. Botanical name (common name)
Acer platanoides (Norway Maple); Acer rubrum (Red Maple); Acer
saccharum (Sugar Maple); Carpinus betulus (European Hornbeam); Fraxinus
americana (White Ash); Ginkgo biloba (Ginkgo); Gledistsia triacanthos
inermis (Thornless Honey Locusts); Liquidambar styraciflua (Sweet Gum);
Liriodendron tulipfera (Tulip Tree); Platanus occidentlis (Syamore); Quercus
coccinea (Scarlet Oak); Quercus palustris (Pin Oak); Quercus rubra (Red
Oak); Tilia cordate greenspire (Littleleaf Linden); Tilia europea (Common
Linden).
(5) On grade open parking areas located in front of the townhouse structure(s) shall
maintain the visual definition of the front lot line and separation of public from
private space in keeping with the appearance and character of the existing
11-7
streetscape. Such definition shall be achieved by using a change of ground
materials at the front lot line and by installing at least one of the following: fences,
plantings, walls, or stone monuments which mark the transition from street or
sidewalk to residential lot.
11.17 Additional Requirements
(1) Fences may not exceed four (4) feet in height in any front yard unless otherwise
permitted by the special permit granting authority.
(2) Any townhouse unit directly abutting a street or streets shall have a principal
entrance on a facade facing a street unless otherwise permitted by the special
permit granting authority.
11.30 FAST ORDER FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
11.31 In considering applications for Special Permits for Fast Order Food Establishments
and Automobile Oriented Fast Order Food Service Establishments, the Board of
Zoning Appeal shall find, in addition to the other criteria specified in Section 10.40, that
the following requirements are met:
(a) the operation of the establishment shall not:
(1) create traffic problems,
(2) reduce available parking,
(3) threaten the public safety in the streets and sidewalks, or
(4) encourage or produce double parking on the adjacent public street(s),
(b) the physical design, including color and use of materials, of the establishment shall
be compatible with and sensitive to the visual and physical characteristics of other
buildings, public spaces and uses in the particular location;
(c) the establishment fulfills a need for such a service in the neighborhood or in the
city;
(d) the establishment will attract patrons primarily from walk in trade as opposed to
drive in or automobile related trade; however, should the Board specifically find
that the district or area within which the establishment is proposed to be located
does not have significant pedestrian traffic, this requirement need not be met.
(e) the establishment shall, to the greatest extent feasible, utilize biodegradable
materials in packaging the food and in the utensils and other items provided for
consumption thereof;
(f) the establishment shall provide convenient, suitable and well marked waste
receptacles to encourage patrons properly to dispose of all packaging materials,
utensils and other items provided with the sale of food; and
(g) the establishment complies with all state and local requirements applicable to
ingress, egress, and use of all facilities on the premises for handicapped and
disabled persons.
11-8
11.32 Establishments seeking to relocate their operations inside the boundary line of the
zoning district in which the establishment is located shall not be required to obtain a
special permit if both of the following conditions will be met.
11.32.1 The new site shall be within five hundred (500) feet of the original site of the
establishment.
11.32.2 There will be no increase in the gross floor area of the establishment at the new site.
11.33 A Special Permit issued for a Fast Order Food Establishment hereunder may be
utilized only by the owner or operator of such establishment as described in the
application documents or as those documents may be modified by the conditions of
the Special Permit as granted.
In granting a Special Permit under this Section 11.30 the Board shall specifically detail
in its decision the kind of Fast Order Food for which the Permit is granted and shall
also identify those other aspects of the establishment as outlined in the application
documents for which alterations will require the issuance of a new Special Permit.
11.40 DELETED (See Article 22.70)
11.50 DELETED (See Article 20.000)
11.60 DELETED (See Article 20.000)
11.70 DELETED (See Article 20.000)
11.80 EMPLOYMENT COMPLIANCE PROCEDURE
11.81 Purpose. As specified in Section 1.30, one of the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance is
encouragement of the most appropriate use of land throughout the City, including
appropriate economic development. Through amendments to this Ordinance and by
related actions the City has established a program for promoting new economic
development activity in underutilized, industrially zoned districts. As part of its
economic development program, the City seeks to promote development which will
provide expanded job opportunities for unemployed and underemployed citizens of
Cambridge. It is the purpose of this Section 11.80 to ensure that, prior to initiating
construction of new employment generating land uses, development entities
demonstrate that they have considered and responded to the “Cambridge Citizens
Employment Plan.”
11.82 Applicability. The provisions of this Section 11.80 shall apply to new economic
development activity in the Alewife Revitalization District and the South Cambridgeport
Revitalization Area and in other major economic revitalization areas designated by City
Council through amendments to this Subsection 11.82. The Alewife Revitalization
District shall be that area contained within the comprehensive Alewife Area rezoning
amendment ordained on June 16, 1980. The South Cambridgeport Revitalization Area
shall be that area contained within the comprehensive South Cambridgeport Rezoning
11-9
Amendment as ordained by City Council on February 10, 1992. For purposes of this
Section 11.80, the following shall be considered new economic activity:
11.82.1 Construction of any new building which will be a principal use under Subsections 4.31i-2
(hotel/motel), 4.34 (office and laboratory), 4.35 (retail business and consumer service),
4.36 (drive-in retail and service), 4.37 (light industry, wholesale business and storage) and
4.38 (heavy industry) of the table of use regulations.
11.82.2 Expansion or alteration of an existing building occupied by a principal use included in
one of the use categories listed in Subsection 11.82.1, provided that such expansion or
alteration will increase the gross floor area of the building by five thousand (5000)
square feet or more.
11.83 Employment Opportunity Certification. When applying for a building permit for
applicable development as specified in Subsection 11.82, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the Superintendent of Buildings a certification from the City Manager, or
his designee, that the applicant has prepared and filed with the City a statement
indicating how the proposed development will comply with the most recently adopted
Cambridge Citizens Employment Plan.
11.200 INCENTIVE ZONING AND INCLUSIONARY HOUSING
11.201 Purposes.
The purposes of Sections 11.200 to 11.206 are to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare by accommodating the expansion of commercial and residential opportunities
throughout the city; by providing for a full range of housing choices throughout the City for
households of all incomes, ages, and sizes in order to meet the City’s goal of preserving
diversity by mitigating the impacts of commercial and residential development on the
availability and cost of housing and especially housing affordable to low and moderate
income households; by increasing the production of affordable housing to meet
anticipated housing and employment needs throughout the city; by providing a
mechanism through which commercial and residential development can contribute in a
direct way to increasing the supply of affordable housing in exchange for a greater density
or intensity of development than that otherwise permitted as a matter of right; and by
establishing standards for the use of such contributions from the application of incentive
zoning and inclusionary housing provisions.
11.202 Incentive Zoning. The developer or owner of an Incentive Project shall make a Housing
Contribution in accordance with this Section 11.202.
(a) Calculation of Housing Contribution. The Housing Contribution shall be calculated by
multiplying the Gross Floor Area devoted to the uses that qualify the new development as
an Incentive Project by the Housing Contribution Rate effective at the time the
Superintendent of Buildings issues the first building permit for the Incentive Project. If a
building permit is not required, the Housing Contribution Rate shall be the rate effective at
the time the Housing Contribution is provided.
11-10
(b) Housing Contribution Rate. The Housing Contribution Rate effective on September 28,
2015 shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per square foot of Gross Floor Area devoted to the
uses that qualify the new development as an Incentive Project. The effective rate shall be
subject to annual escalation equal to annual percentage increases in the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) Housing Index for Boston-Brockton-Nashua, MA-NH-ME-CT or similar index
to reflect changes in dollar values over time; however, annual decreases in CPI shall not
cause the contribution rate to be decreased. In addition, on September 28 each year from
2016 to 2018 inclusive, the Housing Contribution Rate shall increase by one dollar
($1.00). The table below sets forth the Housing Contribution Rate over time.
Effective Date Housing Contribution Rate
September 28, 2015 $12.00 per square foot.
September 28, 2016 (Annual
Adjustment)
$13.00 per square foot.
November 16, 2016 (CPI
Adjustment)
$13.50 per square foot.
(c) Timing of Payment. The developer or owner of an Incentive Project shall provide the
Housing Contribution to the Managing Trustee of the Affordable Housing Trust or its
designee, who shall certify to the Superintendent of Buildings that the requirements of this
Section are met prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the Incentive Project. If
the Gross Floor Area of an Incentive Project is subsequently increased accommodating
uses that qualify as Incentive Project uses, then notwithstanding the size of the increase,
a Housing Contribution calculated in the manner set forth in this Section shall be provided
for every square foot of that increase.
(d) Reevaluation of Housing Contribution Rate. The City shall initiate a reevaluation of the
Housing Contribution Rate and any other aspect of these Incentive Zoning Provisions at
an interval of no less than three (3) years from the time the rate was last amended by the
City Council. Such reevaluation shall include a report provided to the City Council
reviewing economic factors including but not limited to development activity, commercial
rents per square foot, employment growth, housing trends measured in terms of, but not
limited to, vacancy rates, production statistics, and prices for dwelling units, and the nexus
between Incentive Projects and housing.
11.203 Inclusionary Housing.
11.203.1 Applicability.
(a) Except as otherwise provided, this Section 11.203 shall apply in all zoning districts
throughout the city.
(b) The requirements of this Section 11.203 shall apply to any Inclusionary Housing
Project issued a special permit or, if no special permit has been issued, a building
permit on or after December 1, 2016, (the date of the first advertisement of the most
recent amendment to this Section 11.203)
11-11
(c) For any Inclusionary Housing Project that has been issued a Special Permit for a
Planned Unit Development by the Planning Board prior to December 1, 2016, (the
date of the first advertisement of the most recent amendment to this Section 11.203),
an amendment to that Special Permit that relates to modification of the street layout
or other aspects of the Final Development Plan directly resulting from a delay,
cancellation, or change in a state controlled infrastructure project shall be subject to
the Inclusionary Housing provisions in effect at the time of the issuance of the original
Special Permit or any amendment thereto issued prior to December 1, 2016, (the
date of the first advertisement of the most recent amendment to this Section
11.203.) In no case shall this provision allow an increase of gross floor area, an
increase in the number of units above what is allowed by the Special Permit, or an
increase of the maximum height allowed by zoning for the Project.
11.203.2 Inclusionary Housing Requirement.
(a) For Inclusionary Housing Projects issued a special permit or, if no special permit has
been issued, a building permit on or after December 1, 2016 (the date of the first
advertisement of the most recent amendment to this Section 11.203) but on or before
June 30, 2017, fifteen percent (15%) of the total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area within
the project shall be devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units.
(b) For Inclusionary Housing Projects issued a special permit or, if no special permit has
been issued, a building permit after June 30, 2017, twenty percent (20%) of the total
Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area within the project shall be devoted to Affordable Dwelling
Units.
(c) The City shall initiate a reevaluation of the Inclusionary Housing Requirement at an
interval of no more than five (5) years from the time the Inclusionary Housing
Requirement was last amended. Such reevaluation shall include a report provided to
the City Council reviewing factors such as changes in demographic characteristics
and residential development activity, housing trends measured in terms of, but not
limited to, vacancy rates, production statistics, prices for dwelling units, and
affordability, and the relationship between Inclusionary Housing Projects and all
housing in Cambridge. The Community Development Department shall also conduct
an annual review and report on the Inclusionary Housing Program.
11.203.3 Standards for Providing Affordable Dwelling Units Created through Inclusionary Housing.
(a) Affordable Dwelling Units shall be provided on-site.
(b) Affordable Dwelling Units shall be similar in size, layout, construction materials,
fixtures, amenities, and interior and exterior finishes to comparable non-Affordable
Dwelling Units in the project.
(c) Affordable Dwelling Units shall have similar access to common areas, facilities, and
services as that enjoyed by comparable non-Affordable Dwelling Units in the project
including but not limited to outdoor spaces, amenity spaces, storage, parking, bicycle
parking facilities, and resident services.
11-12
(d) Affordable Dwelling Units shall be dispersed throughout the project rather than
concentrated on particular floors, within sections of a building, or within particular
buildings in a project with multiple buildings.
(e) Except as specified below for Family-Sized Dwelling Units, the proportionate amounts
of Affordable Dwelling Units defined by size and number of bedrooms within the total
amount of Affordable Dwelling Units shall be similar to the proportionate amounts of
non-Affordable Dwelling Units defined by size and number of bedrooms within the
total amount of non-Affordable Dwelling Units in the project.
(f) The ratio of Family-Sized Affordable Dwelling Units to all Affordable Dwelling Units
shall be greater than or equal to the ratio of non-Affordable Family-Sized Dwelling
Units to all non-Affordable Dwelling Units in the project, notwithstanding that in some
cases this may result in a smaller proportion of Affordable Dwelling Units that are not
Family-Sized Dwelling Units in the project and a smaller proportion of total Affordable
Dwelling Units in the project in order to meet the required percentage of Dwelling Unit
Net Floor Area devoted to Affordable Dwelling Units in the project.
(g) Townhouse or multifamily residential projects of at least thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet of Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area shall provide Family-Sized Affordable
Dwelling Units at a ratio of at least one dwelling unit per every six thousand (6,000)
square feet of required Affordable Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area in the project,
rounded to the nearest whole unit with fractions of 0.5 unit or more rounded up and
fractions of less than 0.5 unit rounded down, or the ratio derived from paragraph (f)
above, whichever is greater.
(h) The ratio of rental to owner-occupied Affordable Dwelling Units shall mirror the ratio of
rental to owner-occupied non-Affordable Dwelling Units in the project except that no
Affordable Dwelling Units shall be rental Affordable Dwelling Units where a majority of
all dwelling units in the project are initially offered for sale.
(i) In cases where the owner and the Community Development Department agree that
the above standards, as applied, result in a total Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area of all
Affordable Dwelling Units that is less than the Affordable Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area
required to be provided pursuant to the Inclusionary Housing Requirement, the
remainder of the Inclusionary Housing Requirement shall be met through a monetary
contribution to the Affordable Housing Trust equal to the amount of subsidy
necessary to create an equivalent amount of Affordable Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area
in a project assisted by the Affordable Housing Trust. The Affordable Housing Trust
shall periodically provide to the Community Development Department a report on
projects it has assisted from which the Community Development Department shall
calculate the amount of subsidy necessary to create a square foot of Dwelling Unit
Net Floor Area in an affordable housing project assisted by the Affordable Housing
Trust. Such calculation may be adjusted by the Community Development Department
from time to time. Prior to issuance of a building permit for the project, the Community
Development Department shall multiply the calculated per-square-foot amount by the
outstanding Affordable Dwelling Unit Net Floor Area necessary to satisfy the
Inclusionary Housing Requirement to determine the necessary monetary contribution,
11-13
which shall be made prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the
project.
11.203.4 Standards for Eligibility, Rent, Initial Sale Price, and Parking Fees for Affordable Dwelling
Units Created through Inclusionary Housing.
(a) Affordable Dwelling Units shall be rented or sold only to Eligible Households, with
preference given to Cambridge residents, in accordance with standards and
procedures related to selection, transfers, asset limits, and marketing established by
the Community Development Department.
(b) Affordable Dwelling Units shall be created and conveyed subject to recorded
covenants guaranteeing the permanent availability of the Affordable Dwelling Units
for Eligible Households.
(c) For rental Affordable Dwelling Units:
(i) The gross household income of an Eligible Household upon initial
occupancy shall be at least fifty percent (50%) and no more than eighty
percent (80%) of AMI. A gross household income less than fifty percent
(50%) of AMI may be permitted in the case of an Eligible Household having
a rental subsidy allowing it to pay a rent equivalent to that paid by an Eligible
Household with a gross household income within the range set forth above.
(ii) Rent, including utilities and any other fees routinely charged to tenants and
approved by the Community Development Department, shall not exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the gross household income of the Eligible
Household occupying the Affordable Dwelling Unit, except that in the case
of Affordable Studio Dwelling Units, rent shall not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the gross household income of the Eligible Household
occupying the Affordable Dwelling Unit.
(iii) After initial occupancy, the gross household income of an Eligible
Household shall be verified annually to determine continued eligibility and
rent, in accordance with policies, standards, and procedures established by
the Community Development Department.
(iv) An Eligible Household may continue to rent an Affordable Dwelling Unit
after initial occupancy even if the Eligible Household’s gross household
income exceeds eighty percent (80%) of AMI, but if the Eligible Household’s
gross household income exceeds one hundred percent (100%) of AMI, or a
percentage promulgated in a regulation by the Community Development
Department from time to time, for more than one year after that Eligible
Household’s gross household income has been verified to exceed such
percentage, the dwelling unit shall no longer qualify as an Affordable
Dwelling Unit and either the dwelling unit must be rented to a new Eligible
Household or a comparable non-Affordable Dwelling Unit in the project
must become an Affordable Dwelling Unit.
11-14
(v) An Eligible Household may continue to rent an Affordable Dwelling Unit
after initial occupancy even if the Eligible Household’s gross household
income falls below fifty percent (50%) of AMI, but the Eligible Household
shall pay a rent that is no less than thirty percent (30%) of forty percent
(40%) of AMI or, in the case of an Affordable Studio Dwelling Unit, the
Eligible Household shall pay a rent that is no less than twenty-five percent
(25%) of forty percent (40%) of AMI.
(vi) Where an optional parking fee exists, it shall not exceed the lesser of the
following amounts for Affordable Dwelling Units:
(vii) an amount calculated by applying to the rent of the Affordable Dwelling Unit
the ratio of optional parking fee to rent for comparable non-Affordable
Dwelling Units with the lowest non-affordable rent in the project, or
(viii) an amount which, when added to the rent for an Affordable Dwelling Unit,
shall not exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the renting Eligible
Household’s gross household income or, in the case of an Affordable
Studio Dwelling Unit, twenty-eight percent (28%) of the renting Eligible
Household’s gross household income.
(ix) Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in (i) through (vi) above, an
owner may voluntarily choose to charge a lower rent than as provided
herein for Affordable Dwelling Units or to rent Affordable Dwelling Units to
Eligible Households with lower gross household incomes than as provided
herein.
(d) For owner-occupied Affordable Dwelling Units:
(i) The gross household income of an Eligible Household upon initial occupancy
shall be no more than one hundred percent (100%) of AMI.
(ii) The initial sale price of an Affordable Dwelling Unit shall be determined to
ensure that the monthly housing payment (which shall include debt service at
prevailing mortgage loan interest rates, utilities, condominium or related fees,
insurance, real estate taxes, and parking fees, if any) shall not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of ninety percent (90%) of monthly AMI, except that in the
case of an Affordable Studio Dwelling Unit, the monthly housing payment
shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of ninety percent (90%) of monthly
AMI.
11.203.5 Relaxation of Dimensional Requirements for Inclusionary Housing Projects.
The following relaxations of the dimensional requirements in any zoning district, including
base or overlay zoning districts, shall be permitted as-of-right for an Inclusionary Housing
Project:
(a) The Gross Floor Area permitted by the applicable zoning may be increased by thirty
percent (30%), as long as such additional Gross Floor Area is used for residential
uses not including hotel or motel use.
11-15
(b) The number of dwelling units permitted by the applicable zoning through rules for
minimum lot area per dwelling unit or other applicable rules may be increased by
thirty percent (30%).
(c) The additional Gross Floor Area or dwelling units permitted herein shall be counted
toward the determination of any applicable threshold triggering the requirement of a
special permit, including but not limited to Section 19.20 Project Review Special
Permit, Section 4.26 Multifamily Special Permit, and Section 11.10 Townhouse
Development Special Permit.
11.204 Implementation of Incentive Zoning and Inclusionary Housing.
(a) The City Manager shall have the authority to promulgate regulations for the
implementation of the provisions of Sections 11.200 to 11.205. There shall be a thirty
day review period, including a public meeting, to receive public comments on draft
regulations before final promulgation.
(b) The Community Development Department may develop standards and procedures
appropriate to and consistent with the provisions of Sections 11.200 to 11.205.
11.205 Enforcement of Incentive Zoning and Inclusionary Housing.
The Community Development Department shall certify in writing to the Superintendent of
Buildings that all applicable provisions of Sections 11.200 to 11.205 have been met
before issuance of any building permit for any Incentive Project or Inclusionary Housing
Project, and shall further certify in writing to the Superintendent of Buildings that all
documents have been filed and all actions taken necessary to fulfill the requirements of
Sections 11.200 to 11.205 before the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any
such project.
11.206 Affordable Housing Trust.
The entity “Cambridge Affordable Housing Trust Fund” was established by Chapter 482 of
the Acts of 1991, and has been thereafter identified and known as the Cambridge
Affordable Housing Trust or the Affordable Housing Trust.
11.206.1 Board of Trustees.
(a) The City Manager shall appoint and chair a nine (9) member Board of Trustees of the
Affordable Housing Trust. The Board of Trustees shall be composed of the City Manager
and representatives from different sectors of the community concerned with housing
policy, including members of City boards and agencies, individuals affiliated with
Cambridge non-profit housing organizations, and Cambridge community representatives.
(b) The Trustees shall establish regulations for the operations of the Trust.
(c) The Trustees shall administer the Affordable Housing Trust, whose activities shall include
but not be limited to the following:
i. Disburse funds and property pursuant to the provisions of Sections
11.200 to 11.206;
11-16
ii. Review and approve or disapprove proposals submitted for use of funds
and property;
iii. Advise on the establishment of new programs designed to meet the
City’s affordable housing needs;
iv. Provide assistance and reports where appropriate to any special permit
granting authority authorized to issue a special permit for any
development making use of funds from the Affordable Housing Trust;
and
v. Advise on policies, standards, and procedures for the implementation of
the provisions of Sections 11.200 to 11.206.
11.206.2 Receipt and Use of Funds and Property.
(a) The Affordable Housing Trust may receive funds and property generated by the
provisions of Sections 11.200 to 11.206 as well as funds and property generated from
other sources.
(b) The funds and property of the Affordable Housing Trust may be used for, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
(i) Creation of rental or owner-occupied Affordable Dwelling Units through such
mechanisms as favorable financing terms, capital grants to write down project costs,
subsidies for land acquisition, subsidies for acquisition of existing structures, and
subsidies for acquisition of Affordable Dwelling Units within a larger development;
(ii) Substantial rehabilitation of distressed multifamily residential properties in a manner
that preserves the affordability of units through favorable financing terms or capital
grants to write down project costs, interest rate subsidies, and loan guarantees with
priority funding consideration given to multifamily housing owned by non-profit
housing entities that ensure maximum long-term affordability;
(iii) Acquisition and rehabilitation of potential limited equity housing cooperatives or
condominium conversions using low interest loans, share loans, or capital grants to
write down project costs;
(iv) Preservation of existing affordable housing by providing acquisition and/or financing
assistance for Affordable Dwelling Units that are part of a larger development; and
(v) Reasonable administrative expenses necessary to support Affordable Housing Trust
activities, including but not limited to payment for consulting services such as legal,
appraising, or engineering services, and other project related expenses.
11.500 PLANNING OVERLAY REQUIREMENTS
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide temporarily for review of large scale
development in order to ensure conformance with the Cambridge Growth Policy
Document, “Towards a Sustainable Future: and guarantee that the city infrastructure
can support potential increases in traffic.
11-17
11.501 Term of Effect. The provisions of this Section 11.500 apply to any building permit
granted between Wednesday, July 1, 1998 and Monday, February 12, 2001, inclusive.
11.502 Applicability. The provisions of this Section 11.500 apply to all new construction of
50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area or new construction of a parking facility
which will cause such facility to have a net increase of more than 150 in the number of
nonresidential parking spaces, involving a change of category of use, such categories
being defined as those numbered and bolded in Section 4.30 of this Ordinance. The
provisions of this section also apply to any project that will bring the total construction
on the lot, or an abutting lot or lots that are or have been in common ownership at any
time since May 1, 1998, to 50,000 square feet of more gross floor area during the
effective period of this section. This section shall not apply to any housing projects
with a substantial component of affordable units (defined as more than 25% of units
affordable by households making 110% or less of median income). The provisions of
this section apply to all zoning district in the City without exception.
11.503 The Planning Overlay Special Permit
11.510 A Planning Overlay Special Permit shall be required from the Planning Board for all
projects subject to this Section 11.502. The Planning Board may request reports from the
Community Development Department, Conservation Commission, Historical Commission
or other pertinent boards and commissions regarding compliance with Growth Policies 13,
27, 39, and 66 as set forth in Section 11.512. Before a building permit for a project to
which paragraph 11.502 applies can be issued, the project must receive a “Planning
Overlay Special Permit.” The application for the Planning Overlay Special Permit may be
simultaneous with the application to the Planning Board for other special permits. No
application for this permit will be accepted unless it is accompanied, at a minimum, by the
following documents:
(a) The information required by the Large Project Submittal Requirements as described
in Paragraph 1.45 of this Ordinance.
(b) A traffic study certified as being done in a complete and reliable manner by the
Traffic, Parking and Transportation Department. The required traffic study shall
include information on Parking Transportation Demand Management measures,
which may mitigate projected traffic impacts. Such certifications must be issued or
denied within twenty-one (21) days of its request and must only certified the
methodology used, not necessarily the accuracy of the data.
Any applicant who has been granted a special permit prior to the effective date of this
amendment must apply for a “Planning Overlay Special Permit” by no later than 60 (sixty)
days after the issuance of the original special permit.
11.511 Criteria for Special Permit
11-18
A. In granting a planning overlay special permit the Planning Board will ensure that the
project conforms with the following growth policies as set forth in the Cambridge
Growth Policy Document, “Towards a Sustainable Future”:
Growth Policy #13. A pace of development or redevelopment should be
encouraged that permits the maintenance of a healthy tax base, allows for
adjustment and adaptation to changing economic conditions, and is consistent
with the City’s urban design and other physical development objectives yet does
not unreasonably disrupt the daily activities of the city’s neighborhoods and
residents or overburden the city’s water and sewer infrastructure.
Growth Policy #27. Where possible, construct new affordable housing that fits
neighborhood character. In existing residential neighborhoods housing should be
built at scale, density, and character consistent with existing development
patterns. Permit reconstruction of affordable housing (defined as more than 50%
of units rented or owned by households at 80% or less than median income) that
serves a wide range of incomes and groups at previous nonconforming density
where reconstruction is less expensive than rehabilitation. Emphasize
construction of affordable housing designed for families with children.
Growth Policy #39. Development patterns in all nonresidential areas must be
planned to minimize negative impact on abutting residential neighborhoods.
Growth Policy #66. New open space facilities, including larger ones for organized
activities, should be considered for those private developments where the size of
the development, the amount of and area and/or the ownership patterns provide
the flexibility to accommodate such a facility without loss of economic value for
other uses.
B. Additionally, the Planning Board shall, before issuing a special permit, find that the
project will have no substantial adverse impact on city traffic. In determining whether
there is a substantial adverse impact, the Planning Board shall apply criteria for
measuring traffic impact based on the best available measures of traffic volumes and
level of service, as recommended by the Traffic, Transportation and Parking
Department. These criteria shall be updated as new data on existing traffic volumes
and level of service are compiled.
11.512 Enforcement. The Superintendent of Buildings will require certification from the Planning
Board that it has issued a special permit to the applicant to which paragraph 11.502
applies before issuing a building permit to that applicant.
11.513 Expiration. A Planning Overlay Special Permit will expire one (1) year if construction on
the project has not begun and no extension has been granted by the Planning Board.
Such extension may only be granted for good cause. If expiration takes place the
Superintendent of Buildings will revoke any building permit granted under the special
permit effective the date of expiration.
11-19
11.700 deleted (see Article 20.700)
11.800 MEDICAL MARIJUANA
11.801 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the limited
establishment of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries as they are authorized pursuant to
state regulation set forth at 105 CMR 725.000, Implementation of an Act for the
Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana. That is the intent of this ordinance, subject to
state regulation, that nay approved medicinal marijuana facility shall not physically
incorporate a future recreational marijuana facility within the same location to the extent
permitted by law.
11.802 Requirements
11.802.1 Use. Notwithstanding the use limitation of the base zoning district tor any overlay zoning
district, a Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall be allowed up the granting of a special
permit by the Planning Board, subject to the requirements set forth in this Section.
11.802.2 Registration. All permitted Registered Marijuana Dispensaries shall be properly
registered with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health pursuant to 105 CMR
725.100 and shall comply with all applicable state and local public health regulations and
all other applicable laws, rules and regulations at all times. No Building Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a Registered Marijuana Dispensary that is not
properly registered with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
11.802.3 Limitation of Approval. A special permit authorizing the establishment of a Registered
Marijuana Dispensary shall be valid only for the registered entity to which the special
permit was issued, and only for the site on which the Registered Marijuana Dispensary
has bene authorized by special permit. If the registration for a Registered Marijuana
Dispensary has not been renewed or has been revoked, transferred to another,
controlling entity, or relocated to a different site, a new special permit shall be required
prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
This ordinance will be reconsidered by the Ordinance Committee if upcoming recreational
marijuana regulations created by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts impacts the
location and desirability of medical marijuana facilities, in particular the possibility of
having a joint location for both now allowed medical services and future recreational
services.
11.802.4 Building. A Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall be located only in a permanent
building and not with any mobile facility. All sales shall be conducted either within the
11-20
building or by home deliveries to qualified clients pursuant to applicable state and local
regulations.
11.802.5 Dimensional Requirements. Except where it is explicitly stated otherwise in this Section
11.800, a Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall conform to the dimensional
requirements applicable to non-residential uses within the base and overlay districts.
11.802.6 Parking and Loading. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 6.000 of this
Ordinance, the required number of parking and bicycle parking (both long term and short
term) spaces and the required number of loading bays for a Registered Marijuana
Dispensary shall be determined by the Planning Board based on the transportation
analysis and other information related to operational and security plans provided by the
applicant. Except as set forth above, all parking, bicycle parking and loading facilities
shall conform to the requirements set forth in Article 6.000.
11.802.7 Signage. All signage shall confirm to the requirements of Article 7.000 of this
Ordinance. The Planning Board may imposed additional restrictions on signage as
appropriate to mitigate any aesthetic impacts.
11.802.8 Location. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries shall be allowed only by Planning Board
Special Permit within the Business A, Business B, Business B-1, Business B-2, Business
C, Industry A-1, Industry B-1, and Industry B-2 districts. No Registered Marijuana
Dispensaries shall be allowed within one thousand and eight hundred (1,800) feet of
another Registered Marijuana Dispensary.
11.803 Application Requirements. An application to the Planning Board shall include, at a
minimum, the following information:
(a) Description of Activities: a narrative providing information about the type and scale of all
activities that will take place on the proposed site, including but not limited to cultivating
and processing of marijuana or marijuana infused product (MIPs), on-site sales, off-site
deliveries, distribution of educational materials, and other programs or activities..
(b) Service Area: A map and narrative describing the area proposed to be served by the
Registered Marijuana Dispensary and the anticipated number of clients that will be served
within that area. This description shall indicated where any other Registered Marijuana
Dispensaries exist or have been proposed with the expected service area.
(c) Transportation Analysis: A quantitate analysis, prepared by a qualified transportation
specialist acceptable tot eh Planning Board, modeling the expected origin and frequency
of client and employee trips to the site, the expected modes of transportation used by
clients and employees, and the frequency and scale of deliveries to and from the site.
(d) Context Map: A map depicting all properties and land uses within a one thousand (1,000)
foot radius (minimum) of the project site, whether use uses are located in Cambridge or
within surrounding communities, including but not limited to all educational uses, daycare,
preschool and afterschool programs.
11-21
(e) Site Plan: A plan or plans depicting all proposed development on the property, including
the dimensions of the building, the layout of automobile and bicycle parking, the location
of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular points of access and egress, the location and design
of all loading, refuse and service facilities, the location, type and direction of all outdoor
lighting on the site, and any landscape design.
(f) Building Elevations and Signage: Architectural drawings of all exterior building facades
and all proposed signage, specifying materials and colors to be used. Perspective
drawings and illustrations of the site from public ways and abutting properties are
recommended but not required.
(g) Registration Materials: Copies of registration materials issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and any materials submitted to the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health for the purpose of seeking registration, to confirm that all
information provided to the Planning Board is consistent with the information provided to
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
11.804 Special Permit Criteria. In granting a special permit for a Registered Marijuana
Dispensary, in addition to the general criteria for issuance of a special permit as set forth
in Section 10.43 of this Ordinance, the Planning Board shall find that the following criteria
are met:
(a) The Registered Marijuana Dispensary is located to serve an area that currently does not
have reasonable access to medical marijuana, or if it is proposed to serve an area that is
already served by other Registered Marijuana Dispensaries, it has been established by
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health that supplemental service is needed.
(b) The site is located at least five hundred (500) feet distant from a school, daycare center,
preschool or afterschool facility or any facility in which children commonly congregate or if
not located at such a distance, it is determined by the Planning Board to be sufficiently
buffered from such facilities such that its users will not be adversely impacted by the
operation of the Registered Marijuana Dispensary.
(c) The site is designed such that it provides convenient, safe and secure access and egress
for clients and employees arriving to and leaving form the site using all modes of
transportation, including drivers, pedestrians, bicyclists and public transportation users.
(d) Traffic generated by client trips, employees trips, and deliveries to and from the
Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall not create a substantial adverse impact on nearby
residential uses.
(e) Loading, refuse and service areas are designed to be secure and shielded from abutting
uses.
(f) The building and site have been designed to be compatible with other buildings in the
area and to mitigate any negative aesthetic impacts that might result from required
security measures and restrictions on visibility into the building’s interior.
11-22
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
12-1
ARTICLE 12.000 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
12.10 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
12.20 AREA OF APPLICABILITY
12.30 REVIEW OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
12.40 ENFORCEMENT
12.50 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
12.10 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
This Article of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge is hereby adopted to
encourage the construction of Planned Unit Developments. The Planned Unit
Development districts and uses created herein are intended to provide greater
opportunity for the construction of quality developments on large tracts of land by
providing flexible guidelines which allow the integration a variety of land uses and
densities in one development.
12.20 AREA OF APPLICABILITY
A Planned Unit Development shall be allowed by Special Permit in PUD districts so
designated from time to time on the zoning map and shall be regulated by the general
development controls set forth in Section 12.50 and by the specific development
controls for the individual PUD district in which the project is located. Planned Unit
Development Districts shall be overlay districts on the zoning map and, for any land
within a PUD district, a developer may choose to conform either to all the controls
which govern the base district or to all the PUD development controls and process.
12.30 REVIEW OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS
12.31 Review Scope. An application to construct a Planned Unit Development must be
reviewed in a manner which is consistent with the procedures set forth in this Section
12.30 and those procedures required by Chapter 40A of the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended.
12.32 Constitution of Review Authority. The Planning Board shall review and approve or
disapprove all applications for Special Permits to construct Planned Unit
Developments. In reviewing an application for a Special Permit for a Planned Unit
Development, the Planning Board may also seek the professional opinion of the staff
of city departments, including but not limited to, the Community Development
Department, Public Works Department, Traffic and Parking Department, Police
Department, Fire Department, Water Department, and School Department.
12.33 Pre-application Conference. A developer desiring to obtain a Special Permit to
construct a Planned Unit Development may request a Pre-Application Conference
with the Planning Board prior to submitting an application for the Special Permit.
12-2
12.33.1 The purpose of the Pre-Application Conference shall be to familiarize both the
developer and the Planning Board with each other's intentions with respect to the
PUD. Although a Pre-Application Conference shall not be required, this preliminary
meeting between the Planning Board and the developer is desirable since it should
help clarify many procedural and policy issues.
12.33.2 At the Pre-Application Conference, the Planning Board shall familiarize the developer
with the process for obtaining a Special Permit for a PUD and explain to him issues
that should be considered in planning the project. The developer may discuss his
range of options concerning development and inform the Planning Board of his
development concept. Any statement made by either the Planning Board or the
developer concerning potential disposition of a Special Permit application of the final
form of the development shall not be legally binding.
12.33.3 The developer shall not be required to present any written or graphic materials at the
Pre-Application Conference. The Planning Board shall make available to the
developer at this time any forms required for application for a Special Permit for a
PUD.
12.34 Development Proposal. A developer who wishes to apply for a Special Permit for a
PUD must submit to the Planning Board a Development Proposal completed on the
appropriate forms which may be obtained from the Planning Board at the Pre-
Application Conference or from the Community Development Department.
12.34.1 The written and graphic information specified in Section 12.34.3 and on the
appropriate forms must be submitted for the entire proposed project. A copy of the
Development Proposal shall remain open to the public during the application process
and shall be located in the Community Development Department.
12.34.2 The purpose of the Development Proposal shall be to provide the Planning Board with
an opportunity for in-depth substantive review of the PUD before final designs are
developed.
12.34.3 The Development Proposal shall include written and graphic materials in the
appropriate number as specified by the Planning Board.
(1) Written materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) legal description of the total development parcel proposed for development
including exact location and a statement of present and proposed ownership;
(b) statement of development concept, including the planning objectives and the
character of the development to be achieved through the PUD;
(c) development schedule indicating the appropriate date when construction of
the PUD can be expected to begin and be completed, including initiation and
completion dates of separate stages of a phased development;
(d) statement of intentions regarding the future selling or leasing of all or
portions of the PUD, such as land area, dwelling units, and public facilities;
12-3
(e) statement of financing plan, including projected sources and amounts of
funds;
(f) statement of how utilities and other public works will be provided, including
design standards;
(g) the impact of the development on existing city services outside the
development.
(2) Quantitative data including:
(a) parcel size;
(b) proposed lot coverage of structures;
(c) floor area ratio;
(d) total amount of private open space, both private and public;
(e) total number and type of dwelling units by number of bedrooms;
(f) projected rent levels or selling price by unit size;
(g) approximate gross residential densities;
(h) total amount in square footage of nonresidential construction by type of use;
(i) economic feasibility or market analysis including projected market area and
proposed rent levels for commercial development;
(j) number of parking spaces to be provided by use;
(k) total length of streets to be conveyed to the city government;
(l) total length of streets to be held as private ways within the development;
(m) total length by type of other public works to be conveyed to the city
government;
(n) number and types of public facilities.
(3) Graphic materials shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) map of existing site conditions, including contours, water course, floor plains,
unique nature features, existing vegetation, soil types, existing buildings;
(b) map of existing land use;
(c) existing and proposed lot lines;
(d) location and size of gross floor area of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements including maximum heights, types of
dwelling units, and nonresidential structures by use;
(e) location and size in square feet of all private open space and areas to be
conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common open spaces, public parks,
recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and semi-public uses;
(f) the existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector, and local
streets, including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading areas, and
all points of access to existing public rights of way;
(g) proposed pedestrian circulation system;
12-4
(h) existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, and water, electric, gas, and telephone lines;
(i) general landscaped plan indicating the treatment of materials used for
private and common open spaces;
(j) description of adjacent land areas, including land uses, zoning, densities,
circulation systems, public facilities, and unique natural features of the
landscape;
(k) proposed treatment of the perimeter of the development, including materials
and techniques used such as screens, fences, and walls.
12.34.4 When applying for a Special Permit to construct a PUD, a developer must pay for all
expenses incident to advertising for public hearings that may be incurred by the
Planning Board.
12.35 Review of Development Proposal. Within sixty-five (65) days of the date of receipt of
a complete application for a Special Permit to construct a PUD, the Planning Board
shall hold a public hearing. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to solicit public
opinion concerning the Development Proposal.
12.35.1 Between the date of submission of the application for a Special Permit to construct a
PUD and the public hearing concerning the Development Proposal, the Planning
Board may submit the Development Proposal for review to city departments, including
but not limited to, the Community Development Department, Public Works
Department, Traffic and Parking Department, Police Department, Fire Department,
Water Department. Any city department desiring to comment on the Development
Proposal shall submit comments in writing to the Planning Board within sixty (60) days
of the date of receipt of the application for a Special Permit or no later than five (5)
days before the date of the public hearing. All written comments shall be made a part
of the application for a Special Permit and shall remain on public record.
12.35.2 Within twenty-one (21) days after the public hearing, the Planning Board shall make a
determination concerning the Development Proposal. If the Planning Board approves
the Development Proposal or conditionally approves the Development Proposal with
recommendations for modifications, then the developer must submit a Final
Development Plan as specified in Section 12.36. If the Planning Board disapproves
the Development Proposal then the application for a Special Permit to construct a
PUD shall be denied. If the Planning Board makes no decision within the specified
time limit, then the Development Proposal shall be considered approved and the
developer shall prepare a Final Development Plan.
12.35.3 Approval of the Development Proposal shall be granted only upon determination by
the Planning Board that the Development Proposal:
(1) conforms with the General Development Controls set forth in Section 12.50, and
the development controls set forth for the specific PUD district in which the project
is located;
12-5
(2) conforms with adopted policy plans or development guidelines for the portion of
the city in which the PUD district is located;
(3) provides benefits to the city which outweigh its adverse effects; in making this
determination the Planning Board shall consider the following:
(a) quality of site design, including integration of a variety of land uses, building
types, and densities; preservation of natural features; compatibility with
adjacent land uses; provision and type of open space; provision of other
amenities designed to benefit the general public;
(b) traffic flow and safety;
(c) adequacy of utilities and other public works;
(d) impact on existing public facilities within the city; and
(e) potential fiscal impact.
12.36 Final Development Plan. The purpose of the Final Development Plan shall be to set
forth in final form the specifics of the proposed development proposal and to allow
review for any additional items not present in the Development Proposal.
12.36.1 The developer shall submit a Final Development Plan to the Planning Board, no later
than fifty-nine (59) days after the Public Hearing concerning the Development
Proposal. Failure to submit a Final Development Plan within the specified time period
shall result in the termination of the application for a Special Permit to construct a
PUD.
12.36.2 The Final Development Plan shall consist of final versions of all statements and
graphics presented in the Development Proposal and must contain any revisions
which are required by the Planning Board at the time of conditional approval of the
Development Proposal.
12.36.3 The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing to consider the Final Development
Plan no later than sixty-nine (69) days after the public hearing concerning the
Development Proposal. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to solicit public
opinion on the Final Development Plan with emphasis placed on reviewing
modifications made to the Development Proposal.
12.36.4 The Planning Board shall make the decision to approve or disapprove the application
for a Special Permit to construct a Planned Unit Development no later than ninety (90)
days after the public hearing concerning the Development Proposal Approval of the
Final Development Plan shall be granted only upon determination by the Planning
Board that the Final Development Plan meets the evaluation criteria set forth in
Section 12.35.3 and contains any revisions to the Development Proposal required by
the Planning Board. If the Planning Board grants the Special Permit with conditions,
the conditions must be agreed to in writing by the developer before the Special Permit
is granted. The Planning Board shall make its final decision in writing and shall
specify its reason for not granting a Special Permit to construct a PUD. If the Planning
Board makes no decision within the specified time limit, then the Final Development
12-6
Plan shall be considered approved and the Special Permit to construct a PUD shall be
deemed granted.
12.37 Amendments to Final Development Plan. After approval of the Final Development
Plan by the Planning Board, the developer may seek amendments to the Final
Development Plan, only if he encounters difficulties in constructing the PUD which
could not have reasonably been foreseen, such as with terrain or soil conditions or
other complications.
12.37.1 Amendments to the Final Development Plan shall be considered major or minor.
Minor amendments, as specified in Section 12.37.2 shall be authorized by written
approval of the Planning Board. Major amendments, as specified in Section 12.37.3,
shall be considered as an original application for a Special Permit to construct a PUD
and shall be subject to procedures specified in Section 12.34 through 12.36. The
Planning Board shall decide whether proposed changes are major or minor.
12.37.2 Minor amendments are changes which do not alter the concept of the PUD in terms of
density, floor area ratio, land usage, height, provision of open space, or the physical
relationship of elements of the development. Minor amendments shall include, but not
be limited to, small changes in the location of buildings, open space, or parking; or
realignment of minor streets.
12.37.3 Major amendments represent substantial deviations from the PUD concept approved
by the Planning Board. Major amendments shall include, but not be limited to, large
changes in floor space, mix of uses, density, lot coverage, height, setbacks, lot sizes,
open space; changes in the location of buildings, open space, or parking; or changes
in the circulation system.
12.40 ENFORCEMENT
12.41 Commencement of Construction. The developer shall begin construction of the PUD
within twelve (12) months of the date of the granting of the Special Permit to construct
a PUD. The Planning Board may grant in writing an extension of this time period of up
to twelve (12) months upon determination of good cause by the developer. If the
developer fails to commence construction of the PUD within the specified time, the
Special Permit shall lapse.
12.41.1 If the PUD is to be developed in stages, then the developer must begin the
construction of each stage within the time limits specified in the Final Development
Plan. Construction in each phase shall include all the elements of that phase
specified in the Final Development Plan.
12.42 The Planning Board, or its Designee, shall periodically monitor the construction of the
PUD, with respect to start of construction and development phasing. If the Planning
Board, or its designee, finds that either the developer has failed to begin development
within the specified time period or that the developer is not preceding in accordance
with the approved development phasing, with respect to either timing or construction
of an approved mix of project elements, then the Planning Board shall review the PUD
12-7
and may extend the time for start of construction or the length of time needed to
complete a phase, revoke the Special Permit, or recommend that the developer
amend the Final Development Plan subject to procedures specified in Section 12.37.
If the Planning Board revokes the Special Permit for the PUD then the Final
Development Plan shall be null and void.
12.50 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
12.51 Applicability and Conformance with Existing Policy Plans. The following regulations in
this Section 12.50 shall control development within each PUD district. Each
development proposal for a PUD shall, to the extent feasible, be made to conform to
existing policy plans established by the Planning Board or City Council from time to
time for the specific area of the city in which the PUD is located.
12.52 PUD Development Parcel Size. The minimum size of a development parcel for a
planned unit development shall be as indicated in each planned unit development’s
individual regulations; however the Planning Board may, at its discretion, allow
development parcels containing less than the minimum parcel size required but at
least five times the minimum required area for a lot in the base zoning district in which
the development would be located. The Planning Board shall permit a development
parcel containing less than the minimum parcel size required only upon its written
determination that public review and approval of such a small development is
necessary for accomplishing the planning objectives of the PUD district in which the
development is located.
12.53 Standards for Construction of Roadways. All new roadways within a PUD shall be
constructed in conformance with standards established by the Department of Traffic
and Parking.
12.53.1 Any existing private way or subsequently constructed private way in a PUD may be
accepted by the City as a public way only if it meets the Minimum Standards for
Acceptance of Existing Private Ways as Public Ways as adopted by the Planning
Board.
12.53.2 The design of the overall circulation pattern shall be prepared in accordance with the
principles and concepts established in “Recommended Practices for Subdivision
Streets” prepared by the Institute of Traffic Engineers (1965).
12.54 Standards for Construction of Utilities and Public Works. All improvements to the site
which include the installation of utilities, public lighting, sewers, and other public works
shall be constructed according to criteria established by the Public Works Department,
Water Department, Electrical Department, the Planning Board and other appropriate
departments. If the developer provides public works, roadways, and utility
improvement to the site, the Planning Board may require the developer to post a
performance bond.
12.55 Landscaping. All open areas within a PUD which are not used as driveways,
walkways, or parking lots shall be landscaped in an appropriate manner utilizing both
natural and manmade materials such as grass, trees, shrubs, and benches.
12-8
Wherever possible, deciduous trees should be planted along new and existing streets.
Plazas, arcades, malls, and similar manmade developments shall be counted as
landscaped area. In addition, landscaping within a PUD shall conform to any
landscaping criteria or requirements which may be adopted by the Planning Board or
City Council from time to time, except that any PUD development prior to the
establishment of formal landscaping regulations shall not have to conform to them.
Outdoor lighting shall be considered in a landscaping plan and shall be designed to
complement both manmade and natural elements of the PUD.
12.56 Environmental Performance Standards. All uses in the PUD district shall conform to
all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations regarding the environment
such as laws and regulations concerning noise, air quality, water quality, radiation,
and radioactivity.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
13-1
ARTICLE 13.000 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
13.10 PUD AT KENDALL SQUARE: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.20 PUD-1 DISTRICT: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.30 PUD-2 DISTRICT: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.40 PUD-3, and PUD3A DISTRICTS: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.50 PUD-4, PUD4A, PUD 4B and PUD4C DISTRICTs: DEVELOPMENT
CONTROLS
13.60 deleted
13.70 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT IN THE NORTH POINT RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
13.80 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 5 DISTRICT
13.10 PUD AT KENDALL SQUARE: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.11 Purpose. The PUD-KS district is intended to provide for the creation of a mixed-use
district of high quality general and technical office and retail activity, with a significant
component of residential use. The creation of a large public park is desired. The
PUD-KS district permits larger scale development and supporting commercial
activities close to Kendall Square and the major public transit services located there. It
encourages strong linkages between new development at Kendall Square, the East
Cambridge riverfront, and the PUD-KS area and the neighborhoods of eastern
Cambridge, facilitated in part by a strong retail presence along Third Street.
Development in the PUD-KS district should be generally consistent with the policy
objectives set forth in the Eastern Cambridge Plan and the guidance provided in the
Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines.
13.12 Uses Allowed in a PUD-KS District. The uses listed in this Section 13.12, alone or in
combination with each other, shall be allowed upon permission of the Planning Board.
The amount and extent of uses may be further regulated and limited as set forth
elsewhere in this Section 13.10.
13.12.1 Residential Uses
(1)Townhouse Development. Any special permits for parking arrangements for
townhouse development required by Section 11.10 shall be granted by the Planning
Board in a Planned Unit Development in a PUD-KS district.
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
13.12.11 Transient Residential Uses
For the purposes of this Section 13.10, the following Transient Residential Uses shall
be considered non-residential uses
(1) Hotels or motels
13-2
13.12.2 Transportation, Communication, Utility and Institutional Uses. All uses listed in
sections 4.32 and 4.33 and which are allowed or conditionally allowed in the base
zoning district. Telephone exchange use set forth in 4.32 g (1) shall be permitted
provided that any facility having a floor area greater than four hundred (400) square
feet shall only be permitted in a building in existence as of June 1, 2001 that, if
vacant, has not been occupied by a residential use in the five years immediately
preceding the time of application for a Certificate Of Occupancy for the proposed use,
or if occupied, the current use is any office and laboratory use, Section 4.34; any retail
business and consumer service establishment, Section 4.35; any light industry,
wholesale business or storage use, Section 4.37; or any heavy industry use, Section
4.38.
13.12.3 Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
13.12.4 Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments. The following retail uses
shall be permitted, provided that the total amount of retail GFA in the District does not
exceed 70,000 square feet and no individual establishment exceeds ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of Gross Floor Area unless the Planning Board determines in
writing that more retail GFA and establishments of a greater size better serve the
residents within the PUD district and in adjacent districts and better advance the
policies set forth in the Eastern Cambridge Plan and the Eastern Cambridge Design
Guidelines.
(1) Stationery and office supply store.
(2) Printing and reproduction service establishment, photography studio.
(3) Other store for retail sale of merchandise located in a structure primarily
containing non-retail use provided no manufacturing, assembly or packaging occur on
the premises.
(4) Barber shop, beauty shop, laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up agency, shoe repair,
self-service laundry or other similar establishments.
(5) Restaurants or other eating and drinking establishments listed in Subsection 4.35
e, f, and g.
(6) Theater or hall for public gatherings.
13.12.5 Institutional Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.33 f and g.
13.12.6 Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsections 13.12.1 through 13.12.4, otherwise
allowed in a Business B District may be allowed by the Planning Board only upon
written determination by the Board that such use is consistent with the objectives of
the PUD-KS district and the policies and guidelines set forth in the ECaPS Plan.
13.13 District Dimensional Regulations.
13.13.1 Permitted FAR. In the PUD-KS District the maximum ratio of floor area to
Development Parcel shall be 3.0, subject to the further use limitations set forth below
in Section 13.13.11.
13-3
13.13.11 Limitations on Non-Residential Development. In the PUD-KS District all nonresidential
uses shall be further limited as set forth below. Where the amount of nonresidential
Gross Floor Area (GFA) is limited to a percentage of the total GFA
authorized, the calculation shall be based on GFA authorized exclusive of any GFA
that may be constructed as a result of the application of the FAR bonuses permitted in
Section 11.200 or any GFA devoted exclusively to structured parking.
(1) For any lot or combination of lots held in common ownership as of June 1, 2001
having in total an area of less than five acres, the total GFA devoted to non-residential
uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total GFA authorized in a PUD for that
portion of a PUD Development Parcel containing such lot or lots, or any portion
thereof. This limitation shall apply to each Development Parcel individually. This
limitation shall not apply to any individual lot created subsequent to the Planning
Board approval of the PUD Final Development Plan.
Notwithstanding the above limitations, additional non-residential GFA shall be
permitted as set forth in Paragraph (3) below.
(2) For any lot or combination of lots held in common ownership as of June 1, 2001
having in total an area of more than five (5) acres, the total GFA devoted to nonresidential
uses shall not exceed sixty (60) percent of total GFA authorized, inclusive
of any GFA otherwise exempt from the provisions of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance
in a PUD for that portion of a PUD Development Parcel containing such lot or lots, or
any portion thereof. This limitation shall not apply to any individual lot created
subsequent to the Planning Board approval of the PUD Final Development Plan.
Notwithstanding the above limitations, additional non-residential GFA shall be
permitted as set forth in Paragraph (3) below.
At least ninety-five (95) percent of the authorized non-residential GFA must be located
on the portion of said lot or lots having an Office 2 base district designation.
However, where circumstances related to the transfer of property from the federal
government to other governmental or private entities (for the purpose of private
development on a portion or all of the land in the control of the federal government)
the Planning Board may in its discretion approve a Final Development Plan providing
GFA in excess of sixty (60) percent of the authorized GFA in the PUD provided it is
conclusively demonstrated to the Planning Board that all residential GFA required to
be developed on such lot or lots in their entirety, by this Paragraph, has already been
constructed.
(3) For the entire PUD-KS district, the first 50,000 square feet of retail and customer
service uses authorized in total in all approved PUDs shall not be counted toward the
non-residential GFA limitations of Paragraphs (1) and (2) above provided the GFA is
located on the ground floor of a multistory building, fronts on and has a public
entrance onto Third Street, Broadway, or a public park, and for each individual
establishment the GFA does not exceed 10,000 square feet.
13.13.2 Minimum Development Parcel Size. The minimum size of a Development Parcel
within the PUD-KS shall be the greater of (1) 40,000 square feet or (2) seventy-five
percent of the area of a lot or combination of lots (a) in existence as of June 1, 2001
and (b) held in common ownership where it is proposed to incorporate any portion of
such lot or lots within the Development Parcel. A Development Parcel within the
PUD-KS may contain noncontiguous lots elsewhere in the PUD-KS district or within a
contiguous PUD district. There shall be no specified minimum lot size for lots located
within a Development Parcel.
13-4
However, where circumstances related to the transfer of property from the federal
government to other governmental or private entities (for the purpose of private
development on a portion or all of the land in the control of the federal government)
limit the feasibility of creating a Development Parcel meeting the size requirements of
this Section 13.13.2, the Planning Board may in its discretion approve a PUD
application having a smaller Development Parcel size.
13.13.3 Residential Density. For the purpose of computing residential density, the minimum lot
size for each dwelling unit shall be three hundred (300) square feet. Residential
density shall be computed based on the entire development parcel.
13.13.4 Maximum Building Height.
13.13.41 The maximum height permitted in the district shall be sixty-five (65) feet except as it
may be further limited or permitted below. The permitted heights are further illustrated
on the Building Height Regulation Map for the PUD-KS, Map 13.11.
(1) Additional Building Height to Eighty-Five Feet. The maximum height shall be
eighty-five (85) feet in the areas described below:
(a) An area bounded by the centerlines of Fifth Street, Monroe Street, Third
Street and Potter Street.
(b) An area bounded by the centerline of Potter Street and its northwesterly
extension; then the centerline of the former Sixth Street (the MXD district
boundary line); then a line northeasterly of, parallel to and two hundred (200) feet
distant from the northeasterly sideline of Broadway; then a line northwesterly of,
parallel to, and three hundred (300) feet distant from the northwesterly sideline of
Third Street, to the point of beginning.
(2) Additional Building Height to One Hundred and Twenty Feet. The maximum height
shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet in that area bounded by areas described in
Paragraph (1) above; then the centerline of Third Street; then a line northeasterly of,
parallel to, and one hundred (100) distant from the northeasterly sideline of Broadway;
then the centerline of the former Sixth Street (the MXD district boundary line) to the
point of beginning.
(3) Additional Building Height to One Hundred and Eighty Feet with Portions to Two
Hundred and Fifty Feet. The maximum height shall be one hundred and eighty (180)
feet in that area bounded by the area described in Paragraph (2) above; then the
centerline of Third Street; then the centerline of Broadway; and then the centerline of
the former Sixth Street (the MXD district boundary line) to the point of beginning.
However, portions of buildings may rise above one hundred and eighty (180) feet to no
more than two hundred and fifty (250) feet provided the area of all floorplates of
portions of buildings above 180 feet do not exceed ten percent of the total area of the
Development Parcel.
(4) Portions of Buildings limited to Forty-five Feet. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Paragraphs (1) – (3) above, any portion of a building that is within fifty (50) feet of an
existing or proposed Public Open Space or single intervening street abutting that open
space may exceed 45 feet only if for each floor above 45 feet, that floor is set back an
additional 10 feet from the façade of the floor below, until the maximum height is
attained, or until a 20 foot setback from the façade at 45 feet is attained. Alternately, a
set back of 20 feet from the façade of the building at a height of 45 feet shall be
permitted, and the remaining portions of the building allowed to achieve the maximum
13-5
height permitted in Paragraphs (1) – (3) above or any variation between the two
provisions.
13.13.42 The Planning Board shall not approve any Final Development Plan in the PUD-KS
District not in conformance with the regulations of Section 13.13.4 above. In the
portion of the PUD-KS that allows buildings to 200 feet or more, the Planning Board
may approve a building up to 250 feet if other buildings or portions of buildings in that
portion of the Development Parcel are no higher than one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
13.13.43 In evaluating a development proposal providing building height in excess of one
hundred and twenty (120) feet, the Planning Board shall give consideration to evidence
presented on the following:
(a) that increased height will not cast shadows or alter air currents in ways that will
unreasonably limit the amount of light and air reaching other buildings in the vicinity to
a significantly greater extent than if the building height did not exceed one hundred
and twenty (120) feet;
(b) that increased height would mitigate detrimental environmental impacts such as
excessive ground coverage, diminution of open space, and monotonous
development;
(c) that increased height would not adversely affect and would result in increased
sensitivity to the visual and physical characteristics of the particular location through
more harmonious relationships to the terrain and to the proposed and existing
buildings in the vicinity that have functional or visual relationships to the proposed
building;
(a) that increased height would result from actions taken to lessen the impact of
traffic and parking on the surrounding area; and
(b) that the orientation and location of the proposed structure would not otherwise
diminish the health and safety of the area around the development parcel.
(c) The additional height permits accommodation of GFA transferred from the
Eastern Cambridge Development Rights Transfer Donating District.
13.13.5 Other Dimensional Requirements. There shall be no minimum width for the
development parcel and no minimum width for lots located within the development
parcel. There shall be no minimum required front, rear and side yard requirements for
a development parcel or for lots located within a development parcel. The Planning
Board shall approve all such lot sizes and building setbacks.
13.14 Open Space. The following Open Space requirements shall be met on each
Development Parcel.
(1) For that portion of a Development Parcel consisting of lots described in
Section 13.13.11, Paragraph (1) above, any combination of Public Open Space,
Green Area Open Space or Permeable Open Space, as defined in this
Ordinance, shall be provided on the Development Parcel and shall in the
aggregate equal at least twenty (20) percent of the area of that portion of the
Development Parcel.
(2) For that portion of a Development Parcel consisting of lots described in
Section 13.13.11, Paragraph (2) above, any combination of Public Open Space,
Green Area Open Space or Permeable Open Space, as defined in this
Ordinance, shall be provided on the Development Parcel and shall in the
13-6
aggregate equal at least Forty-two (42) percent of the area of that portion of the
Development Parcel, subject to the further limitations set forth in Section 13.14.1
below.
Owners of adjacent Development Parcels may collectively provide the required open
space by easement, deed restriction, covenant, or comparable legal instrument
enforceable by the City of Cambridge or other public entity. In that event each
Development Parcel shall, for purposes of this Section 13.10 be deemed to include
that portion of such open space as the owners shall allocate to it in chosen legal
instrument.
All required open space shall be generally accessible to the public for reasonable
periods throughout the day for the purposes for which the open space is designed and
approved by the Planning Board, which may include but not be limited to walking,
bicycling, active and passive recreation. The Planning Board must approve any
proposal to significantly limit public access to the required open space.
13.14.1 Required Public Open Space. For that open space required in Section 13.14,
Paragraph (2) above, the required open space shall consist in part of a contiguous 7.5
acre Public Open Space to be located in the northwest quadrant of the PUD-KS
district as further described and located in the Eastern Cambridge Plan. The Public
Open Space shall be under the control of the City of Cambridge through fee simple
conveyance, easement, or other legal mechanism acceptable to the City. In the event
that the City of Cambridge does not accept the facility, the PUD permittee shall
maintain the park for the use of the general public as originally designed and
approved by the Planning Board in the Special Permit. The Public Open Space shall
be designed and constructed by the permittee according to the conditions of the PUD
special Permit and when conveyed to the City shall be environmentally and otherwise
suitable for the recreational uses for which it is designed.
However, where circumstances related to the transfer of property from the federal
government to other governmental or private entities (for the purpose of private
development on a portion or all of the land in the control of the federal government)
limit the feasibility of creation of a 7.5 acre park, the Planning Board may at its
discretion approve a Final Development Plan providing a contiguous Public Open
Space of less than 7.5 acres. In approving such a Final Development Plan the
Planning Board shall find that a smaller facility continues to meet the objectives of the
Eastern Cambridge Plan and the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines,
13.14.2 The Planning Board shall encourage development that is located adjacent to a Public
Open Space to be physically and functionally integrated with the open space by
means of building orientation, location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages
between major activity centers, and similar techniques.
13.15 Perimeter and transition. Any part of the perimeter of a PUD-KS which fronts on an
existing street or public open space should be so designed as to complement and
harmonize with adjacent land uses with respect to scale, density, setback, bulk,
height, landscaping, and screening. Developments in the PUD-KS district should
provide integrated pedestrian circulation systems, with particularly strong linkages
among the riverfront, Kendall Square, and the Eastern Cambridge neighborhoods.
13.17 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development the PUD-KS District shall conform
to the off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, and in
the Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements applicable to the Residence C-3,
Office 3, Business B and Industry B districts, except as modified by this Section
13.17.
13-7
13.17.1 Off street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(1) Residence: 1 space per unit minimum, 1.5 spaces per unit maximum.
(2) Public Assembly: Number of seats requiring one space: 15.
(3) Institutional: 1 space per 1,800 square feet.
(4) Retail (except as noted in Section 13.17.2 below) and Office:
Ground floor: 1,125 square feet
Other level: 1,800 square feet
13.17.2 Ground Floor Retail and Customer Service Uses. Retail and customer service uses
fronting on and having a public entrance onto a public street or a public open space,
located at the first floor level of a multistory building, and not exceeding 10,000 square
feet for each separately leased establishment shall not be required to provide any
accessory parking. Where parking is provided it shall be subject to Section 13.17.1
above.
13.18 Traffic Mitigation Measures. In reviewing a development proposal under the
provisions of this Section 13.70 and Section 19.20, the Planning Board shall
determine that the proponent has demonstrated, at the time of Final Development
Plan approval, a commitment to a Transportation Demand Management Program
consistent with the reduce parking mandated in this PUD. The measures to be taken
in this program must address:
(1) The amount of parking provided,
(2) The scale of development and the mix of uses proposed, and
(3) The assumptions employed with regard to the proportion of automobile use
for those traveling to the site.
For examples of such Measures, the Planning Board shall refer to the Eastern
Cambridge Plan, Article 18.000, and the requirements of Section 19.20 in establishing
Transportation Demand Management measures applicable to any approved PUD.
13.19 Relationship to MBTA Urban Ring Transportation Planning Project. In all PUD
application documents, the applicant shall indicate how the proposed PUD
development relates physically to the most current plans developed by the MBTA for
implementation of the Urban Ring transportation project.
13.110 Residential Uses Abutting Binney Street. Where any Development Proposal locates
residential dwellings along Binney Street, the Planning Board shall, in approving a
Final Development Plan containing such residential units, be satisfied that the
negative impacts of truck and other heavy vehicular traffic on Binney Street will be
adequately mitigated for the residents of the proposed dwelling units. Such mitigation
shall be achieved through the location of the buildings within the Development Parcel
13-8
and the distribution of activities within those buildings; the provision of setbacks,
landscaping and similar kinds of buffers; the inclusion of non-residential uses at the
ground floor; the employment of construction techniques to minimize the transmission
of sound and vibrations; and/or through the employment of any other appropriate
measures.
13-9
13.20 PUD-1 DISTRICT: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.21 Purpose. The PUD-1 district is intended to provide the opportunity for a medium
density mixed use development with commercial, office, and a variety of residential
uses.
13.22 Uses Allowed in a PUD-1 District.
13.22.1 The following uses alone or in combination with other uses shall be allowed upon
permission of the Planning Board:
(1) All Residence Uses specified in Section 4.31
(2) All Institutional, Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses specified in
Sections 4.32 and 4.33
(3) All Office and Laboratory Uses specified in Section 4.34
(4) All Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishment uses specified in
Section 4.35
13.22.2 Any other use, alone or in combination with other uses, contained in Article 4.000 may
be allowed by permission of the Planning Board only if a substantial public benefit can
be demonstrated by the applicant.
13.23 District Dimensional Regulations.
13.23.1 The maximum ratio of floor area to total area of the development parcel shall be 3.0.
13.23.2 The minimum size of the development parcel for PUD shall two and one half (2 1/2)
acres. There shall be no specified minimum lot size for lots located within a
development parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all lot sizes located within a
development parcel.
13.23.3 For the purpose of computing residential density, the minimum land area for each
dwelling unit shall be six hundred (600) square feet. Residential density shall be
computed based on the entire development parcel.
13.23.4 There shall be no minimum width for the development parcel and no minimum width
for lots located within the development parcel. There shall be no minimum required
front, rear, and side yard requirements for a development parcel or for lots located
within a development parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all such building
setbacks.
13.24 Height.
13.24.1 The maximum height of any building shall be sixty (60) feet, except as modified by
sections 13.24.2 and 13.24.3, below.
13.24.2 The maximum allowable height may be increased to one hundred and ten (110) feet
upon permission of the Planning Board, if the Planning Board finds that provision of
any of the following amenities provides substantial public benefits:
(1) open space or recreational facilities dedicated to public use;
13-10
(2) walkways or similar facilities which enable the public to have access through the
PUD to existing areas of unique natural or man-made value;
(3) development design, which enhances any unique natural or man-made features
of the site or abutting areas;
(4) pedestrian malls, arcades, decks, bridges, or similar facilities within the interior of
the PUD which are designed to appeal to the general public;
(5) designs for residential development which are intended to appeal to a family
population;
(6) provision of residential development for a mixture of economic groups utilizing
federal, state, or private programs conditional upon the provision of appropriate
legal assurance, that a mixed income development will be implemented;
(7) other amenities that the developer may propose which the Planning Board feels
provide unique advantages to the general public or which contribute to achieving
city development goals;
provided, however, that the Planning Board shall not approve any Final
Development Plan in which 20 (twenty) percent or more of the land area of the
development parcel is covered with buildings or parts of building not exempted
by Section 5.23 in excess of eighty (80) feet in height or in which five (5) percent
or more of the land area of the development parcel is covered with such
buildings or parts thereof in excess of 100 (one hundred) feet in height.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board, in its discretion, may accept
for review an application for a Special Permit based on a Development Proposal
which deviates from the aforesaid provisions of this Section 13.24.2, provided
that the Final Development Plan is in conformity with such provisions.
13.24.3 In evaluating a Development Proposal providing height in excess of sixty (60) feet, the
Planning Board shall give consideration to evidence presented on the following:
(a) that increased height will not cast shadows or alter air currents in ways that will
unreasonably limit the amount of light and air reaching other buildings in the
vicinity to a significantly greater extent than it the building height did not exceed
sixty (60) feet;
(b) that increased height would mitigate detrimental environmental impacts such as
excessive ground coverage, diminution of open space, and monotonous
development;
(c) that increased height would not adversely affect and would result in increased
sensitivity to the visual and physical characteristics of the particular location
through more harmonious relationships to the terrain and to proposed and
existing buildings in the vicinity that have functional or visual relationships to the
proposed building;
(d) that increased height would result from actions taken to lessen the impact of
traffic and parking on the surrounding area; and
13-11
(e) that the orientation and location of the proposed structure shall not otherwise
diminish the health and safety of the Harvard Square area.
13.25 Private open space. The minimum ratio of private open space to the total area of the
development parcel as defined in Article 2.000 and Section 5.22 shall be fifteen (15)
percent, except as modified below.
13.25.1 The Planning Board may reduce the private open space requirement if the
development is located adjacent to a public open space and if the development is
physically and functionally integrated with the open space by means of building
orientation, location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages between major activity
centers, or similar factors.
13.25.2 Private open space shall include parks, plazas, landscaped areas open to the sky,
playgrounds, balconies, roofs, developed for recreational or leisure usage, and
pedestrian ways such as bridges, decks arcades, loggias, and gallerias as specified
by the Planning Board.
13.26 Perimeter and Transition. Any part of the perimeter of a PUD-1 which fronts on an
existing street or public open space shall be so designed as to complement and
harmonize with adjacent land uses with respect to scale, density, setback, bulk,
height, landscaping, and screening.
13.27 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development in a PUD-1 district shall conform to
the Off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, except as
modified by this Section 13.27.
13.27.1 Off street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(1) Residence: Minimum number of spaces per group of dwelling units: 10 per 10
(2) Public Assembly: Number of seats requiring one space: 15.
13.27.2 Institutional, Retail and Office: Number of Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Requiring
One Space:
(1) Institutional: 1,800 square feet
(2) Retail and Office:
Ground Floor: 900 square feet
Other Level: 1,800 square feet
13.30 PUD-2 DISTRICT: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
13.31 Purpose. The PUD-2 district is intended to encourage a medium density residential
and office development with some supporting retail uses along the riverfront in East
Cambridge. It is also intended to encourage an active, high quality development
substantially in accordance with the Development Policies outlined in the 1978 East
Cambridge Riverfront Plan.
13.32 Uses Allowed in a PUD-2 District. The uses listed in this Section 13.32 alone or in
combination with each other shall be allowed upon permission of the Planning Board.
13-12
Residential uses are preferred. Development of about four hundred (400) new
dwelling units in this district is encouraged.
13.32.1 Residential Uses.
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Hotels or Motels.
13.32.2 Transportation, Communication, Utility Uses and Institutional Uses. All uses listed in
Sections 4.32 and 4.33 which are allowed or conditionally allowed in the base zoning
district.
13.32.3 Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
13.32.4 Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments.
(1) Store for retail sale of merchandise located in a structure primarily containing
non-retail uses, provided that no such establishment shall exceed two thousand
five hundred (2500) square feet gross floor area and that no manufacturing,
assembly or packaging occur on the premises.
(2) Barber shop, beauty shop, laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up agency, shoe repair,
self-service laundry or other similar service establishment.
(3) Restaurants or other eating and drinking establishments listed in Subsections
4.35e, f, and g.
(4) Theater or hall for public gatherings.
(5) Printing shop, photographer's studio.
13.32.5 Other Uses. Any use not listed in Subsections 13.32.1, 13.32.4 shall be allowed only
upon the written determination by the Planning Board that such use is compatible with
the development policies for “The Front” district specified in the East Cambridge
Riverfront Plan and is necessary to support the predominant uses in the PUD-2
district.
13.33 District Dimensional Regulations.
13.33.1 The maximum ratio of floor area to total area of the development parcel shall be 3.0;
however, the maximum ratio for a planned unit development in which seventy-five (75)
percent or more of the gross floor area of development will be devoted to multifamily
dwellings or townhouses shall be 4.0.
13.33.2 The minimum size of a development parcel shall be one acre (43,560 square feet.) A
development parcel within the PUD-2 district may contain noncontiguous lots
elsewhere in this PUD district or within a contiguous lots elsewhere in this PUD district
or within a contiguous PUD district. There shall be no minimum lot size for lots
located within a development parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all lot sizes
located within a development parcel.
13-13
13.33.3 For the purpose of computing residential density, the minimum land area for each
dwelling unit shall be three hundred (300) square feet. Residential density shall be
computed based on the entire development parcel.
13.33.4 There shall be no minimum width for the development parcel. Buildings on parcels
abutting the Cambridge Parkway should be setback from the Parkway Street line.
There shall be no minimum required front, rear and side yard requirements for a
development parcel or for lots located within a development parcel. The Planning
Board shall approve all such building setbacks. A variety of setbacks along
Cambridge Parkway and crenellated facades are encouraged along the riverfront
rather than a continuous, unbroken building mass.
13.34 Height.
13.34.1 The maximum height of any building shall be one hundred twenty (120) feet.
13.34.2 A variety of building heights ranging between five (5) and twelve (12) stories are
encouraged within the district.
13.34.3 In order to assure that adequate sunlight reaches public open space along the
riverfront, building planes facing or generally oriented toward the riverfront should be
stepped back in such a way as to minimize the shadows that are cast on the river side
of the Cambridge Parkway.
13.35 Private open space. The minimum ratio of private open space to the total area of the
development parcel as defined in Article 2.000 and Section 5.22 shall be twenty-five
(25) percent except as modified below.
13.35.1 The Planning Board may reduce the private open space requirement if the
development is located adjacent to a public open space and if the development
physically and functionally integrated with the open space by means of buildings
orientation, location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages between major activity
centers, or similar factors.
13.35.2 Private open space shall include parks, plazas, landscaped areas open to the sky,
playgrounds, balconies, roofs developed for recreational or leisure usage, and
pedestrian ways such as bridges, decks, arcades, loggias, and gallerias as specified
by the Planning Board.
13.35.3 Private open space at the ground level should be located and designed to
complement and to be connected with existing and planned public open space in the
district. Private open space oriented toward Cambridge Parkway and the riverfront
park between Cambridge Parkway and Commercial Avenue is preferred for
development parcels abutting those areas. In approving a final development plan, the
Planning Board may specify certain landscaping and other site design details to
assure that that the development will be compatible with public improvements in the
PUD-2 district and with the development policies outlined in the East Cambridge
Riverfront Plan.
13-14
13.36 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development in a PUD-2 district shall conform to
the off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, except as
modified by this Section 13.36.
13.36.1 Off street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(1) Residence: Minimum number of spaces per group of dwelling units: 10 per 10
(2) Public Assembly: Number of seats requiring one space: 15
13.36.2 Institutional, Retail and Office: Number of Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Requiring
One Space:
(1) Institutional: 1,800 square feet.
(2) Retail and Office:
Ground Floor: 900 square feet
Other Level: 1,800 square feet
13.36.3 On grade parking, not enclosed in a structure, may be constructed in the PUD-2
District only under the following conditions:
(1) On an interim basis in anticipation of later construction of structured parking
provided that there is compliance with each of the following:
(a) the future parking structure will be constructed within the District but it may
be located either on or off of the lot;
(b) construction of the future parking structure will commence within three years
of the date of permit application for development on the lot;
(c) such future parking structure may be constructed and/or operated by the
applicant or by any public or private entity;
(d) the future parking structure will contain sufficient spaces reserved for users
of the lot to meet the parking requirements for the lot specified in
Subsections 13.36.1 and 13.36.2; and
(e) binding commitments shall exist to guarantee, to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Planning Board that requirements (a) through (d) above shall be
satisfied. Such commitments shall be made by negotiated lease
agreement, deed restriction, covenant, performance bond, or comparable
legal instrument.
(2) On a permanent basis on the lot for visitors parking or for such other limited uses
as the user of the lot deems appropriate provided that no more than ten (10)
percent of the spaces required by subsections 13.36.1 and 13.36.2 or twenty
(20) spaces, whichever is greater, shall be allowed on grade under this Section
13.36.3(2).
13.36.4 The parking requirements specified in this Section 13.36 may be satisfied in total or in
part by a lease agreement between the developer and the City, other public entity, or
private consortium for use of parking spaces in a public or pooled private parking
facility located within the District. The total number of parking spaces leased and
13-15
constructed for the planned unit development shall be as least equivalent to the
requirements specified in subsections 13.36.1 and 13.36.2.
13.40 PUD-3 AND PUD 3A DISTRICTS: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
Unless otherwise indicated in this Section 13.40, the following provisions apply equally
to all PUD-3 districts.
13.41 Purpose. The PUD-3 districts are intended to provide for the creation of a high quality
general and technical office environment which permits larger scale development and
supporting commercial activities and which encourages strong linkages between new
development at Kendall Square and along the East Cambridge riverfront. The PUD
3A District specifically is intended to permit larger scale development along the Binney
Street corridor, consistent with the scale of development permitted in the abutting
PUD-3 District, which also creates large areas of contiguous Public Open Space in the
PUD 3A district or in adjacent PUD Districts in order to create a better transition from
neighborhoods to commercial areas. As required by Section 13.48 and 13.59, any
Final Development Plan for a Development Parcel in a PUD-3A District containing
increased density and heights as described in Sections 13.43.1(2) and 13.44.4 shall
minimize noise from rooftop mechanical equipment; contain environmentally
sustainable buildings; promote pedestrian usage of the sidewalks, an improved
pedestrian environment, pedestrian connections to public transit, and a sense of
neighborhood continuity by providing an interesting, lively, and active presence at
street level, by requiring a mix of residential, retail, and other uses as part of the Final
Development Plan and by providing attractive exterior through-block connector space;
provide parking which is primarily located underground and is maintained at lower
ratios than customarily required by the Zoning Ordinance, so as to eliminate surface
parking lots and promote public transportation and other parking and traffic demand
measures which will reduce automobile trips; be consistent with the Eastern
Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001; and preserve certain existing
structures which add to the character of the neighborhood. Any such Final
Development Plan encompassing land area in excess of 10 acres is expected to be
constructed over a lengthy period of time of up to 20 years. By meeting these
requirements and providing large areas of contiguous Public Open Space, a Final
Development Plan in the PUD 3A district meeting these requirements will promote the
goals of the Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001 and the public
health, safety, and welfare.
13.42 Uses Allowed in the PUD-3 Districts. The uses listed in this Section 13.42, alone or in
combination with each other, shall be allowed upon permission of the Planning Board.
Office and laboratory uses are preferred.
13.42.1 Residential Uses
(1) Townhouse Development. Any special permits for parking arrangements for
townhouse development required by Section 11.10 shall be granted by the
Planning Board in a Planned Unit Development in a PUD-3 district.
13-16
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
(3) Hotels or motels.
13.42.2 Transportation, Communication, Utility Uses and Institutional Uses. All uses listed in
sections 4.32 and 4.33 and which are allowed or conditionally allowed in the base
zoning district.
13.42.3 Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
13.42.4 Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments.
(1) Stationery and office supply store.
(2) Printing and reproduction service establishment, photography studio.
(3) Other store for retail sale of merchandise located in a structure primarily
containing nonretail use, provided that no such establishment shall exceed two
thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet gross floor area (except in a PUD-3A
district, where such establishments shall not exceed 12,000 gross square feet),
and that no manufacturing, assembly or packaging occur on the premises.
(4) Barber shop, beauty shop, laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up agency, shoe repair,
self-service laundry or other similar establishments.
(5) Restaurants or other eating and drinking establishments listed in Subsection 4.35
e, f, and g.
(6) Theater or hall for public gatherings, including Performing Arts Centers as
hereinafter defined.
(7) Bowling alley, skating rink, tennis center or other commercial recreation
establishments.
13.42.5 Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsections 13.42.1 - 13.42.5 shall be allowed only
upon written determination by the Planning Board that such use is consistent with the
objectives of the PUD-3 district and is necessary to support the predominant uses in
the district. Certain additional uses may be permitted in the PUD-3A district as set
forth in Section 13.59.
13.42.6 “Performing Arts Center” means one or more buildings on the same or adjacent lots
used exclusively for the production, creation, performing, presentment, screening,
development or viewing of at least three distinct forms of theatrical, musical,
cinematic, dance, oratorical and other performing arts, to be viewed or experienced in
at least three distinct venues within such building or buildings, together with such uses
customarily accessory thereto, such as, but not limited to, stage, backstage, rehearsal
or practice, classroom, storage, mechanical, dressing room, green room, lobby shop
and/or store, ticketing, restaurant and/or lounge, and accessory office uses.
13-17
13.43 District Dimensional Regulations.
13.43.1 (1) PUD-3 District: The maximum ratio of floor area to the total area of the
Development Parcel shall be 3.0 for Residential Uses, 4.31 a-h, and Dormitory Uses,
Section 4.33 b (7), and 2.0 for all other permitted uses.
A portion or portions of the existing or former Broad Canal without reference to
ownership may be counted in calculating the area of the Development Parcel. Each
portion so counted shall be included in computing the development parcel area for
one planned unit development.
(2) PUD-3A District: The maximum ratio of floor area to total area of the Development
Parcel shall be 1.25 except that the Planning Board may approve a Final Development
Plan with a maximum FAR exceeding 1.25 but not to exceed a maximum FAR of 3.0
where the Final Development Plan meets the requirements of Section 13.59.
Pursuant to Sections 13.59.4 and 13.59.9, certain building areas may be excluded
from Gross Floor Area for purposes of calculating such FAR.
13.43.11 Notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Ordinance, including the definition
of Gross Floor Area in Article 2.000, the Gross Floor Area of a Performing Arts Center
in the PUD-3 District shall include only publicly accessible, above grade, circulation,
performance, and amenity spaces as measured from the interior face of walls of each
space provided that all other dimensional requirements, limitation on the permitted
number of seats, or other requirements imposed under a PUD-3 District Special
Permit, as amended, have been found by the Planning Board to have been satisfied.
13.43.2 The minimum size of the Development Parcel for a PUD shall be two (2) acres. A
Development Parcel within the PUD-3 may contain noncontiguous lots elsewhere in
this PUD district or within adjacent PUD districts.
A Development Parcel within the PUD-3A District may contain noncontiguous lots
elsewhere in one or more of the PUD-3A District, the PUD-4C District and, solely for
the purpose of including lots to be dedicated to Public Open Space, the PUD-2 District
subject to the provisions of Section 13.59.
There shall be no specified minimum lot size for lots located within a Development
Parcel. Planning Board approval of all proposed lots located within a Development
Parcel shall be required.
13.43.3 For the purpose of computing residential density, the minimum lot size for each
dwelling unit shall be three hundred (300) square feet. Residential density shall be
computed based on the entire Development Parcel.
13.43.4 There shall be no minimum width for the Development Parcel and no minimum width
for lots located within the Development Parcel. There shall be no other minimum
required front, rear and side yard requirements for a Development Parcel or for lots
located within a Development Parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all such
building setbacks. Any buildings on a parcel abutting the Broad Canal should be set
back or so designed as to provide a pedestrian pathway along the canal’s edge.
13-18
13.43.41 In a PUD-3A District, there shall be a setback of ten (10) feet from the streetline of
Binney Street at and above a point between 78 and 85 feet above grade (the exact
location of such point to be determined by the Planning Board in its review of the
Development Proposal and Final Development Plan). Up to one-third of façade length
on a cumulative basis may be exempted from this requirement.
13.44 Height.
13.44.1 In the PUD-3 District the maximum height of any building shall be two hundred and
thirty (230) feet, except as modified in Section 13.44.2.
13.44.2 In the PUD-3 District the Planning Board shall not approve any Final Development
Plan in which twenty-five (25) percent or more of the land area of the Development
Parcel is covered with such buildings or parts of buildings not exempted by Section
5.23 in excess of one hundred and twenty (120) feet in height or in which fifteen (15)
percent or more of the land areas of the Development Parcel is covered with such
buildings or parts thereof in excess of two hundred (200) feet in height.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board, in its discretion, may accept for
review an application for a Special Permit based on a Development Proposal which
deviates from the aforesaid provisions of this Section 13.44.2, provided that the Final
Development Plan is in conformity with such provisions. Lower buildings or building
elements are encouraged closer to the Charles River while taller buildings or building
elements are encouraged closer to Kendall Square.
13.44.3 In the PUD-3 District, in evaluating a Development Proposal providing building height
in excess of one hundred and twenty (120) feet, the Planning Board shall give
consideration to evidence presented on the following:
(a) that increased height will not cast shadows or alter air currents in ways that will
unreasonably limit the amount of light and air reaching other buildings in the
vicinity to a significantly greater extent that if the building height did not exceed
one hundred and twenty (120) feet;
(b) that increased height would mitigate detrimental environmental impacts such as
excessive ground coverage, diminution of open space, and monotonous
development;
(c) that increased height would not adversely affect and would result in increased
sensitivity to the visual and physical characteristic of the particular location
through more harmonious relationships to the terrain and to the proposed and
existing buildings in the vicinity that have functional or visual relationships to the
proposed building;
(d) that increased height would result from actions taken to lessen the impact of traffic
and parking on the surrounding area; and
(e) that the orientation and location of the proposed structure would not otherwise
diminish the health and safety of the area around the development parcel.
13-19
13.44.4 In the PUD-3A District, the maximum height of any building shall be one hundred
twenty (120) feet, except that the Planning Board may approve a Final Development
Plan with a building height within the PUD-3A District of one hundred forty (140) feet
subject to the requirements of Section 13.59.
13.45 Open Space. The minimum ratio of open space to the total area of the Development
Parcel as defined in Article 2.000 and Section 5.22 shall be fifteen (15) percent except
as modified below.
13.45.1 The Planning Board may reduce the open space requirement if the development is
located adjacent to a Public Open Space and if the development is physically and
functionally integrated with the Public Open Space by means of building orientation,
location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages between major activity centers, or
similar factors, or if the development provides for contiguous Public Open Space as
described in Section 13.59.
13.45.2 Open space shall include parks, plazas, landscaped areas open to the sky,
playgrounds, balconies, roofs developed for recreational or leisure usage, and
pedestrian ways such as bridges, decks, arcades, loggias, and gallerias as specified
by the Planning Board.
13.46 Perimeter and transition. Any part of the perimeter of a PUD which fronts on an
existing street or Public Open Space should be so designed as to complement and
harmonize with adjacent land uses with respect to scale, density, setback, bulk,
height, landscaping, and screening. Development in the PUD-3 districts should
provide integrated pedestrian circulation systems, particularly strong linkages between
the riverfront and Kendall Square. Development in the PUD-3A District should
enhance the pedestrian experience along Binney Street. See Section 13.59.3
13.47 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development in the PUD-3 district shall conform
to the off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, except
as modified by this Section 13.47. In the PUD-3A district these provisions shall be
further modified by Section 13.59 for any development subject to the provisions of
Section 13.59.
13.47.1 Off street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(1) Residence: Minimum number of spaces per group of dwelling units: 10 per
10.
(2) Public Assembly: Number of Seats requiring one space: 15.
13.47.2 Institutional, Retail and Office: Number of Square Feet of Gross Area Requiring One
Space:
(1) Institutional: 1,800 square feet
(2) Retail and Office:
Ground Floor: 900 square feet
13-20
Other level: 1,800 square feet.
13.47.3 The parking requirements of this Section 13.47, and as modified in Section 13.59 for
development subject to the provisions of Section 13.59, may be satisfied anywhere on
the Development Parcel, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Article
6.000.
13.48 Where indicated in this Section 13.40, the provisions of Section 13.59 shall apply
equally in the PUD-3A District. The Planning Board shall include in any Special
Permit conditions that require ongoing compliance with any and all applicable
provisions of Section 13.59.
13.50 PUD-4, PUD-4A, PUD-4B and PUD-4C DISTRICTS: DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
Unless otherwise indicated in this Section 13.50, the following provisions apply equally
to all PUD-4 Districts.
13.51.1 Purpose. The PUD-4, PUD-4A and PUD-4B districts are intended to provide the
opportunity for creation of a highly active, medium density commercial and residential
area with a mix of retail, office and residential uses. Development in the PUD-4, PUD4A
and PUD-4B districts shall be generally consistent with the policy objectives set
forth in the Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001 and the guidance
provided in the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001 and
with the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated October 15, 2001. The PUD-4A and
4B districts specifically are intended to encourage a mix of uses with a substantial
component of housing, with the housing, where possible, located within the
development parcel adjacent to the existing residential neighborhood. In the PUD-4A
District reuse of existing historic industrial structures for mixed residential, retail and
office uses is encouraged. It is the intent of these Districts to encourage an active
urban setting around the Lechmere Canal and along public and private streets both
during and after customary business hours. Ground floor building spaces oriented
toward the Lechmere Canal and public streets should primarily contain retail or
consumer service office uses to the extent possible. Extensive ground level building
frontage along the Lechmere Canal developed to institutional or office uses is not
encouraged.
13.51.2 Purpose. The PUD-4C District is intended to provide for the creation of quality
development that enhances the pedestrian experience along Binney Street, creates a
transition between commercial development along the Binney Street corridor and
residential neighborhoods to the north, and creates large areas of contiguous Public
Open Space in the PUD-4C District or in adjacent PUD Districts. As required by
Section 13.59, any Final Development Plan in a PUD-4C District containing increased
density and heights as described in Sections 13.53.1(4) and 13.54.4 shall minimize
noise from rooftop mechanical equipment; contain environmentally sustainable
buildings; promote pedestrian usage of the sidewalks and pedestrian connections to
public transit, and a sense of neighborhood continuity by providing an interesting,
lively and active presence at street level, by requiring a mix of residential, retail and
13-21
other uses as part of the Final Development Plan and by providing attractive exterior
through-block connector space; provide parking which is primarily located
underground and is maintained at lower ratios than customarily required by the Zoning
Ordinance, so as to eliminate surface parking lots and promote the use of public
transportation and other parking and traffic demand measures which will reduce
automobile trips; be consistent with the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines dated
October 15, 2001; and preserve certain existing structures which add to the character
of the neighborhood. Any such Final Development Plan encompassing land area in
excess of 10 acres is expected to be constructed over a lengthy period of time of up to
20 years. By meeting these requirements and providing large areas of contiguous
Public Open Space, an approved Final Development Plan in the PUD 4C district will
promote the goals of the Eastern Cambridge Planning Study dated October 2001 and
the public health, safety and welfare.
13.52 Uses Allowed in PUD-4 Districts. The uses listed in this Section 13.52, alone or in
combination shall be allowed. However, the amount and extent of uses may be
further regulated and limited in each PUD district as set forth elsewhere in this Section
13.50.
13.52.1 Residential Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.31 a-h, and i2.
13.52.2 Transportation, Communications and Utility Uses and Institutional Uses. All uses
listed in Sections 4.32 and 4.33, which are allowed or conditionally allowed in the
applicable base zoning districts.
13.52.3 Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
13.52.4 Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments. All uses listed in Section
4.35.
13.52.5 Open air or Drive in Retail and Service Uses.
(1) sales place for flowers, garden supplies, agricultural produce conducted
partly or wholly outdoors; commercial greenhouse or warehouse;
(2) open air place of entertainment;
(3) automobile service station where no major repairs are made provided that
all lubrication and repairs are carried out within the building and further
provided the service station will be located within or attached to a parking
garage or other structure as accessory use.
13.52.6 Other Uses. Any use not listed in Subsections 13.52.1 - 13.52.5 shall be allowed only
upon written determination by the Planning Board that such use is (1) compatible with
the Lechmere Canal and Square district in the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated
May, 1978 and the policy objectives set forth in the Eastern Cambridge Plan dated
October 2001 and the guidance provided in the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines
dated October 15, 2001 and (2) necessary to support the predominant uses in the
PUD-4 districts.
13-22
Certain additional uses may be permitted in the PUD-4C as set forth in Section 13.59
13.53 District Dimensional Regulations.
13.53.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum ratio of floor area to the total area of the
Development Parcel shall be as set forth below. For purposes of this Section 13.53.1,
residential use shall mean those uses set forth in Section 4.31 a-h.
(1) PUD-4 District: 2.0 for all uses, or the Gross Floor Area of the buildings
contained within the Development Parcel at the time of application for a
PUD special permit, whichever is greater.
(2) PUD-4A District: 2.5 for all uses, or the Gross Floor Area of the buildings
contained within the Development Parcel at the time of application for a
PUD special permit, whichever is greater. In no case, however, may nonresidential
uses, including hotels and motels, exceed fifty (50) percent of
the total GFA authorized by a PUD special permit.
(3) PUD-4B: For all uses an FAR twice that permitted for non-residential uses
in the applicable base zoning district (i.e. 2.0 in the Business A District; 2.5
in the Industry A-1 district). In no case, however, may the GFA of the nonresidential
uses, including hotels and motels, authorized by a PUD special
permit exceed that resulting from the application of the non-residential FAR
permitted in the applicable base zoning district to the PUD parcel area (i.e.
1.0 in a Business A district and 1.25 in an Industry A-1 district).
(4) PUD-4C District: 1.25 for all uses, except that the Planning Board may
approve a Final Development Plan with a maximum FAR exceeding 1.25
but not to exceed a maximum FAR of 3.0 where the Final Development
Plan meets the requirements of Section 13.59. Pursuant to Sections
13.59.4 and 13.59.9, certain building areas may be excluded from Gross
Floor Area for purposes of calculating such FAR.
13.53.2 Minimum Development Parcel. The minimum size of the Development Parcel for a
PUD shall be twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet. A Development Parcel within
the PUD-4 districts may contain non-contiguous lots elsewhere in any one of the PUD4
districts or within a contiguous PUD district.
For a Development Parcel within the PUD-4C District that is subject to the provisions
of Section 13.59, the minimum size shall be two (2) acres and may contain noncontiguous
lots elsewhere in the PUD-4C District, the PUD-3A District, and, solely for
the purpose of including lots to be dedicated to Public Open Space, the PUD-2
District.
There shall be no specified minimum lot size for lots located within a Development
Parcel. Planning Board approval of all lots located within a Development Parcel shall
be required.
13-23
13.53.3 Dwelling Unit Density. For the purpose of computing residential dwelling unit density,
the minimum land area for each dwelling unit shall be four hundred and fifty (450)
square feet. Residential density shall be computed based on the entire Development
Parcel. Wherever a residential FAR of 3.0 is permitted, the Planning Board may
increase the dwelling unit density to one unit per three-hundred (300) square feet of
land area.
13.53.4 Other Dimensions. There shall be no minimum width for the Development Parcel and
no minimum width for lots within the Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum
required front, rear and side yard requirements for a Development Parcel or for lots
located within a Development Parcel. The Planning Board shall approve all such
building setbacks.
Any development subject to the provisions of Section 13.59 shall be subject to the
following setback requirements:
(1) Four (4) feet from the Rogers Street streetline for any building facing
Rogers Street Park (see Section 13.59).
(2) Eight (8) feet for the first two stories and four (4) feet above the second
story, measured from the northerly street line of Binney Street between
Second Street and Third Street.
13.54 Maximum Height. The maximum height for any building shall be as set forth below:
(1) PUD-4 district: Eighty-five (85) feet.
(2) PUD-4A district: Sixty-five (65) feet except as provided for below:
(a) Alterations and additions within the footprint of any building or group
of abutting buildings existing on the site at the time of the application
for a PUD special permit may exceed sixty-five feet but may be no
higher than the highest portion of the existing buildings within the
Development Parcel.
(b) Building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet in that area bounded by
the centerline of Cambridge Street; then by a line easterly of, parallel
to and one hundred (100) feet distant from the westerly boundary
line of the PUD-4A; then the centerline of O’Brien Highway; then the
westerly boundary line of the PUD-4A, to the point of origin.
(3) PUD-4B district: Sixty-five (65) feet except that between Thorndike Street
and Bent Street building height shall be forty-five (45) feet within 200 feet of
the easterly sideline of Second Street.
(4) PUD-4C District: Forty-five (45) feet north of the northerly sideline of
Rogers Street (subject to the limitation on buildings set forth in Section
13.59 below, where applicable) and Sixty-five (65) feet south of the
northerly sideline of Rogers Street, except the Planning Board may
13-24
approve a Final Development Plan with the following building heights,
subject to the provisions of Section 13.59:
(a) In the block bounded by Binney Street, Third Street, Rogers Street
and Second Street:
(i) A building height of eighty-five (85) feet for a building
devoted primarily to residential uses north of the northerly sideline
of Binney Street and within seventy-five (75) feet of the easterly
sideline of Third Street; and
(ii) A building height of seventy-eight (78) feet within one
hundred and thirty–eight (138) feet of the northerly sideline of
Binney Street, exclusive of the area described in Paragraph (i)
above.
(b) In the block bounded by Binney Street, Sixth Street, Rogers Street,
and Fifth Street: a building height of seventy-five (75) feet.
In approving heights in a PUD development the Planning Board shall be guided by the
intent of this Section 13.50 to provide transitions in height between the higher density
development along First and Binney Streets and lower density development and lower
height along Second Street adjacent to the residential neighborhood.
13.55 Open Space. The minimum ratio of open space to the total area of the Development
Parcel shall be twenty (20) percent except as modified below. The open space may
be any combination of Useable, Permeable, Green Area or Publicly Beneficial Open
Space as defined in Article 2.000 and further regulated in Section 5.22 of the
Ordinance.
13.55.1 The Planning Board may reduce the open space requirement if the development is
located adjacent to a Public Open Space and if the development is physically and
functionally integrated with that Public Open Space by means of building orientation,
location of building entrances, pedestrian linkages between major activity centers, or
similar factors. The open space requirement may also be reduced to the extent that
the Planning Board finds that such reduction facilitates preservation and reuse of
existing historic structures, facilitates the conversion of such structures to residential
use, or otherwise advances the urban design objectives as they apply to a PUD’s
specific location. The Planning Board also may reduce the open space requirement if
the Final Development Plan conforms to the requirements and limitations of Section
13.59, as applicable.
13.55.2 Open space may include parks, plazas, landscaped areas open to the sky,
playgrounds, balconies, roofs developed for recreational or leisure usage, and
pedestrian ways, such as bridges, decks, arcades, loggias, and gallerias as permitted
by the Planning Board.
13-25
13.55.3 Open space at the ground level held in private ownership to serve the needs of
residents and employees of buildings within the PUD should be located and designed
to complement and to be connected with existing and planned Public Open Space in
the district. In approving a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board may specify
certain landscaping and other site design details to assure the PUD will be compatible
with public improvement in the districts and with the development policies outlined in
the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan dated May, 1978 and the Eastern Cambridge
Planning Study dated October 2001.
13.56 Perimeter and Transition. Any part of the perimeter of a planned unit development
which fronts on an existing street or Public Open Space should be so designed as to
complement and harmonize with adjacent land uses with respect to scale, density,
setback, bulk, height, landscaping and screening.
13.57 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development in the PUD-4 districts shall
conform to the off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000,
and in the Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements applicable to the
Residence C-3, Office 3, Business B and Industry B districts, except as modified by
Section 13.57.1 - 3 below. In the PUD-4C District these provisions shall be modified
by the parking provisions of Section 13.59 for any development subject to the
provisions of Section 13.59.
13.57.1 Off street parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(1) Residence: 1 space per unit minimum, 1.5 spaces per unit maximum.
(2) Public Assembly: Number of seats requiring one space: 15.
(3) Institutional: 1 space per 1,800 square feet.
(4) Retail (except as noted in Section 13.57.2 below) and Office:
Ground floor: 1,125 square feet
Other level: 1,800 square feet
13.57.2 Ground Floor Retail and Customer Service Uses. Retail and customer service uses
fronting on and having a public entrance onto First Street, located at the first floor level
of a multistory building, and not exceeding 10,000 square feet for each separately
leased establishment shall not be required to provide any accessory parking. Where
parking is provided it shall be subject to Section 13.57.1 above.
13.57.3 The parking requirements specified in this Section 13.57 may be satisfied in total or in
part by a lease agreement between the developer and the City, other public entity, or
private consortium for use of parking spaces in the public or pooled private parking
facilities located within the Districts. The total number of parking spaces leased and
constructed for the planned unit development shall be at least equivalent to the
requirements specified in Article 6.000. The parking requirements specified in this
Section 13.57, as may be modified in Section 13.59 below for applicable development
13-26
also may be satisfied anywhere on the Development Parcel, notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in Article 6.000.
13.58 Relationship to MBTA Urban Ring Transportation Planning Project. In all PUD
application documents, the applicant shall indicate how the proposed PUD
development relates physically to the most current plans developed by the MBTA for
implementation of the Urban Ring transportation project.
13.59 Special Requirements, Conditions and Standards Applicable to Certain Development
Authorized by the Planning Board in the PUD-3A and PUD-4C Districts.
Where compliance with the provisions of this Section 13.59 is required by certain
provisions of Sections 13.40 and 13.50, the Planning Board shall approve a Final
Development Plan only after finding that in addition to all other applicable
requirements the following requirements have been met. The Planning Board shall, in
addition, include conditions in the approval of the Final Development Plan that will
ensure ongoing compliance with these requirements.
13.59.1 Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Noise Mitigation. Sound emanating from rooftop
mechanical equipment on all new structures in the approved Final Development Plan
shall be minimized by the adoption of best available and feasible practices regarding
the location and sizing of equipment, the selection of equipment and sound
attenuation measures.
At a minimum, any noise or vibration shall not be normally perceptible at ground level
without instruments at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the source lot line
and buildings shall comply with the City of Cambridge Noise Ordinance.
In order to enforce these requirements, the applicant shall provide, in addition to the
Noise Mitigation narrative required as part of Article 19.000 review, acoustical reports
prepared by a professional acoustical engineer as described below:
(1) Prior to and as a condition of the issuance of the first certificate of
occupancy for a new building, an acoustical report, including field
measurements, demonstrating compliance of such building with all
applicable noise requirements; and
(2) Prior to obtaining any building permit to add any equipment having a
capacity greater than 5 horsepower to the rooftop, a narrative report
demonstrating that there will be continued compliance with all applicable
noise requirements after such addition, and upon completion of such
addition and as a condition to operation thereof, an acoustical report,
including field measurements, demonstrating such compliance.
13.59.2 Sustainability.
13-27
All new structures within a Final Development Plan shall be planned, designed and
constructed to be eligible to achieve at least the level “Silver” using the applicable
LEED Rating System of the United States Green Building Council in effect on January
1, 2009 (or any higher standard to which new buildings in the City of 50,000 square
feet or more are made subject by City Ordinance). An applicant subject to this
requirement shall provide to the Planning Board as part of its application for final
approval under Article 19.000 for any new building in an approved Final Development
Plan a completed LEED scorecard, with supporting documentation, demonstrating
that the new building will meet the requirements of this section.
13.59.3 Active Uses and Pedestrian Activity.
The Final Development Plan shall enhance the public pedestrian usage of the
sidewalks and create a sense of neighborhood continuity by providing an interesting,
lively and active presence at street level. Accordingly, portions of the ground floors of
buildings in locations such as the ones enumerated below, or comparable locations,
shall generally be planned, designed, constructed and used for Active Uses (defined
below). At a minimum, at least 20,000 square feet shall be developed Active Uses.
13.59.31 Definition of Active Uses. For purposes of this Section 13.59, “Active Uses” means:
(1) Retail sales and services listed in Sections 4.35 and 4.36;
(2) Restaurants, and establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold and
consumed, listed in Section 4.35;
(3) Mixed-Mode Transportation Hub, which shall mean a facility which shall
include a bicycle storage and bicycle service facility, convenient access to
a “car-sharing” program, and a shuttle bus stop and a protected waiting
area for shuttle buses to public transit facilities; and
(4) Other uses which the Planning Board determines meet the goals of this
Section 13.59.3.
13.59.32 Location of Active Uses.
While Active Uses are desirable and encouraged at many locations throughout a
Development Parcel located in a PUD-3A or PUD-4C district, potential locations of
Active Uses of particular merit include the following locations for the portion of the
Development Parcel within the PUD-3A District:
(1) Portions of buildings and sites adjacent to the intersection of Binney Street
and Second Street (including a “Mixed-Mode Transportation Hub,” as
defined above); and
(2) Portions of buildings and sites facing First Street across from the Triangle
Park (as defined below).
Potential locations of Active Uses of particular merit include the following location for
the portion of the Development Parcel within the PUD-4C District:
13-28
(3) Portions of buildings and sites adjacent to the intersection of Binney Street
and Third Street.
The Planning Board shall have flexibility in approving the actual location of Active
Uses in the Final Development Plan. In order to preserve such flexibility, all ground
floor space in an approved Final Development Plan, whether or not in one of the
potential locations for Active Uses described above, shall contain design features
which could accommodate future Active Uses.
13.59.33 Building and Site Design Requirements for Active Uses and Open Spaces.
(1) Each Active Use shall have at least one entrance from the sidewalk
separate from the principal entrance of the building.
(2) Where the length of a commercial building’s primary façade exceeds 135
feet, loading, service, and garage ramp areas shall occur behind no more
than one third (1/3) of ground level façade length facing a park. Along the
remaining two-thirds (2/3) of ground level façade length, transparent
glazing shall make up at least 40% of ground-level façade area, and areas
of opaque wall may extend no more than 25 feet horizontally.
Notwithstanding these design requirements, it is preferred that parking
entries and service facilities not be located within that portion of a building
facing Rogers Street Park.
(3) In order to provide open and inviting public access between buildings and
sidewalks, a Final Development Plan shall contain attractive exterior
through-block connector space in the block bounded by Binney Street,
Second Street, Rogers Street and Third Street (where that area is
encompassed by the Development Parcel) and shall provide for the
expansion and enhancement of the existing through-block connector in the
block bounded by Binney Street, Second Street, Linskey Way and Third
Street (where that area is encompassed by the Development Parcel).
Exterior connector space shall be open to the public at all times.
(4) Outdoor courtyards, delineated gathering space, or sitting areas are
encouraged throughout the Development Parcel in any approved Final
Development Plan.
13.59.34 Required Marketing Plan.
An approved Final Development Plan shall include a marketing and merchandising
plan to be implemented over the life of the permit in order to recruit users and
otherwise use diligent efforts to cause ground floor areas of buildings and adjacent
sites as approved in the Final Development Plan to be occupied by Active Uses.
Among other things, the marketing plan shall (1) set forth target uses and users (and
shall particularly target local and/or independent retailers), (2) designate an individual
responsible for implementing the plan who shall serve as a point of contact with the
Community Development Department (through its Economic Development Division),
13-29
(3) describe the types of economic incentives which may be offered to tenants such as
rental and fit-up allowances, and (4) include a street activation plan.
The Planning Board shall require in its conditions of approval an annual reporting to
the Community Development Department, until the later of three years after full
occupancy of all required Active Use space and ten years after the issuance of the
first building permit for a building in the Final Development Plan, regarding the
ongoing efforts on the part of the Permittee to comply with such plans. The Permittee
shall revise the marketing and management plan as necessary to achieve full
occupancy of all required Active Use space within a reasonable period of time.
13.59.4 Required Housing.
The Final Development Plan shall provide for at least 220,000 square feet of gross
floor area to be devoted to residential uses. The residential units shall contain at least
47,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area of housing affordable to middle income
households whose total income does not exceed one hundred twenty (120%) percent
of the median income for the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area and at
least 33,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area of housing affordable to low and
moderate income households whose total income does not exceed eighty (80%)
percent of the median income for the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area.
The residential uses shall be constructed in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Construction of the first 70,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area of required
residential uses must commence prior to the issuance of a building permit
allowing non-residential Gross Floor Area in excess of 767,000 square feet
of non-residential Gross Floor Area in the aggregate.
(2) Construction of the remaining 150,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area of
required residential uses shall commence no later than the later of (a)
issuance of a building permit allowing non-residential Gross Floor Area in
excess of 1,000,000 square feet of non-residential Gross Floor Area in the
aggregate or (b) eight years after the grant of a Special Permit approving a
Final Development Plan.
The required 220,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area devoted to residential uses
shall be excluded from Gross Floor Area for the purposes of calculating Floor Area
Ratio (FAR). The required residential Gross Floor Area shall not be subject to the
provisions of Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance. The required residential Gross
floor Area shall specifically not be eligible for the FAR and dwelling unit bonuses set
forth in Section 11.203.2.
Notwithstanding the exclusion of the 220,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area to be
devoted to residential uses from the provisions of Section 11.200, the required low
and moderate income units shall be constructed, marketed and administered in
conformance with the requirements, policies and procedures established by the City
for units otherwise subject to Section 11.200.
13-30
Residential Gross Floor Area approved in the Final Development Plan exceeding
220,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area shall be subject to the FAR limitations of the
PUD Districts and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 11.200.
13.59.41 Incentive Zoning Provisions.
A PUD Final Development Plan subject to the provisions of this Section 13.59 shall
provide to the Cambridge community significant material benefits in the form of,
among other things, a significant component of housing serving households with a
wide range of incomes at least equivalent to the housing which would have been
provided pursuant to Sections 11.203.1 and 11.203.2, as well as providing the land for
two large public parks and the funds to design and construct improvements thereon,
an active program to establish and support retail activities within the development,
donation of an existing building to the City of Cambridge with a preference for its use
for municipal or community use, and measures to monitor and manage noise
generation within the development; therefore, any such Final Development Plan shall
not be subject to the requirements of Section 11.203.1 and 11.203.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
13.59.5 Parking.
The approved Final Development Plan shall provide for parking for non-residential
uses in new buildings at a ratio no greater than .9 spaces per 1,000 feet of Gross
Floor Area for retail and office uses (including technical office and laboratory uses).
The Planning Board may allow, consistent with the provisions of Section 6.35, parking
at a ratio which is less than 1 space per dwelling unit for any residential use. All
parking for nonresidential uses shall be underground structured parking, provided that
a Development Parcel may contain on grade parking equal in number to 5% of the
parking otherwise required for the uses in the Final Development Plan (but in no event
more than 60 spaces). In its approval of a Final Development Plan, the Planning
Board may approve the location, layout and design of parking spaces which deviate
from the requirements of Article 6.000 of this Ordinance.
13.59.51 Interim Use of Surface Parking
On an interim basis in anticipation of later construction of underground structured
parking sufficient to meet all parking requirements, on grade open parking shall be
allowed in a Development Parcel subject to the following conditions:
(1) The future underground parking structure will be constructed within the
Development Parcel but it may be located either on or off of the lot which it
will serve;
(2) Construction of the replacement subsurface parking structure will
commence within four years of the date of certificate of occupancy for the
building initially served by on grade parking;
13-31
(3) The future subsurface parking structure will contain sufficient spaces for
users of the building initially served by on grade open parking so as to
meet the parking requirements for such building; and
(4) Binding commitments shall exist to establish, to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Planning Board, that requirements (1) through (3) above shall be
satisfied. Such commitments shall be made by negotiated lease
agreement, deed restriction, covenant, or comparable legal instrument.
13.59.52 Accessory Parking for Uses Outside the Development Parcel
The Planning Board may approve in the Final Development Plan underground
structured parking spaces as replacements for pre-existing spaces that will be
displaced by improvements contemplated by such Final Development Plan.
In addition, notwithstanding any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, in
the event that any pre-existing accessory off-street parking facilities located in a
Development Parcel, that are serving a pre-existing use located outside the
Development Parcel (whether within or outside the applicable PUD district), are
proposed to be eliminated or displaced in accordance with the Final Development
Plan, such pre-existing off-street parking may be relocated by Special Permit granted
by the Planning Board to the owner of the off-site use. In granting such Special
Permit, the Planning Board may grant deviations from the requirements of Article
6.000 of this Ordinance for the number, location, layout and design of the relocated
parking spaces
13.59.6 Consistency with Design Guidelines.
The Final Development Plan shall be generally consistent with the guidance provided
in the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines dated October 15, 2001, provided that in
the event of any conflict between such Design Guidelines and this Ordinance, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Application of such Design Guidelines may
vary within the context of specific building proposals in a way that, nevertheless,
respects the intent of such Design Guidelines and this Ordinance. Accordingly,
variations from the Design Guidelines may be approved so long as it is demonstrated
that the alternate approach serves as well or better the objectives of the PUD-3A and
PUD-4C Districts or creates positive design opportunities not envisioned in the Design
Guidelines. In granting approval under Article 19.000 for all buildings in a Final
Development Plan subject to this Section 13.59, the Planning Board may approve
buildings for which physical design information is presented in conceptual form,
subject to later design review and approval by the Planning Board and a finding that
final design of such buildings is consistent with such Design Guidelines as aforesaid,
and such other design goals as are set forth in this Ordinance and the Special Permit
approving such Final Development Plan.
13.59.7 Preservation.
In the event that all or any portion of a lot listed below is included in a Final
Development Plan, the exterior of the currently existing structure thereon shall not be
13-32
demolished but shall be preserved in place for adaptive re-use during its useful life (or
relocated, as noted):
(1) 140-146 Sixth Street (The building at the corner of Sixth Street and Rogers
Street on Tax Parcel 28-23)
(2) 213 Binney Street (The building on the corner of Binney Street and Fifth
Street on Tax Parcel 28-23 but not including the building on such Tax
Parcel known as 126 Rogers Street)
(3) 161 First Street (excluding three story rear addition) (Tax Parcel 16-20)
(4) 41 Linskey Way (Also known as 219 Second Street) (Building may be
moved to another location, in compliance with all applicable laws) (Tax
Parcel 15-11)
13.59.8 Letter of Commitment.
Issuance of any base building permit or certificate of occupancy for any building in the
Final Development Plan shall be conditioned upon certification by all relevant
departments of the City to the Superintendent of Buildings that the Project is
proceeding in accordance with all provisions of that certain “Letter of Commitment”
dated February 9, 2009.
13.59.9 Required Public Open Space Features.
Where compliance with this Section 13.59 in required by any provision of Sections
13.40 and 13.50 of the Zoning Ordinance, the following Public Open Space to be
dedicated to the City of Cambridge shall be required in the approved Final
Development Plan:
(1) In the block bounded by Rogers Street, Third Street, and Second Street
(Tax Parcels 16-25, 16-27 and 16-1), a Public Open Space no less than
two (2) acres in size in the aggregate (Rogers Street Park).
(2) In the block bounded by Land boulevard, First Street, Binney Street and
Monroe Street Extension (Tax Parcel 11-32) and the block bounded by
Land Boulevard, First Street and Munroe Street Extension (Tax Parcel 1146),
a Public Open Space no less than 0.30 acres in size in the aggregate
(Triangle Park).
13.59.91 Timing of the Permanent Dedication of Required Public Open Space.
The required Public Open Space shall be permanently dedicated to the City of
Cambridge by a legal device or instrument acceptable to the City, with all buildings
and foundations removed, and in an environmental condition consistent with all
federal, state and local laws, rules, and regulations for all uses to which Public Open
Space is intended to be put, including, but not limited to (in the case of the Rogers
Street Park), unrestricted excavation for purposes of construction of recreational
13-33
buildings and facilities and landscaping, and (in the case of the Triangle Park),
unrestricted excavation for purposes of construction and installation of sidewalks,
poles, walls, fences, landscaping and similar site improvements. The open space
shall be dedicated to the City on the following schedule:
(1) In the case of the Rogers Street Park, no later than the issuance of the first
certificate of occupancy for the first non-residential building constructed in
the approved Final Development Plan.
(2) In the case of the Triangle Park, no later than the issuance of certificates of
occupancy for non-residential buildings in the Final Development Plan that
in the aggregate of such building construction contain at least 700,000
square feet of Gross Floor Area.
The dedication of the required Public Open Space shall be accomplished
by transfer of ownership of the required lots to the City in fee simple
absolute, subject to encumbrances acceptable to the City which do not
interfere with the use of the land for its intended purposes such as
subsurface utility easements. If the City does not accept such transfer of
ownership, then the Permitee, or its successors and assigns, shall hold the
land as Public Open Space available to the public in perpetuity for all uses
and activities identified in the definition of Public Open Space in this Zoning
Ordinance. The development of the Public Open Space, whether or not
ownership is transferred to the City, shall be designed and its use shall be
programmed and controlled by the City of Cambridge. No building other
than any building constructed by the City ancillary to the use of the site
shall be constructed on the lots so dedicated as Public Open Space. The
Gross Floor Area of any such buildings shall be excluded from Gross Floor
Area for purposes of calculating Floor Area Ratio.
13.59.10 Donation of an Existing Building with a preference for its use for Municipal or
Community Uses.
Any Final Development Plan shall provide for the transfer of ownership to the City of
Cambridge of the existing building and lot identified as 101 Rogers Street (also known
as 117 Rogers Street and as the Foundry Building) (Tax Parcel 27-82), with a
preference for its use for municipal or community uses as generally set forth in
Section 4.33 of the Table of Use Regulations, at least 10,000 square feet of which
shall be devoted to educational, cultural or institutional uses listed in Section 4.33 of
the Table of Use Regulations, at a time and in a form acceptable to the City. Such
transfer shall include the full development rights attendant to such lot at an FAR of 3.0
as generally permitted within the applicable PUD. Upon the execution of such transfer
of ownership, the PUD Permittee shall be entitled to 43,684 square feet of additional
Gross Floor Area for non-residential or residential development within the approved
Final Development Plan above that otherwise permitted through application of the
FAR limitations set forth in the PUD-3A and 4C Districts, and if ownership of a portion
of up to 5,254 square feet of the lot identified as 249 Third Street (Tax Parcel 27-76) is
transferred to the City of Cambridge, upon the execution of such transfer of
13-34
ownership, the PUD Permittee shall be entitled to additional Gross Floor Area, as well,
equal to the product of 3 times the number of square feet of such portion of such lot.
Such Gross Floor Area may be included in the approved Final Development Plan,
notwithstanding that such approval may precede the actual transfer of the property to
the City.
13.60 deleted
13.70 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT IN THE NORTH POINT RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
13.71 Purpose. This Section 13.70 is intended to provide the opportunity to create a new
residential neighborhood from an area now primarily industrial in character. Retail and
office uses and community services are encouraged as part of that neighborhood to
serve the residential community and stimulate activity in the area for extended hours
throughout the day. Significant new public open space to serve the residents of the
district and the general public is desired. It is also intended that development in the
PUD in the North Point Residence District will be generally consistent with the policy
objectives set forth in the Eastern Cambridge Plan and guidance provided in the
Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines.
13.72 Applicability. A special permit for a Planned Unit Development may be granted by the
Planning Board in the North Point Residence District in accordance with the
requirements of Sections 12.30 and 12.40, and the development controls specified in
Section 12.50 and this Section 13.70. All references to and requirements for a PUD
district in those sections shall also apply to a Planned Unit Development in the North
Point Residence District.
13.73 Use Regulations. Any use permitted in Article 16.000 - North Point Residence District
may be allowed by the Planning Board, but subject only to the requirements and
limitations of this Section 13.70. Other uses, not permitted in Article 16.000 but
permitted in a Business B District, may be allowed by the Planning Board upon a
written determination that such use is compatible with and advances the policy
objectives of the Eastern Cambridge Plan and that it is necessary to support the
predominant residential use in the PUD in the North Point Residence District.
However, except as set forth in Section 13.73.0 below, non-residential uses may not
constitute more than thirty-five (35) percent of the total authorized Gross Floor Area
within any Development Parcel, exclusive of both Gross Floor Area devoted to parking
facilities and the additional Gross Floor Area (GFA) that may be constructed as a
result of the application of FAR bonuses permitted in Section 11.200.
13.73.0 Special Permit for Non-residential Uses. The Planning Board may permit up to one
hundred (100) percent of the total authorized Gross Floor Area within a Development
Parcel to consist of non-residential uses if there is only one (1) building proposed to
be located within the Development Parcel.
13-35
13.73.1 Special Provisions Related to Permitted Retail Uses.
The total Gross Floor Area for retail and consumer service establishments authorized
by the Planning Board in all approved PUDs within that portion of the PUD in the North
Point Residence District located west of Charlestown Avenue shall not exceed 75,000
square feet or 25,000 square feet for that portion of the PUD located east of
Charlestown Avenue, unless a finding is made by the Planning Board that additional
retail use will better serve the objectives of this Section 13.70 and the objectives of the
Eastern Cambridge Plan. All retail and consumer services establishments shall be
subject to the following limitations:
(i) In no instance shall any individual retail or consumer service establishment exceed
10,000 gross square feet unless the Planning Board determines in writing that
establishments of a greater size better support and serve the residents within the
PUD district and better advance the policy objectives set forth in the Eastern
Cambridge Plan and the guidance proved in the Eastern Cambridge Design
Guidelines.
(ii) No off street parking is provided except that the Planning Board, in approving a
Final Development Plan, may explicitly permit accessory off street parking not to
exceed one space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of Gross Floor Area
approved for retail and consumer service establishments, provided that mitigating
measures are included to ensure that the goals of the district will be met.
(2) The initial 50,000 square feet of retail and consumer service establishments
authorized in total in approved PUDs shall be exempt from any limitations as to nonresidential
Gross Floor Area as set forth in Section 13.73.1 above subject to the
following limitations:
(i) The GFA is located on the ground floor and fronts on and has a public entry onto a
publicly accessible street.
(ii) The establishment is located within the 500-radius described in Section 13.74.11
below.
13.73.2 Limitations on Telephone Exchange Uses. Where the floor area of any such use exceeds
400 square feet, the use shall only be located within 250 feet of the Boston/
Somerville/Cambridge municipal boundary line and west of Charlestown Avenue.
13.74 Dimensional Requirements.
13.74.1 Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Limitation. The maximum ratio of Gross Floor Area to the total
area of the Development Parcel, which area shall be calculated in accordance with
Section 13.74.2 below, shall be 2.4 except as modified by Sections 13.74.11 –
13.74.12 below. Any GFA contained within the head house or transit station serving
the MBTA Green Line, excluding any GFA occupied by private retail, office, or other
uses, shall not be subject to the FAR limitations set forth in this Section 13.74.1.
13-36
Where a Development Parcel encompasses lots to which different FAR and nonresidential
use limitations apply, the FAR and non-residential use limitation regulations
shall be used only to determine the total amount of GFA permitted including the GFA
devoted to residential and non-residential uses. Those FAR and non-residential use
regulations shall not regulate or limit the distribution of the authorized GFA or uses
within the Development Parcel as a whole. That distribution shall be determined by
the Planning Board in its approval of the Final Development Plan.
13.74.11 Additional FAR for Proximity to Transit. For any portion of a Development Parcel
located within a 500-foot radius of a point defined as the intersection of the centerline
of McGrath and O’Brien Highway and the northerly extension of the centerline of First
Street, the permitted FAR shall be 3.0. That portion of said Development Parcel shall
be permitted to use up to 35% of the allowable FAR for non-residential uses. The
portions of the development parcel outside the 500-foot radius shall be subject to the
limitations of Sections 13.74.1 and 13.74.12. The additional GFA permitted by this
Section 13.74.11 must be located within the portion of the development parcel located
within the 500-foot radius; provided that the Planning Board may allow such additional
GFA to be located outside of the 500-foot radius upon determining that such
relocation of GFA would further the establishment of an active retail plaza near
Lechmere Station. (See Map 13.81)
13.74.12 Additional FAR for Increased Residential Use. For those portions of the PUD district
not located within the 500-foot radius described in Section 13.74.11, the FAR
permitted in Section 13.74.1 may be increased according to the schedule set forth
below as the proportion of GFA devoted to residential uses increases, as proposed in
the application for a PUD special permit and approved by the Planning Board.
Proportion of Residential GFA Permitted FAR
Proposed and Approved
All residential 3.0
No less than 90% 2.9
No less than 85% 2.8
No less than 80% 2.7
No less than 75% 2.6
No less than 70% 2.5
No less than 65% 2.4
To attain the increase in FAR, the proposed development must attain the percentage
thresholds indicated above. There shall be no partial application of the gradations
noted above.
13.74.2 Minimum Development Parcel Size. The minimum size of the Development Parcel
shall be the larger of (1) one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or (2) seventyfive
percent of the area of a lot or combination of lots (a) in existence as of June 1,
2001 and (b) held in common ownership where it is proposed to incorporate any
portion of such lot or lots within the Development Parcel provided that clause (2) shall
not apply to a lot or combination of lots owned by The Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or a department thereof as of June 1, 2001. The area of a
13-37
development parcel may include land dedicated (after adoption of this Section 13.70
and prior to the issuance of any building permit for work under a PUD special permit
under this Section 13.70) by the owner or former owner of the land, whether in fee or
by easement, deed restriction, covenant or comparable legal instrument enforceable
by the City of Cambridge or other public entity, as a public way, private way open to
public use, or public open space.
13.74.21 Where the Development Parcel required in Section 13.74.2 is greater than 100,000
square feet, the applicant may at his own discretion designate a portion of
Development Parcel as a Master Plan Area, within which area physical information
may be presented in a more generalized way, subject to more detailed approval by
the Planning Board at a time and in a manner determined by the Board in its PUD
special permit decision. Within the Master Plan Area location of streets and public
parks, the quantities of proposed land uses, general building envelopes, locations and
heights shall be indicated in sufficient detail that the Planning Board can reasonably
assess the impact of the Master Plan and its general consistency with the objectives
of the PUD district and the guidance provided in the Eastern Cambridge Design
Guidelines.
13.74.3 Maximum Building Height. The maximum height of buildings in the PUD district shall
be eighty-five (85) feet except as otherwise shown on the PUD in the North Point
Residence District Height Limitation Map (Map 13.71) and as provided herein and as
further regulated by the provisions set forth in Sections 13.74.31 – 13.74.33 below.
(1) Maximum Building Height of One Hundred and Fifty (150) Feet. The maximum
height of buildings shall be 150 feet in the following described areas:
(a) That area bounded by a line beginning as the centerline of Charlestown
Avenue, then the centerline of North Point Boulevard and its southeasterly
extension to the Cambridge/Boston municipal boundary line, then the
Cambridge/Boston municipal boundary line, and then the centerline of O’Brien
Highway (Bridge Street) to the point of origin.
(b) That area bounded by a line beginning at the intersection of the Boston and
Cambridge municipal boundary line and the centerline of Charlestown Avenue,
then southwesterly to the centerline of Monsignor O’Brien Highway, then
northwesterly by the centerline of Monsignor O’Brien Highway to the intersection
of a line 200 feet northwesterly of and parallel to northwesterly sideline of
Charlestown Avenue, then northeasterly by a line 200 feet northwesterly of an
parallel to the northwesterly sideline of Charlestown Avenue to Reference Line
#1 (see Section 13.74.34), then northwesterly by Reference Line #1 to its
intersection with a line that is 117 feet southerly of and parallel to the westerly
portion of Reference Line #1 that is deflected 22 degrees south then westerly by
a line 117 feet southerly of and parallel to the westerly portion of Reference Line
#1 that is deflected 22 degrees south to a point that is the intersection of a line
which is 525 feet easterly of and parallel to the northerly extension of the
centerline of Second Street, then northerly by a line which is 525 feet easterly of
and parallel to northerly extension of the centerline of Second Street, to a point
that is the intersection of a line that is 100 feet northerly of and parallel to
Reference Line #1, ten westerly by a line 100 feet northerly of and parallel to
Reference Line #1 to the intersection of a line that is, the northerly extension of
the centerline of Second Street, then northerly by a line that is the northerly
extension of Second Street to its intersection with the Cambridge and Somerville
municipal boundary line, then the Cambridge/Somerville/Boston municipal
boundary line to the point of origin.
13-38
(2) Maximum Building Height of One Hundred and Twenty (120) Feet. The maximum
height of buildings shall be 120 feet in the following described areas:
(a) That area bounded by a line beginning at the centerline of Monsignor O’Brien
Highway at the boundary of the area described in 13.74.3(1)(b) above; then
northwesterly by the centerline of Monsignor O’Brien Highway to the intersection
of a line which is 325 feet northwesterly of and parallel to the northwesterly
sideline of Charlestown Avenue, then northeasterly by a line 325 feet
northwesterly of and parallel to then northwesterly sideline of Charlestown
Avenue to Reference Line #1 at the boundary of the area described in
13.74.3(1)(b) above, then southeasterly by the boundary of the area described in
13.74.3(1)(b) above then southwesterly by the boundary of the area described in
13.74.3(1)(b) to the point of beginning.
(b) That area bounded by a line beginning at the boundary of the area described
in 13.74.3(1)(b) above at the intersection of a line that is the northerly extension
of the centerline of Second Street and a line that is 100 feet north of and parallel
to Reference Line #1, then easterly and southerly by the boundary of the area
described in 13.74.3(1)(b) above to the intersection of Reference Line #1, then
westerly by Reference Line #1to the intersection of Special Zoning District 1
zoning district boundary line, then northwesterly by the Special District 1 zoning
district boundary to the Cambridge and Somerville municipal boundary line, then
easterly by the Cambridge and Somerville municipal boundary line to the
boundary of the area described in 13.74.3(1)(b) above, then southerly by a line
that is the centerline extension of Second Street and the westerly boundary of
the area described in 13.74.3(1)(b) above to the point of beginning.
13.74.31 Portions of Buildings Limited to Sixty-five Feet. Except within the area described in
Section 13.74.3(1)(a), any portion of a building that is within fifty (50) feet of an
existing or proposed Public Open Space or single intervening street abutting that
open space may exceed 65 feet only if for each floor above 65 feet, that floor is set
back an additional 10 feet from the façade of the floor below, until the maximum
height is attained, or until a 20 foot setback from the façade at 65 feet is attained.
Alternately, a set back of 20 feet from the façade of the building at a height of 65 feet
shall be permitted, and the remaining portions of the building allowed to achieve the
maximum height permitted by Section 13.74.3, or any variation between the two
provisions.
13.74.32 Additional Height to Two-hundred and Twenty Feet. The Planning Board may in its
discretion permit no more than seven residential buildings (in addition to those
permitted in Section 13.74.33 below) and one commercial building to exceed a height
of one hundred and fifty (150) feet up to a maximum height of two hundred and twenty
(220) feet in that portion of the PUD in the North Point Residence District west of
Charlestown Avenue, subject to the following limitations.
(1) All such buildings shall be located in that portion of the PUD in the North Point
Residence District where the base height for all buildings is one hundred and fifty
feet, provided that portions of such buildings may be located in other municipalities
and, as to the portion(s) in another municipality only, governed by the zoning
regulations of the other municipality.
(2) When approving the building heights permitted under this Section 13.74.32, the
Planning Board shall determine that portions of any such buildings above sixty-five
feet are appropriately separated from each other.
13-39
13.74.33 Additional Height to Two-hundred and Fifty Feet. The Planning Board may in its
discretion permit no more than two residential buildings to exceed one hundred and
fifty feet in height up to a maximum height of two hundred and fifty (250) feet in that
portion of the PUD in the North Point Residence District east of Charlestown Avenue,
subject to the following limitations.
(1) All such buildings shall be located in that portion of the PUD in the North Point
Residence District where the base height for all buildings is one hundred and fifty
feet.
13.74.34 Description of Reference Lines. Reference Line #1 and Reference Line #2 shall be
as described herein:
(1) Reference Line #1 is that line which is the northwesterly extension of the
centerline of North point Boulevard that, at its intersection with Reference Line #2, is
deflected south by 22* degrees and continues thereafter to its intersection with the
Special District 1 zoning district boundary line. (*scrivener’s error corrected
2/14/11)
(2) Reference Line #2 is that line which is northwesterly of, parallel to, and nine
hundred (900) feet distant from the northwesterly sideline of Charlestown Avenue.
13.74.35 Waiver of Height Limitations
In order to provide a limited level of flexibility in developing a comprehensive plan for
currently vacant or underdeveloped parcels of land in North Point, the Planning Board
may accept a (preliminary) Development Proposal and may approve a Final
Development Plan in which one or more buildings or portions of buildings, no higher
than one hundred and fifty (150) feet, do not conform to the height limitations set forth
in Section 13.74.3 above, subject to the following limitations and conditions.
(1) The building or portion of a building does not extend more than 100 feet into
the adjacent, more restrictive height band as set forth in Section 13.74.3 and
illustrated on Map 13.71.
(2) The building or portion of a building extending into the more restrictive height
band does not exceed the height limit established in the less restrictive height
band from which it is being extended.
(3) Such extensions are limited in nature, not inconsistent with the objective of
establishing the height band provisions of Section 13.74.3, and are generally
consistent with the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines.
(4) Other buildings proposed can be demonstrated to be lower than might
otherwise be required should the height waiver not be granted by the Planning
Board.
(5) The applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that
the requested deviations from the height provisions of Section 13.74.3 are
reasonable in the context of the proposed Final Development Plan as a whole
and permit an organization of buildings, streets, opens space and other features
of the Final Development Plan that better serve the public interest and the
13-40
objectives of the PUD than might otherwise be the case with strict adherence to
the height limits established in Section 13.74.3
13.74.36 In the event that two or more height limitation provisions (as set forth in Sections
13.74.3 (1) and (2), 13.74.31, and 13.74.35 above) apply to a single parcel of land
defined and approved by the Planning Board as part of a Master Plan and intended
to be developed singly and separate from other approved parcels in the Master plan
and located within 700 feet of the northwesterly sideline of Charlestown Avenue and
within 400 feet south of Reference Line #1, the total allowable massing of a structure
on that parcel, as limited in the Master Plan, may be distributed and allocated across
the entire parcel without regard to the restrictions set forth in the above referenced
Sections to the extent that it furthers the purpose of this Section 13.70 and provided
that neither the maximum allowable height applicable on the parcel by the above
referenced Sections nor the maximum allowable square footage at the parcel are
exceeded. Such redistribution of height may be approved by the Planning Board as
part of any design review of individual buildings in the manner set forth in the
approved Master Plan.
13.74.4 Other Dimensional Requirements. There shall be no specified minimum lot size for
lots located within a Development Parcel. There shall be no minimum lot area per
dwelling unit requirement. There shall be no requirement with respect to minimum lot
widths or minimum front, side or rear yards in the District. The Planning Board shall
approve all proposed building setbacks and lot configurations.
13.75 Open Space. Any combination of Public Open Space, Green Area Open Space or
Permeable Open Space, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be provided on every
Development Parcel and shall in the aggregate equal at least twenty (20) percent of
the area of such Development Parcel. Owners of adjacent Development Parcels may
collectively provide such open space by dedication, easement, deed restriction,
covenant, or comparable legal instrument enforceable by the City of Cambridge or
other public entity, in which event each such development parcel shall, for purposes
of this Section 13.70 be deemed to include such portion of such open space as such
owners shall allocate to it in such legal instrument. This open space requirement shall
be subject to the following provisions.
(1) All required open space shall be generally accessible to the public for reasonable
periods throughout the day for the purposes for which the open space is designed and
approved by the Planning Board, which may include but not be limited to walking,
bicycling, active and passive recreation. The Planning Board must approve any
proposal to significantly limit public access to the required open space.
13.75.1 Required Public Open Space. Any approved Planned Unit Development whose
Development Parcel consists in part or entirely of a lot or combination of lots (a) in
existence as of June 1, 2001, (b) held in common ownership, and (c) is at least
250,000 square feet in size shall be obligated to allocate a portion of its open space
requirement as set forth in Section 13.75 above as Public Open Space meeting the
requirements set forth in Section 13.75.11 below. This obligation shall remain with
such lot or combination of lots in its entirety, notwithstanding any subdivision or
change of ownership that may occur after June 1, 2001. In each instance where such
a lot or combination of lots, or a portion thereof, is included within a development
parcel, the PUD special permit shall only be granted if it is established to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board that the Public Open Space required in this Section
13.75.1 can be provided even if its location is on a portion of the lot or combination of
lots not included within the Development Parcel under review.
13-41
13.75.11 Requirements of the Public Open Space. The required Public Open Space shall
consist of a contiguous parcel of land of at least two and one half (2.5) acres in size at
a location and designed in a manner consistent with the Eastern Cambridge Plan. As
defined, the Public Open Space shall be within the control of the City of Cambridge
through fee simple conveyance, easement, or other legal mechanism acceptable to
the City. The Planning Board in its conditions shall establish the time by which the
facility shall be completed. In the event that the City of Cambridge does not accept
the facility, the PUD permittee shall maintain the park for the use of the general public
as originally designed and approved by the Planning Board in the Special Permit. The
Public Open Space shall be designed and constructed by the permittee according to
the conditions of the PUD Special Permit and when conveyed to the city shall be
environmentally and otherwise suitable for the recreational uses for which it is
designed.
Only one facility of 2.5 acres or greater shall be required within the North Point PUD
District. Once the Public Open Space obligation has be met, any remaining open
space required for any PUD need only be consistent with the requirements of Section
13.75 and the applicable guidelines of the Eastern Cambridge Plan. The required
facility shall be created according to the following rules.
(1) Where the Development Parcel includes a lot or combination of lots defined in
13.75.1 above where that lot or combination of lots is at least 250,000 square feet in
area but less than ten acres, and where the development parcel encompasses a
portion of the site of the required Public Open Space as illustrated in the Eastern
Cambridge Plan, the open space required in the PUD shall be allocated in the
approved Final Development Plan in part or in full at the proposed location of the
Public Open Space.
(2) Where the PUD Development Parcel includes all or a portion of a lot or
combination of lots with an area greater than 10 acres, the PUD Final Development
Plan shall be required to create in its entirety a 2.5-acre Public Open Space
consistent with the Eastern Cambridge Plan; if development of a 2.5-acre Public Open
Space has previously occurred in whole or in part, that portion of the Public Open
Space not designated in any previously approved PUD shall be provided.
13.76 Parking and Loading Requirements. Off-street parking and loading requirements shall
be the same as currently specified in Article 6.000 and in the Schedule of Parking and
Loading Requirements applicable to the Residence C-3, Office 3, Business B and
Industry B districts, except as modified below.
13.76.1 Parking facilities may be located on the lot they serve or may be located in whole or in
part in one or more pooled private or public parking facilities located anywhere within
the PUD in the North Point Residence District.
13.76.2 Parking and loading requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Residential Uses: 1 space per unit minimum and 1.5 spaces per unit
maximum.
(2) General Office Uses: 1 space per 1,250 gross square feet minimum and 1
space per 625 gross square feet maximum.
(3) Technical Office for Research and Development Uses: 1 space per 1,675
gross square feet minimum and 1 space per 840 gross square feet maximum.
13-42
(4) Retail and Consumer Services: No accessory parking shall be required if the
retail and consumer service uses are located on the ground floor and front on
and have a public entry directly onto a publicly accessible street.
13.76.21 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.76.2 above, the total number of parking
spaces serving non-residential uses in the PUD in the North Point Residence District
shall not exceed 2,500 spaces, allocated to each Development Parcel at the rate of
1.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of land in the Development Parcel.
13.77 Approval of Roadway Plan. No Final Development Plan shall be approved by the
Planning Board without Planning Board approval of a Roadway Plan. The Planning
Board shall not approve a Roadway Plan (which shall include all proposed roads,
streets, driveways and other motor vehicle circulation routes) as part of the Final
Development Plan unless the Planning Board finds that the impact of traffic projected
to use the approved roadways is consistent with the objective of the PUD in the North
Point Residence District to limit the extent of single occupancy vehicle access to the
district and is consistent with the traffic findings required in Section 19.20 – Project
Review Special Permit.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.22.4, all accessory parking for
development approved in a Final Development Plan shall be provided within the
approved PUD area unless the Planning Board specifically allows accessory parking
at other locations, consistent with all other provisions of Article 6.000.
13.78 Other Provisions
13.78.1 Signs. The sign regulations of Article 7.000 applicable to Retail, and Office Districts
shall be applicable in the District.
13.78.2 Perimeter and Transition. Any part of the perimeter of a planned unit development
which fronts on a public open space for not less than two hundred and fifty (250) feet
or is immediately adjacent to and within three hundred (300) feet of the Charles River
shall be so designed as to complement and harmonize with adjacent land uses
(existing or proposed) with respect to scale, density, setback, bulk, height,
landscaping, and screening.
13.78.3 Traffic Mitigation Measures. In reviewing a development proposal under the
provisions of this Section 13.70 and Section 19.20, the Planning Board shall
determine that the proponent has demonstrated, at the time of Final Development
Plan Approval, a commitment to a Transportation Demand Management program
consistent with the reduced parking mandated in this Section 13.70. The measures to
be taken in this program must address:
(1) The amount of parking provided,
(2) The scale of development and the mix of uses proposed, and
(3) The assumptions employed with regard to the proportion of automobile use
for those traveling to the site.
For examples of such Measures, the Planning Board shall refer to the Eastern
Cambridge Plan, Article 18.000, and the requirements of Section 19.20 in establishing
Transportation Demand Management measures applicable to any approved PUD.
13-43
13.78.4 Relationship to MBTA Urban Ring Transportation Planning Project. In all PUD
application documents, the applicant shall indicate how the proposed PUD
development relates physically to the most current plans developed by the MBTA for
implementation of the Urban Ring transportation project.
13.79 Development Flexibility: Additional Permitted FAR and Height
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section 13.70, the Planning Board may
accept a (preliminary) Development Proposal and may approve a Final Development
Plan that exceeds (1) the FAR limits otherwise required and (2) the proportion of nonresidential
GFA otherwise required subject to the following limitations and conditions:
13.79.1 Previously Issued Planned Unit Development Special Permits
The mix of uses, Gross Floor Area, and other dimensional characteristics of any existing
construction authorized by the grant of a PUD Special Permit, issued before the adoption
of this amended Section 13.70, shall be permitted by this Section 13.70. Such mix of
uses, GFA, and dimensional characteristics may be reauthorized by any subsequent
PUD Special Permit issued for the same Development Parcel under procedures
established in this Section 13.70.
13.79.2 Additional Gross Floor Area for Above Ground Structured Parking
The Planning Board may permit additional Gross Floor Area for the exclusive use of
structured accessory parking located above grade subject to the following limitations. It
is the intent of this Section 13.79.2 to permit the use of above ground parking structures
as an acoustical, visual and aesthetic barrier between occupied space (particularly
housing within the district and beyond the district in the existing East Cambridge
neighborhood) and the active rail lines, yards and operations therein, and adjacent bridge
structures abutting the North Point Residence District. In permitting such above ground
structured parking, it is expected that the authorized structures will be architecturally and
visually well integrated with the development as a whole and not in themselves
negatively impact the quality of the development.
(1) The parking facility shall be located adjacent to the Somerville municipal
boundary line, the Boston municipal boundary line or Charlestown Avenue (the
Gilmore Bridge), but in no case may it extend further than one hundred and
ninety-five (195) feet from the lot line between (A) either property used for active
rail use as of January 1, 2012 or Charlestown Avenue (the Gilmore Bridge) and
(B) property proposed to be developed within the Development Parcel for other
uses or on other land proposed to be developed in conjunction with any
development authorized by this Section 13.70. It is understood that such lot line
and land may be in part located in another municipality.
(2) The facility shall have a height no greater than twenty-five (25) feet unless the
Planning Board specifically authorizes a greater height.
(3) The design of the garage shall be of a quality comparable to that of other,
non-parking structures in the PUD.
13-44
(4) The structure shall be screened with active uses to the maximum extent
possible, but at least where it is likely to be viewed from the principal pedestrian
pathways within the PUD.
(5) The applicant shall provide to the Planning Board a study prepared by an
acoustical engineer outlining the anticipated impact of the proposed development
plan on the abatement of sound transmission from the adjacent rail yards to
areas within the PUD area and in the residential East Cambridge neighborhood
south and west of Msgr. O’Brien Highway.
13-45
13.79.3 Additional Gross Floor Area for Non-residential Uses
The Planning Board may permit additional Gross Floor Area for permitted non-residential
uses subject to the following limitations:
(1) The additional non-residential GFA authorized shall not exceed that resulting
from the application of an FAR of 0.26 and it shall be in addition to and not a
substitute for the residential uses required in Section 13.74.1. In no case,
however, shall the total authorized GFA for the approved PUD exceed an FAR of
2.66. The provisions of Section 13.74.11 (Additional FAR for Proximity to
Transit) may continue to apply but in no case may the FAR permitted in that
section exceed 3.0.
(2) No additional parking shall be provided for this additional authorized nonresidential
GFA. The parking supply upon which that determination is made shall
be that supply permitted by the Planning Board for the development and mix of
uses permitted in Section 13.74.1.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate through the Project Review Special Permit
process, Section 19.20, that the project with the additional non residential GFA
shall not create a more adverse impact upon traffic than the quantity and mix of
development permitted in Section 13.74.1. It is anticipated that such a standard
shall be met through limitations as to the uses permitted in the additional GFA
and through the provision of permanent transit enhancement improvements
above those required to be provided to gain approval of the GFA and use mix
permitted in Section 13.74.1. In no case, however, shall the additional nonresidential
FAR permitted in this Section 13.79 be granted by the Planning Board
unless the relocation of the MBTA Green Line Station at Lechmere is a part of
the PUD application and the Planning Board is satisfied that its construction at a
new North Point location will occur prior to the occupancy of any element of the
project utilizing the additional non-residential GFA.
(4) To be assured that the transportation related behavior of residents and
commercial tenants predicted to occur in the Traffic Study to be conducted under
Section 19.20 is borne out in fact as structures are occupied, the Planning Board
may require monitoring of actual traffic generation by those residents and
employees actually occupying the site. In its decision the Planning Board may
establish criteria and procedures for the timing of such subsequent monitoring of
traffic generation, including but not limited to the proportion of total development
that is occupied, the length of time such buildings have been fully occupied, and
the mix of uses in place.
13.79.4 Provision of Public Benefits
In reviewing any application for additional Gross Floor Area as authorized in Sections
13.79.2 and 13.79.3 above, the Planning Board may consider demonstrated efforts on
the part of the applicant to provide permanently affordable housing for middle income
households having an income at or below one hundred and twenty (120) percent of the
median income for households in the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, in
13-46
addition to those affordable units otherwise required in Section 11.200 and (2) to facilitate
the provision of a public sports facility.
13.710 Monitoring of Compliance with PUD Conditions
The Planning Board shall establish in its Decisions the details for monitoring of the
project and its performance, as it is implemented phase by phase. In anticipation of such
conditions, the applicant shall provide in the application a proposed plan for such longterm
monitoring and review.
13.80 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 5 DISTRICT.
13.81 Purpose. The PUD-5 District is intended to provide for Kendall Square’s continued
prominence as a world-renowned center of innovation and a vibrant neighborhood
through the creation of a mixed-use district of high quality general and technical office
and laboratory uses with significant retail activity proximate to the MBTA station. The
PUD-5 District helps organize placement of commercial and institutional buildings and
establishes an additional mixed-use development containing a significant residential
component to support the burgeoning residential corridor along Third Street and the
strong links to existing neighborhoods and the riverfront. The PUD-5 District allows for
continued support of the academic mission at MIT and encourages connective links,
physical and otherwise, between the Institute and adjacent neighborhoods.
The PUD-5 District responds to the Kendall Square planning process and is intended to
be a smart-growth, transit-oriented district and therefore allows for replacing surface
parking lots with larger scale development in Kendall Square and the major public transit
services located there. The PUD-5 District encourages low parking ratios, shared
parking strategies, the use of public transportation and improved pedestrian and bicycle
environments. The PUD-5 District furthers the City’s goals for sustainable development
through buildings and sites that are planned, designed and constructed in a sustainable
way so as to minimize adverse environmental impacts as they are initially constructed
and as they are occupied and operated over the course of their useful lives.
The PUD-5 District promotes the creation of a strong retail corridor along Main Street and
the enhancement of Broad Canal Way. Combined, this new public crossroads will have
broad appeal as a desirable destination during and beyond the traditional workday by
providing a critical mass of diverse restaurants, shops, entertainment and programming.
The ground floor space will engage pedestrians and provide a variety of indoor and
outdoor gathering spaces, including retail that can address the needs and reflect the
creativity of the local community.
13.81.1 Establishment and Scope of Subdistricts within the PUD-5 District.
The PUD-5 District shall be divided into a series of Subdistricts as described below for
the purpose of defining requirements that may not apply to the District as a whole. All
provisions of the PUD-5 shall apply equally to each Subdistrict, except as provided for
elsewhere in Section 13.80.
13-47
13.81.2 Description of the Subdistricts within the PUD-5 District.
13.81.2.1 The Third Street Transition Subdistrict is the area bounded by the northern sideline
of Lot # 31 on Assessor’s Map 14 running to the centerline of Third Street, then the
centerline of Third Street running southerly to the centerline of Broadway, then the
centerline of Broadway and Main Street running from Third Street to a point in the
centerline of Main Street that is consistent with the point of intersection that the
eastern sideline of the above-referenced Parcel would have with the centerline of
Main Street if such sideline continued in a straight line to the centerline of Main
Street, then the eastern sideline of the above-reference Parcel northerly from the
centerline of Main Street to the northern sideline of the above-referenced Parcel.
13.81.2.2 The Main Street Subdistrict is the area bounded by the point in the centerline of
Main Street that is consistent with the point of intersection that the eastern sideline
of Lot #15 on Assessor’s Map 46 would have with said centerline if said eastern
sideline were continued in a straight line to said centerline, then southerly by the
eastern boundary of said Parcel to a line 150 feet north of and parallel to the
property lines of lots abutting the northern sideline of Memorial Drive, then westerly
by said line to the centerline of Wadsworth Street, then the centerline of Wadsworth
Street running north from Memorial Drive, then the centerline of Amherst Street
running west from Wadsworth Street, then the centerline of Hayward Street running
north from Amherst Street to its intersection with a line 400 feet to the south of and
parallel to the Main Street front property lines of lots abutting Main Street and
located between Ames and Hayward Streets, then centerline of Ames Street from
the parallel line to Main Street, then the centerline of Main Street, but excluding Lot
#14 on Assessor’s Map 48 (and the portion of Main Street immediately abutting the
northern sideline of Lot #14 on Assessor’s Map 48).
13.81.2.3 The Transitional Height Subdistrict is the area bounded by the centerline of Ames
Street running northerly from the intersection with Amherst Street to a line 400 feet
to the south and parallel to the Main Street front lot lines of properties abutting Main
Street and located between Ames and Hayward Streets, then westerly by said line
to the centerline of Hayward Street, then the centerline of Hayward Street running
south toward Amherst Street and then the centerline of Amherst Street running west
to Ames Street.
13.81.2.4 The Memorial Drive Height Subdistrict is the area bounded by the centerline of
Ames Street running northerly from the northern sideline of Memorial Drive, then the
centerline of Amherst Street running east toward Wadsworth Street, then the
centerline of Wadsworth Street running south to its intersection with a line 150 feet
north of and parallel to the lot lines of the parcels abutting the northerly boundary of
Memorial Drive, then easterly along said line to the easterly boundary of Lot #15 on
Assessor’s Map 46, then southerly along said easterly boundary to the northern
edge of the DCR right of way along Memorial Drive, then westerly by the northern
sideline of Memorial Drive.
13-48
13.82 Uses Allowed in the PUD-5 District. The uses listed in this Section 13.82, alone or in
combination with each other, shall be allowed upon permission of the Planning Board.
13.82.1 Residential Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.31(d-g) and (i)(2).
13.82.2 Transportation, Communication and Utility Uses. All uses listed in Sections 4.32, except
for railroad freight terminal, railroad yard and shops (4.32c), truck or bus terminal yard or
building for storage or servicing of trucks, trailers or buses, or parking lot for trucks
(4.32d), and helipad or airport (4.32h).
13.82.3 Institutional Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.33.
13.82.4 Office and Laboratory Uses. All uses listed in Section 4.34.
13.82.5 Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments. All uses listed in Section 4.35.
13.82.6 Open Air or Drive in Retail & Service. All uses listed in Sections 4.36a. (Sales place for
flowers, garden supplies agricultural produce conducted partly or wholly outdoors,
commercial greenhouse or garden) and 4.36e. (Open air theatre or other open air place
of entertainment), but not including drive in theatres.
13.82.7 Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage. All uses listed in Sections 4.37(a), (b),
(c) and (f).
13.82.8 Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsections 13.82.1 - 13.82.7 shall be allowed only
upon written determination by the Planning Board that such use is consistent with the
objectives of the PUD-5 District and is consistent with the predominant uses in the PUD-5
District.
13.83 Floor Area Ratio; Gross Floor Area.
13.83.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum total Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of the PUD-5
District shall be 3.9 for all permitted uses. The FAR of any given Development Parcel
may exceed the limitation set forth above as long as the overall FAR in the PUD-5 District
for such uses does not at any time exceed the limitation set forth above.
13.83.2 Floor Area Ratio and Gross Floor Area Exemptions. Notwithstanding anything appearing
in this Section 13.83 or otherwise contained in the Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, the
following shall not be counted as Gross Floor Area for the purposes of calculating the
allowable FAR for the PUD-5 District or the Gross Floor Area limitations set forth further
below:
a. The Gross Floor Area of any first floor or areas situated no more than one (1) floor
below grade of a building devoted to the retail uses identified in Sections 13.82.5 and
13.82.6, constructed or, if located in an existing building, substantially renovated, after
13-49
the adoption of Section 13.80, provided, however, that in the event that the average
size of individual retail uses located in the PUD-5 District exceed 5,000 square of
Gross Floor Area, the portion of any individual retail use exceeding 5,000 square feet
(or 10,000 square feet for a grocery, market or pharmacy retail use) shall be counted
as Gross Floor Area for the purposes of calculating allowable FAR. The floor area of
any grocery, market or pharmacy uses shall not be included in calculating the average
size of individual retail uses for the purposes of this Section 13.82.3.a.
b. The area of any public transportation facility directly providing public transportation
services that is owned or controlled by a public transportation agency.
c. The Gross Floor Area of any residential and institutional dormitory uses constructed in
any of the Main Street, Transitional Height and Memorial Drive Height Subdistricts
after January 1, 2013, but only to the extent that such Gross Floor Area, when taken
together with the aggregate Gross Floor Area of all other residential and institutional
dormitory uses then-situated within said Subdistricts, exceeds the total amount of
Gross Floor Area devoted to such uses within said Subdistricts as of January 1, 2013.
d. Fifty percent (50%) of the Gross Floor Area devoted to Innovation Office Space (as
defined in Section 13.89.3), up to an amount equal to twenty percent (20%) of the
total office space remaining in the PUD-5 District.
13.83.3 Gross Floor Area Limitations.
a. Definition of New Gross Floor Area. For purposes of this Section 13.80, “New Gross
Floor Area” shall mean an amount of square feet of Gross Floor Area in excess of the
amount of Gross Floor Area in existence in the PUD-5 District as of January 1, 2013.
For example, if an existing building in the PUD-5 District containing 50,000 square
feet of Gross Floor Area is demolished and a building containing 55,000 square feet
of Gross Floor Area is constructed in its place, 5,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area
would be considered New Gross Floor Area.
b. Plan Requirements.
i. Existing Uses. As part of the first application for a PUD special permit under the
provisions of this Section 13.80, such existing Gross Floor Area for the entire
PUD-5 District shall be identified as to quantity, type of use and location and
such enumeration shall thereafter serve as the basis from which to administer
this Section 13.83.3.
ii. Conceptual Development Plan. A Development Proposal shall include, in
addition to the required site plans for development within that particular
Development Parcel, a conceptual plan depicting the range of potential building
sites elsewhere in the PUD-5 District and indicating the potential size and use (or
alternate uses) of future development on those sites. The purpose of this plan is
to place the Development Proposal in context with existing and potential future
13-50
development and to illustrate how the remaining allowed development within the
District may be distributed in the future. The conceptual development plan shall
be expected to evolve over time. With each subsequent Development Proposal
within the PUD-5 District, a revised conceptual plan shall be submitted.
Revisions to a conceptual plan shall not require amending any previously
approved PUD Special Permit, but shall not be effective to waive or modify any of
the specific conditions contained in a previously approved PUD Special Permit.
The Conceptual Development Plan may also incorporate the Conceptual Open
Space Plan required in Section 13.87.2.
c. Commercial Limitation. No more than an aggregate of 980,000 square feet of New
Gross Floor Area of the types of uses listed in Sections 13.82.4-13.82.7 shall be
permitted in the PUD-5 District.
Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance to the contrary, a building shall not be
considered to be a “commercial building” if institutional uses occupy in excess of
seventy-five percent (75%) of the Gross Floor Area of the building, excluding the Gross
Floor Area of any retail contained therein, for the purposes of Sections 13.88 and
13.89.4.
13.84 Parcel and Lot Requirements.
13.84.1 Parcel and Lot Size. The minimum size for a Development Parcel for a PUD in the PUD5
District shall be 25,000 square feet. There shall be no minimum lot size for lots within a
Development Parcel in the PUD-5 District.
13.84.2 Lot Width. There shall be no minimum width for a Development Parcel and no minimum
width for lots located within a Development Parcel.
13.84.2 Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. There shall be no required minimum Lot Area per
dwelling unit in the PUD-5 District.
13.85 Setbacks. Except as provided below, there shall be no minimum required front, rear and
side yard requirements for a Development Parcel or for lots located within a Development
Parcel.
13.85.1 New commercial buildings along Main Street, Third Street and Broadway containing uses
set forth in Sections 13.82.4 -13.82.7 above in the PUD-5 District must be set back
sixteen (16) feet from the Street Line of Main Street, Third Street and Broadway at and
above a point eighty-five (85) feet above mean grade. Up to one-third of the façade
length on such a street, on a cumulative basis, may be exempt from this requirement.
13.85.2 New buildings constructed in the Third Street Transition Sub-District must be set back
from the portion the easterly boundary of the Sub-District situated within 120 feet of the
northerly Street Line of Main Street (the “Limited Setback Boundary”) (a) a distance of at
13-51
least twenty (20) feet, running parallel from the Limited Setback Boundary, and (b) thirtysix
(36) feet for any portions of the building that exceed a height of eighty-five (85) feet
above mean grade, running parallel from the Limited Setback Boundary.
13.86 Height.
13.86.1 In the Third Street Transition and the Main Street Subdistricts, the maximum height of
any building shall be 250 feet, except as permitted by Section 13.86.1.1.
13.86.1.1 The Planning Board may approve Final Development Plans that result in no more than
one new building exceeding 250 feet up to 300 feet in height in the Third Street
Transition Subdistrict and one additional building up to 300 feet in height in the Main
Street Subdistrict; provided that:
a. the use of any occupiable space situated above 250 feet in height shall be limited to
residential and/or institutional dormitory uses, and
b. within a residential building, Middle Income Units (as defined below) shall occupy an
aggregate Gross Floor Area equal to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total
residential Gross Floor Area (excluding any Gross Floor Area occupied by institutional
dormitory uses) in the portions of the building that exceed 250 feet in height. Such
Middle Income Units shall be evenly distributed throughout the residential building in a
manner approved by the Planning Board, in consultation with City staff, in the Final
Development Plan for a Development Parcel, in order to ensure that the Middle
Income Units are of an appropriate location, size, configuration and quality for
households intended to occupy such units.
For the purposes of this Section 13.86.1.1, Middle Income Units shall be defined as
residential dwelling units for which:
i. the occupancy is restricted to households whose total income exceeds 80% but
does not exceed 120% of the median income of households in the Boston
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area adjusted for family size, or such other
equivalent income standard as may be determined by the Board of Trustees of
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
ii. the rent (including utilities) does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the income of
the renting household or, in the instance of home ownership units, the monthly
mortgage payment (including insurance, utilities and real estate taxes) does not
exceed thirty percent (30%) of the income of the purchasing household, or such
other equivalent standard as may be determined by the Board of Trustees of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
13.86.2 In the Transitional Height Subdistrict, the maximum height of any building shall be 200
feet. Notwithstanding the above, if at least 50% of the area of the ground floor footprint
of a building is located within the Main Street Subdistrict, a portion of the building at the
13-52
higher height may extend into the Transition Height Subdistrict, but by no more than 50
feet.
13.86.3 In the Memorial Drive Height Subdistrict, the maximum height of any building shall be
150 feet.
13.87 Open Space.
13.87.1 Minimum Open Space. The minimum overall percentage of Publicly Beneficial Open
Space of the total area of the PUD-5 District shall be fifteen percent (15%). The
percentage of Publicly Beneficial Open Space provided in any given Final Development
Plan for a Development Parcel may be less than 15% as long as the overall ratio in the
PUD-5 District is not less than 15%. In the event that a Development Parcel provides
less than 15% open space, the Final Development Plan for the Development Parcel shall
identify the Publicly Beneficial Open Space in the PUD-5 District that shall equal or
exceed 15% of the total area of the PUD-5 District.
13.87.2 Conceptual Open Space Plan. A Development Proposal shall include a conceptual plan
depicting the size, layout and configuration of Publicly Beneficial Open Space within the
PUD-5 District upon completion of the proposed building(s) in the Development Parcel.
This conceptual plan shall indicate the Publicly Beneficial Open Space that exists in the
PUD-5 District as of the time of the submission of the Development Proposal, that will be
constructed as part of the Development Proposal, and that are planned for elsewhere in
the PUD-5 District. The conceptual open space plan shall be expected to evolve over
time as some portions of Publicly Beneficial Open Space may be relocated or
reconfigured as part of future Development Proposals. With each subsequent
Development Proposal within the PUD-5 District, a revised conceptual open space plan
shall be submitted. Revisions to a conceptual open space plan shall not require
amending any previously approved PUD Special Permit, but shall not be effective to
waive or modify any of the specific conditions contained in a previously approved PUD
Special Permit. The Conceptual Open Space Plan may be presented jointly with the
Conceptual Development Plan required in Section 13.83(b)(ii).
13.88 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development in the PUD-5 District shall conform to
the off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, except as
modified by this Section 13.88.
13.88.1 With regard to uses contained within new commercial buildings, provided that the
requirements of Section 6.23 of the Ordinance are met, the parking requirements of this
Section 13.88 may be satisfied (a) anywhere in the PUD-5 District or, if located outside of
the PUD-5 District, within 2,000 feet of the use being served, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in Article 6.000 and (b) in total or in part by a lease agreement
between the developer and the City, other public entity or private owner or consortium for
use of parking spaces in the public or pooled private parking facilities within said area.
13-53
13.88.2 All parking provided within an approved PUD shall be considered collectively accessory
to all approved uses within the PUD, including any uses outside of the Development
Parcel that may be approved by the Planning Board. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in Article 6.000, this Ordinance shall not restrict the management and
assignment of parking spaces in a way that will most efficiently utilize the existing and
proposed parking spaces to serve all approved uses. As an exception to this rule, all
parking spaces (whether existing or proposed) to be included within an institutional
parking pool shall be distinctly identified, and shall not be used for any other uses except
in ways that are explicitly approved by the Planning Board in issuing a PUD Special
Permit Decision.
13.88.3 Minimum Parking. In approving a Final Development Plan for a Development Parcel, the
Planning Board may waive any minimum parking requirements applicable in the zoning
district, with the exception that parking for residential uses shall not be less than 0.5
parking spaces per dwelling unit. The Planning Board may approve arrangements for
shared parking of such residential parking spaces with commercial spaces. The Planning
Board shall specify a minimum parking requirement for a PUD based on review and
analysis of Transportation Impact Studies and other relevant information on parking
demand provided in application documents, including the Shared Parking Study as
required further below, and with the guidance of City agencies.
13.88.4 Maximum Parking. Maximum allowed parking for a PUD shall be limited by applying the
rates set forth below to each use within the PUD and taking the summation of the result
for all uses. Exceeding the maximum allowed parking shall require a waiver of maximum
parking required under the general provisions of Article 6.000.
a. Maximum of 0.9 spaces per 1,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area for office
uses, excluding technical office (Section 4.34(a-e)).
b. Maximum of 0.8 spaces per 1,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area for laboratory
use and technical office uses (Section 4.34(f)).
c. Maximum of 0.75 spaces per residential dwelling unit (Section 4.31(d-g)).
d. Maximum of 0.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of retail (Sections 4.35 and 4.36).
e. Maximum of 1 space per 4 sleeping rooms for hotel use (Section 4.31(i)(2)).
13.88.5 Shared Parking Study. A Development Proposal for development in the PUD-5 District
shall include an analysis of anticipated parking demand for all uses in the development
throughout the course of a typical day and week. This analysis may identify opportunities
for reducing the total amount of parking required to serve all uses through the sharing of
parking spaces by multiple uses. Based on this analysis, the Planning Board may
approve a reduced minimum or maximum parking requirement upon finding that the
approved amount of parking will be sufficient to serve all permitted uses.
13.88.6 Design, Dimensional, and Other Requirements of Provided Parking and Loading
Facilities
13-54
a. Except as provided herein, all parking for new non-residential and noninstitutional
uses shall be underground structured parking. Notwithstanding this
underground parking requirement, parking for all uses in the Third Street
Transition Subdistrict may be in above-ground structured parking provided such
structured parking is consistent with the existing structured parking in the
Subdistrict.
b. In its approval of a Final Development Plan, the Planning Board, in consultation
with City staff (including the Traffic Parking and Transportation Department), may
approve (i) the location, layout and design of parking spaces that deviate from
the requirements of Article 6.000; (ii) the location, width and layout of curb cuts
serving the Development Parcel that deviate from the requirements of Section
6.43; and (iii) a small number of on-grade parking and loading spaces to be used
for, among other things, handicap parking, short-term loading, use by food trucks
and other short-term or special purposes.
13.88.7 Temporary On-Grade Open Parking for Commercial Uses
On an interim basis in anticipation of later construction of underground or other
structured parking sufficient to meet all parking requirements of a new commercial use
constructed on a Development Parcel, on-grade open parking shall be allowed within the
PUD-5 District to serve such a use subject to the following conditions:
a. The future underground parking structure will be constructed within the PUD-5
District, but it may be located either on or off of the lot which it will serve;
b. Construction of the replacement subsurface parking structure is anticipated to
commence within four (4) years of the date of certificate of occupancy for the
building initially served by on grade parking;
c. The future subsurface parking structure will contain sufficient spaces for users of
the building initially served by on grade open parking so as to meet the parking
requirements for such building; and
d. Binding commitments shall exist to establish, to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board, that requirements (a) through (c) above shall be satisfied. Such
commitments shall be made by negotiated lease agreement, deed restriction,
covenant, or comparable legal instrument.
13.88.8 Pre-Existing Parking Spaces
a. The Planning Board, after consultation with City staff, may approve in a Final
Development Plan, underground or structured parking spaces as replacements
for pre-existing accessory parking spaces that will be displaced by improvements
contemplated by such Final Development Plan, provided that such spaces are
serving pre-existing commercial uses that are not proposed to be substantially
altered. The Planning Board shall approve such replacement spaces upon
determining that they were legally permitted under the applicable zoning
regulations when the pre-existing use was established and that the traffic
generated by the pre-existing use shall not be increased as a result. If such preexisting
spaces have been guaranteed to a third party by virtue of the terms of a
13-55
duly executed lease, license or other legally binding written agreement that exists
as of January 1, 2013, the Planning Board may include conditions to its approval
that would take effect upon the expiration of the third party’s pre-existing use and
occupancy of building, pursuant to the existing agreement (as such agreement
may be extended and/or renewed from time to time).
b. Where any pre-existing accessory off-street parking spaces located in a
Development Parcel that are serving a pre-existing use located outside the
Development Parcel (whether within or outside the PUD-5 District) are proposed
to be eliminated or displaced in accordance with the Final Development Plan for
that Development Parcel, such pre-existing off-street parking may be relocated to
a Parcel other than the Development Parcel by Special Permit granted by the
Planning Board to the owner of the off-site use after consultation with City staff,
provided, however, that such use is permitted on such other Parcel either as-ofright
or by virtue of zoning relief granted for such Parcel by the Planning Board or
the Board of Zoning Appeals, as the case may be. In granting such Special
Permit, the Planning Board may grant deviations from the requirements of Article
6.000 of this Ordinance for the number, location, layout and design of the
relocated parking spaces.
c. Such replacement or relocated accessory parking spaces for pre-existing uses
shall not count toward the maximum parking permitted under this Section 13.88.
13.88.9 The Planning Board, in its approval of a Final Development Plan for a Development
Parcel, may waive any requirements for the amount, location and design of loading
facilities within a Development Parcel, and may permit loading facilities to be shared
across various uses and lots within the PUD-5 District.
13.88.10 The quantity, design and location of bicycle parking shall comply with the provisions set
forth in Article 6.000 of this Ordinance.
13.89 Special Requirements, Conditions and Standards Applicable to Certain Development
Authorized by the Planning Board in the PUD-5 District. The Planning Board shall
approve a Final Development Plan only after finding that in addition to all other applicable
requirements the following requirements have been met. The Planning Board shall, in
addition, include conditions in the approval of a Final Development Plan that will ensure
ongoing compliance with these requirements.
13.89.1 Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Noise Mitigation. Sound emanating from rooftop
mechanical equipment on all new or substantially altered structures (i.e., alterations to an
existing structure or building the cost of which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
assessed value of such building or structure) in an approved Final Development Plan
shall be minimized by the adoption of best available and feasible practices regarding the
location and sizing of equipment, the selection of equipment and sound attenuation
measures.
At a minimum, any noise or vibration emanating from new commercial or substantially
altered (as defined in this Section 13.89.1) commercial buildings shall not be normally
perceptible at ground level without instruments at a distance of one hundred (100) feet
13-56
from the source lot line and shall comply with the provisions of the City of Cambridge
Noise Ordinance applicable to Commercial Areas (as such term is defined in the Noise
Ordinance).
In order to enforce these requirements, the applicant shall provide, in addition to Noise
Mitigation narrative required as part of Article 19.000 review, acoustical reports prepared
by a professional acoustical engineer as described below:
a. Prior to and as a condition of the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for
a new or substantially altered commercial building, an acoustical report, including
field measurements, demonstrating compliance of such building with all
applicable noise requirements; and
b. Prior to obtaining any building permit to add any equipment having a capacity
greater than five (5) horsepower to the rooftop, a narrative report demonstrating
that there will be continued compliance with all applicable noise requirements
after such addition, and upon completion of such addition and as a condition to
operation thereof, an acoustical report, including field measurements,
demonstrating such compliance.
13.89.2 Required Housing.
At least 240,000 square feet of New Gross Floor Area in the aggregate must be devoted
to residential uses in the PUD-5 District. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
allowing construction of New Gross Floor Area for commercial uses in excess of 600,000
square feet in the aggregate, the Developer must demonstrate that construction of a
minimum of 240,000 square feet of New Gross Floor Area of residential use has
commenced, a full building permit has been issued for the construction of such
residential use and that the construction of such square footage is being continuously
and diligently pursued. The required residential Gross Floor Area shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth
herein, a Final Development Plan shall be subject to the requirements of Section
11.203.1 (Requirements for Incentive Zoning Contributions) and 11.203.2 of the Zoning
Ordinance (Requirements for Inclusionary Housing), provided, however, in the Third
Street Transition Subdistrict, subject to the provisions of Section 11.203, the percentage
shall be increased to eighteen percent (18%).
13.89.3 Innovation Space. A Development Proposal containing at least 200,000 square feet of
new Office Uses shall include a plan for Innovation Office Space meeting the
requirements of this Section 13.89.3.
13.89.3.1 Required Space. For a Development Proposal containing new Office Uses,
Innovation Office Space within the PUD-5 District must occupy Gross Floor Area equal
to, or in excess of, the amount of Gross Floor Area that is five percent (5%) of the New
Gross Floor Area approved in the Final Development Plan for Office Uses. Existing
Gross Floor Area within the PUD-5 District may be used to meet this requirement.
Where at least 40,000 square feet of Innovation Office Space is required, Innovation
Office Space may be distributed in separate buildings, provided, however, that each
13-57
separate “unit” of Innovation Office Space, contains at least 20,000 square feet. If less
than 40,000 square feet of Innovation Office Space is required to be contained in the
PUD-5 District, the Innovation Office Space must be contained in a single building.
Developers of properties within the PUD-5 District may collaborate with property owners
in adjacent zoning districts in the Kendall Square area to develop joint Innovation Office
Space Plan. In such a case, the total square footage of joint Innovation Office Space
must be large enough to satisfy the sum of the requirements, if any, for such participating
developers and zoning districts.
13.89.3.2 Characteristics. For the purposes of this Section 13.89.3, the required Innovation
Office Space shall have the following characteristics:
a. Durations of lease agreements (or other similar occupancy agreements) with
individual business entities shall be for periods of approximately one (1) month.
b. No single business entity may occupy more than 2,000 square feet or 10% of the
entire Innovation Office Space required to be provided in the PUD-5 District,
whichever is greater.
c. The average size of separately contracted private suites may not exceed 200
square feet of GFA.
d. Innovation Office Space shall include shared resources (i.e., co-working areas,
conference space, office equipment, supplies and kitchens) available to all
tenants and must occupy at least 50% of the Innovation Office Space.
e. Individual entities occupying Innovation Office Space may include small business
incubators, small research laboratories, office space for investors and
entrepreneurs, facilities for teaching and for theoretical, basic and applied
research, product development and testing and prototype fabrication or
production of experimental products.
13.89.3.3 Variations. In approving a Final Development Plan or a Minor Amendment to a Final
Development Plan, the Planning Board may allow variations in the specific standards and
characteristics set forth Sections 13.89.3.1 and 13.89.3.2 above, if the Planning Board
finds that the Innovation Office Space, as proposed, will be consistent with the purposes
of these standards and characteristics.
13.89.4 Sustainability.
New buildings constructed within the PUD-5 District shall comply with the provisions of
Section 22.20 of the Ordinance. Notwithstanding the above, new commercial buildings
containing uses identified in Sections 13.82.4 and 13.82.7 and new residential buildings
identified in Section 13.82.1, shall comply with LEED Gold level criteria. In connection
with the submission requirements of Section 22.24.2.a., the developer of such buildings
shall submit a Statement of Energy Design Intent produced through the EnergyStar
Target Finder tool, or comparable method. New institutional buildings will meet LEED
Gold level criteria, unless the technological specifications of a proposed specialized
research facility are such that the developer can demonstrate the impracticability of
achieving the LEED Gold level criteria or the inordinate impact achieving the LEED Gold
level would have on such specialized research facility. New buildings in the PUD-5
13-58
District must incorporate an integrated design approach and incorporate the best
practices for meeting sustainability in the following five (5) areas:
a. Energy and Emissions; Steam. Each new building must conserve building
energy and, to the extent applicable, reduce carbon/GHG emissions. The
Developer, with each Development within the PUD-5 District, must evaluate the
potential for on-site energy generation or the construction of co-generation
facilities within the PUD-5 District that will serve the new building and other
buildings located within the PUD-5 District. A Development Proposal for a
commercial building shall include a study, prepared by the Developer,
considering the feasibility of connecting the building identified in the
Development Proposal to the existing district steam system.
b. Urban Site and Landscaping; Water Management. The Developer, for each new
building, must explore opportunities for (i) potable water use reductions, (ii) storm
water management using open spaces, (iii) the incorporation of indigenous
vegetation and (iv) storm water for irrigation purposes. At a minimum, all new
buildings within the PUD-5 District must meet the Department of Public Works’
standards for water quality management and the retention/detention of the
difference between the 2-year 24-hour pre-construction runoff hydrograph and
the post-construction 25-year 24-hour runoff hydrograph.
c. Healthy Living & Working. Each new building must provide people with access
to daylight and enhance the visual and thermal comfort of people living and
working within the PUD-5 District.
d. Transportation. The Final Development Plan for the PUD-5 District must
encourage multimodal transportation, provide facilities for cyclists and provide an
infrastructure to support alternative energy vehicles.
e. Promotion of Sustainability Awareness. New buildings within the PUD-5 must be
designed to incorporate features that demonstrate other sustainability strategies.
f. Cool Roofs. All new buildings approved in the District after January 1, 2013,
must employ Functional Green Roofs (as such term is defined in Article 22.000
of this Zoning Ordinance), high-albedo “white” roofs or a functionally equivalent
roofing system.
g. Monitoring. All new buildings approved in the PUD-5 District after January 1,
2013, shall track and report energy use to the City using EnergyStar, Labs21,
LEED-EBOM or a substantially similar mechanism. Such reporting shall occur at
the end of the first year of occupancy of the building, then once annually during
the first five (5) years of occupancy, and once every five (5) years thereafter.
Failure to provide such reports to the City shall not constitute a failure of
condition of any PUD-5 Special Permit.
h. In connection with the approval of a Final Development Plan or in connection
with the granting of a Special Permit pursuant to Article 19 of the Ordinance, the
Planning Board may grant dimensional and other zoning relief in order to permit
the construction of a co-generation facility or other energy systems that allow
developments to develop shared solutions to minimize energy usage.
13.810 Other Provisions.
13-59
13.810.1 Active Uses and Pedestrian Activity.
Final Development Plans for commercial uses shall enhance the public pedestrian usage
of the sidewalks and create a sense of neighborhood continuity by providing an
interesting, lively and active presence at street level. Accordingly, portions of the first
floors of commercial buildings in locations enumerated below shall generally be planned,
designed, constructed and used for Active Uses (defined below). At a minimum, a total
of at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the aggregate New Gross Floor Area of the
Activation Space situated within a commercial building in the PUD-5 District shall be
devoted to Active Uses. For the purposes of this Section 13.810.1, the term “Activation
Space” shall mean the portions of the first floors of commercial buildings immediately
abutting Main Street, Broadway and the Broad Canal, situated between the Principal
Front Wall Plane of such building along said Main Street and Broadway and along the
northerly and easterly boundaries of the Third Street Transition Subdistrict along Broad
Canal Way and the line that is situated twenty (20) feet from said Principal Front Wall
Plane. Notwithstanding the above, the Planning Board, in approving a Final
Development Plan for a new building, may, in consultation with City staff, grant a
reduction of the required minimum total area of Active Uses within the Activation Space
of the new building, where such reduction is necessitated by site conditions or other
complications.
Definition of Active Uses. For purposes of this Section 13.810.1, “Active Uses” means:
(1) Retail business and consumer service establishments listed in Section
4.35;
(2) Institutional uses that are generally open to the public, such as museums
and exhibition spaces;
(3) Uses listed in Section 13.82.6; and
(4) Other uses which the Planning Board determines meet the goals of this
Section 13.810.1.
The definition of “Active Uses” shall specifically exclude lobbies or other spaces that
serve an accessory function to upper-story office or laboratory uses.
Building and Site Design Requirements for Active Uses and Open Spaces.
(1) Active Uses shall have one or more entrance(s) from the sidewalk or
plaza separate from the principal entrance of the building for non-retail
uses.
(2) Outdoor courtyards, delineated gathering space, or sitting areas are
encouraged throughout each Development Parcel in any approved Final
Development Plan.
Prior to submitting any application for a special permit in the PUD-5 District, the applicant
shall engage the services of a consultant or other party with retail expertise to advise the
applicant in connection with retail and other Active Uses to be included in the applicable
Development Parcel. The recommendations of that consultant shall be included in the
applicable special permit application.
13-60
13.810.2 Contribution to Community Fund.
Upon the Planning Board’s approval of the first Final Development Plan for a
Development Parcel within the PUD-5 District, the permittee shall contribute to a
Community Fund, established by the City Manager, an amount equal to $10.00 multiplied
by the number of square feet of new gross floor area for the commercial uses identified in
section 13.82.4 and 13.82.7 (an amount, a “Fund Contribution Payment”). The City shall
use the funds contributed by the developer pursuant to this Section 13.810.2.
Notwithstanding the above, the permittee shall, within ninety (90) days of the adoption of
this Section 13.80, make a payment of $2,500,000 to the City as a deposit against future
Fund Contribution Payments. On the earlier to occur of the issuance of the first Final
Certificate of Occupancy for a new commercial building within the PUD-5 District or three
(3) years from the date of the adoption of Article 13.80, the permittee shall make a
payment of $2,500,000 to the City as an additional deposit against future Fund
Contribution Payments. Following the payment of the second deposit the permittee shall
not be required to make any further Fund Contribution Payments until such time as the
City has issued Final Certificates of Occupancy for new commercial buildings containing
500,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area, in the aggregate.
13.810.3 Planning and Zoning Studies; Design Guidelines. In its review and approval of a Final
Development Plan for a Development Parcel, the Planning Board shall consider all future
planning and zoning studies and design guidelines adopted by the Planning Board for a
geographic area containing the Development Parcel.
13.810.4 Letter of Commitment. The Letter of Commitment dated April 8, 2013, by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology shall be binding upon the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology and its successors and assigns. The issuance of any building permit or
certificate of occupancy authorized by a Planned Unit Development Special Permit
issued pursuant to this Section 13.80 shall be conditioned upon certification by the
Community Development Department and all other relevant City departments to the
Inspectional Services Department that all portions of the aforementioned Letter of
Commitment are continuing to be met.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
14-1
ARTICLE 14.000 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
KENDALL CENTER
14.10 SCOPE AND INTENT
14.20 USE REGULATIONS
14.30 INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
14.40 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
14.50 VEHICULAR ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING
14.60 SIGNS
14.70 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
14.80 INAPPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN OTHER REGULATIONS
14.10 SCOPE AND INTENT
14.11 Scope. This Article regulates development within the Kendall Center Mixed Use
Development (MXD) District, located within the Kendall Square Urban Renewal Project
Area, as shown on the Zoning Map, as amended.
14.12 Intent. The purpose of the District is to allow a diversity of land uses in close proximity,
within a limited area; to promote a balance of land uses; to facilitate development
proposals responsive to current and future market conditions; to facilitate integrated
physical design; and to encourage interaction among activities located within the
District.
14.13 Approach. This Article is designed to fulfill the above purposes of the Kendall Center
MXD District by establishing controls which will facilitate development while protecting
the public interest; by setting regulations which limit the aggregate amount of
development within the District and set other district wide requirements while permitting
flexible development scale and configuration on individual lots within the District; by
allowing a broad set of land uses within the District; and by encouraging development
of appropriate density for each class of land use.
14.20 USE REGULATIONS
14.21 Permitted Uses. The following uses, except as explicitly prohibited are permitted in the
Kendall Center MXD District. All uses not listed within one of the use groups in this
section shall be prohibited. All uses within the District shall comply with the
environmental protection standards of Section 14.23.
14.21.1 Light Industry
(1) Manufacturing: fabrication, assembly, finishing work (including packaging and
bottling, but only as an accessory use) without limit as to category or product.
14-2
(2) Wholesale business, only if affiliated with and accessory to another use or located
on the same lot as other nonwholesale uses. Development on any lot in the
district shall not be devoted exclusively to wholesale uses.
(3) Printing, binding, or related establishment.
(4) Storage warehouse, cold storage building, as an accessory use only and not
exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, but not including storage or
bailing of junk scrap metal, rags, paper or other waste materials and not including
outside storage of products or materials.
14.21.2 Office Uses and Biotechnology Manufacturing Uses
(1) Business or professional offices.
(2) Bank, trust company, or other financial institution
(3) Research and development office.
(4) Research, experimental and testing laboratory.
(5) Radio or television studio.
(6) Manufacturing of biotechnology and pharmaceutical products, including
(a) Fabrication, assembly, finishing work (including packaging and bottling, but
only as an accessory use).
(b) Wholesale business, only if affiliated with and accessory to another use or
located on the same lot as other nonwholesale uses.
(c) Storage warehouse, cold storage building, as an accessory use only.
14.21.3 Retail and Consumer Service Establishments
(1) Store for retail sale of merchandise, including grocery store, pharmacy, and
market, but not a sales place for automobiles or trucks.
(2) Eating and/or drinking establishment, whether or not liquor is sold or consumed,
including restaurant, bar, lunchroom, cafeteria and food commissary.
(3) Fast order food establishment only if (i) it is not located in a separate structure, (ii)
it does not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area, (iii) there
will be no more than fifteen (15) such establishments within the District (a
maximum of eight (8) of which shall be located in the Ames Street District and a
maximum of seven (7) of which shall be located in the portions of the District
outside of the Ames Street District) and (iv) it is granted a Special Permit, as
provided in Section 10.40 and 11.30.
(4) Consumer service establishment, including but not limited to hairdresser, barber
shop, laundry or dry cleaning pick up establishment, self-service laundry, shoe
repair or tailoring shop, or photography studio.
(5) Rental agency for autos or other products, but not including taxi companies. Such
agencies shall be operated entirely within a building and no major automobile
repairs shall be made on the premises.
14-3
(6) Automobile service station, provided that it is located within or attached to a
parking garage or other structure as an accessory use, that no major repairs are
made on the premises, and that all lubrication and repairs are carried out within the
building.
14.21.4 Residential Uses
(1) Multifamily dwelling
(2) Hotel or Motel
14.21.5 Entertainment and Recreational Uses
(1) Indoor commercial entertainment establishments including but not limited to
cinema, theater, concert hall, cabaret and night club.
(2) Recreation facilities including bowling alley, indoor or outdoor tennis courts, public
recreation building, health club, or skating rink. Such recreation facilities shall be
allowed only if they are located in or attached to structures containing other
principal uses.
(3) Hall, auditoriums and similar spaces used for public gatherings.
(4) Park or playground
14.21.6 Institutional Uses
(1) Religious purposes
(2) Educational purposes exempt by statute
(3) Library or museum as an accessory use only.
(4) Governmental offices and facilities, including post office, fire station and police
station.
(5) Clinic licensed under Section 51, Ch. 111, General Laws but not a hospital
licensed under said Chapter.
14.21.7 Transportation, Communication and Utility Uses
(1) Bus, subway or railroad passenger station.
(2) Automobile parking lot or parking garage.
(3) Distribution center, parcel delivery center or delivery warehouse as accessory uses
only.
(4) Telephone exchange, as an accessory use.
(5) Radio or television transmission station.
(6) Transformer station, substation, gas regulator station, or pumping station and
related utility uses designed primarily to serve development within the District.
14.21.8 Other Uses. Any use not listed in subsection 14.21.1 through 14.21.7 may be allowed
by the Planning Board in its approval of an Infill Development Concept Plan or
subsequent Amendment, upon written determination by the Board that such use is
14-4
consistent with the objectives of the District and with adopted City policies and
guidelines applicable to Kendall Square.
14.22 Multiple Uses in the Same Structure. Within the District there shall be no restriction on
combining different categories of use within the same building other than those
imposed by the State Building Code or other federal, state or local regulations other
than the Zoning Ordinance.
14.23 Environmental Protection Standards. No activity shall be permitted in the District
unless it shall be in conformity with the following standards for environmental
protection.
14.23.1 All dust, fumes, odors, smoke or vapor shall be effectively confined to the premises or
so disposed of as to avoid air pollution.
14.23.2 Any noise, vibration or flashing shall not be normally perceptible without instruments at
a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the premises.
14.23.3 All development proposals shall comply with Federal and State air pollution and water
pollution control regulations, the City of Cambridge Ordinances, and other applicable
environmental laws.
14.23.4 Except during construction activity on the lot all refuse and other waste materials shall
be stored within buildings prior to collection and disposal.
14.30 INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
14.31 Applicability. The amount and density of development within the Kendall Center MXD
District shall be governed by the provisions of this Section 14.30.
14.32 District Development Limitations. There shall be limitations on the overall amount of
development within the District as specified below.
14.32.1 The Aggregate gross floor area (GFA) of development in the District shall not exceed
the sum of (i) three million, six hundred seventy three thousand (3,673,000) square
feet, plus (ii) six hundred thousand (600,000) square feet that shall be limited to multifamily
residential uses as permitted in Section 14.21.4(1), for a total Aggregate GFA
not to exceed four million, two hundred seventy three thousand (4,273,000) square
feet. Up to sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of such Aggregate GFA of three
million, six hundred seventy three (3,673,000) in clause (i) of the preceding sentence,
shall be allowable only by special permit pursuant to Section 14.72.
At least two hundred thousand (200,000) square feet of the GFA restricted to housing
uses shall occur only within the area designated on the Zoning Map as the “Ames
Street District” and has been approved by special permit dated March 27, 2015 (the
“Ames Street Residential Project”). The commencement of construction for the Ames
Street Residential Project, approved by special permit in 2015, shall precede the
occupancy of any commercial GFA in excess of three million and seventy three
14-5
thousand (3,073,00) square feet, other than the sixty thousand (60,000) of commercial
space that may be permitted by special permit pursuant to Section 14.72.3.
Additionally, the commencement of construction of a second residential project of at
least two hundred thousand (200,00) square feet shall precede the occupancy of any
commercial GFA utilizing Infill GFA (as defined in Section 14.32.2 below) in excess of
three hundred and seventy five thousand (375,000) square feet.
Aggregate GFA of development in the District is at any time the sum of the GFA (as
defined in Article 2.000 of this Ordinance) of all buildings (i) which are then located in
the District, (ii) which are being constructed or may be constructed in the District
pursuant to then effective building permits, and (iii) which, pursuant to then outstanding
contracts (including options) with Cambridge Redevelopment Authority and so stated in
certificates from the Authority to the Superintendent of Buildings, may be constructed
in the District in the future. Notwithstanding the definition in Article 2.000 for Gross
Floor Area and the provisions of Section 5.25, parking garages and accessory parking
facilities shall be exempt from the requirements as to Floor Area Ratio and shall not be
included in the calculation for Gross Floor Area on a lot.
14.32.2 The Cambridge Redevelopment Authority (CRA) shall cause in Infill Development
Concept Plan (Concept Plan) to be prepared providing for the distribution of additional
GFA for new development within the District above and beyond three million, three
hundred and thirty three thousand (3,333,000) square feet (“Infill GFA”) and meeting
the requirements of Section 14.32.2.1. The Concept Plan shall be approved by CRA
and by a special permit granted by the Planning Board in order to authorize the
development of infill GFA. The purpose of the Concept Plan is to provide a context
and a conceptual governance structure for existing and potential future development
that allows development to proceed in a flexible manner without requiring additional
special permit for each building. The Concept Plan is expect to evolve over time, and
with each subsequent development proposal updated to the Concept Plan shall be
submitted. Amendments to the special permit may be granted as set forth below, but
revisions to a Concept Plan shall not necessarily require amending the special permit
so long as the revisions remain in conformance with the conditions of the special
permit.
14.32.2.1 Infill Development Concept Plan Requirements.
1) A current development program illustrating the size, location, and uses of existing
buildings at the time of submission.
2) A site plan for all proposed new development within the District including location
of Innovation Space as described in Section 14.32.5 and Active Ground Floor
Uses described in Section 14.36.
3) A table summarizing the current and proposed future uses on building sites in the
District and indicating the potential size and use (or alternate uses) of future
development.
4) A Phasing Plan describing the anticipated timing of commercial and housing
development.
14-6
5) A Transportation Impact Study certified by the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department in accordance with the requirements of Section 19.24, Paragraph (2)
of this Zoning Ordinance, which shall also include a parking demand analysis and
a projection of proposed reliance on transit and plans to address non-automobile
use.
6) A housing program describing the distribution of new housing units, including
affordable housing units, middle income housing units, and larger family units
containing two (2) or more bedrooms. The housing program shall also describe
the anticipated housing tenancy (rental/home ownership) and a description of
efforts to provide a mixture of tenancy types.
7) An open space pan depicting the size, layout and configuration of all open space
within the District. This open space plan shall illustrate the open space existing in
the District and open space to be developed or modified within the District and/or
outside the District in accordance with Section 14.40. The plan shall provide a
narrative discussion of public programming concepts for new and existing open
space. The open space should also describe connections between the District
and the neighboring PUD-KS District.
8) A plan describing street and public infrastructure improvement to be undertaken in
coordination with the development program, including all proposed water, storm
water and sewage facilities, which shall also be submitted to Department of Public
Works for review.
9) A plan illustrating proposed building scale, height and massing, including a model
and a study demonstrating the anticipated shadow and wind impacts of all
proposed buildings taller than one hundred (100) feet, and a general description of
proposed mitigation measures that will be employed. Additionally a set of urban
design guidelines to be utilized in the design review process.
10) Proposed modifications, if any, to the development plans then approved pursuant
to the Massachusetts Environment Policy Act (MEPA) and an updated on
implementation of required mitigations from MEPA.
11) A sustainability plan describing concepts for how additional development will meet
the requirements set forth in Section 14.74 below, including but not limited to
district-wide approaches to energy, water and wastewater management, climate
resiliency and waste management.
12) In order to effectuate the goals of promoting a vibrant retail environment and
street-level activation, the Concept Plan shall include a Retail Plan to demonstrate
how the project will improve and diversify the existing retail environment, create
active street-level uses and attract and support the provision of local and
independent businesses. Among other things, the Retail Plans shall:
a) Set forth target uses and users (and shall particularly target
local/independents retailers and grocery store/pharmacy operators).
b) Designate an individual responsible for implementing the plan who shall
serve as a point of contact with the CRA,
14-7
c) Describe the types of economic incentives which may be offered to
tenants such as rental and fit-up allowances,
d) Provide a street activation plan for Main Street, Broadway and Ames
Street, and
e) Identify opportunities for “start-up” retail uses as an entrepreneurial or
developmental stage of business, which opportunities may, for example,
be located in indoor or outdoor temporary space (such as kiosks, markets,
food trucks and the like) or in leased space, or in some combination.
The Concept Plan must include an annual reporting process to the CRA for the
duration of the Kendall Square Urban Renewal Plan regarding the ongoing efforts on
the part of the development to comply with the Retail Plan.
14.32.2.2 Findings and Approval. The Planning Board shall grant a special permit approving an
Concept Plan upon finding that the new development identified within the plan meets
the criteria for approval of a Planned Unit Development set forth in Section 12.35.3(3)
of the Zoning Ordinance and the criteria for approval of a Project Review Special
Permit set forth in Section 19.25 of the Zoning Ordinance. In making its finding, the
Board shall consider the objectives set forth in the Kendall Square Final Report of the
K2C2 Planning Study (“K2 Plan”) and the Kendall Square Design Guidelines. The
approval of a Concept Plan shall serve to meet any applicable project review
requirements of Article 19.000, and no additional Project Review Special Permit shall
be required for new development that is identified within an approved Concept Plan.
14.32.2.3 The special permit shall include a summary of approved Infill GFA in the aggregate, a
description of the sites on which the development of Infill GFA is permitted, and the
allowed range of development and uses on each site. Alternatives and variations may
be allowed as set forth in the conditions of the special permit. The special permit shall
also include conditions for project mitigation applicable to each Infill GFA development
site. Development on a particular site identified in the Concept Plan shall be
authorized if the conditions application to that site are met.
14.32.2.4 Ongoing Review. The conditions of the special permit shall set forth a process for
future review and approval of the design of buildings, landscaping and other significant
component of an approved Concept Plan. Such process shall include representation
by the CRA, Planning Board and City staff, in compliance with the Kendall Square
Urban Renewal Plan. The special permit may specify that such further review not be
required for any building design that is determined to have been sufficiently advanced
at the time of granting of the special permit as to meet the standards for project review
as set forth in Section 14.73.
14.32.2.5 Amendments. Major or Minor Amendments to the Concept Plan may be approved as
set forth in Section 12.37of the Zoning Ordinance after review and approval by the
CRA, with Major Amendments requiring the granting of a special permit by the
Planning Board and Minor Amendments requiring a written determination by the
Planning Board. The conditions of the special permit may specify what types of
modifications would constitute Major or Minor Amendments.
14-8
14.32.6 Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section 14.32.2 to the contrary, (i) the GFA
utilized for the Ames Street Residential Project and (ii) a maximum of sixty thousand
(60,000) square feet of Aggregate GFA associated with a project seeking a special
permit under Section 14.72.3, shall not be deemed to be Infill GFA for the purposes of
this Article 14.
14.32.3 Any construction or change of use within the District which would cause Aggregate
GFA limitations of subsections 14.32.1to be exceeded shall not be allowed.
(1) Compliance with this Section 14.32.3 shall be determined by the Superintendent of
Buildings at all times including at the time of issuance of a building permit and at
the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy under Section 9.20 of this
Ordinance.
(2) CRA shall maintain a record of the aggregate GFA within the District and shall
provide an Aggregate GFA record to the Superintendent of Buildings and the
Community development Department (CDD) with any building permit or certificate
of occupancy application utilizing Infill GFA. Such record shall separately account
for development within the Ames Street District. These records shall be adjusted
as appropriate, from time to time, including upon issuance, revocation or expiration
of a building permit or certificate of occupancy and upon receipt of a certificate
from CRA as to an outstanding contract (including option) for the construction of a
building. The CRA shall also maintain a record of cumulative GFA by land use for
purposes of determining and tracking open space requirements for existing and
future development.
(3) Each applicant for a Special Permit, building permit or a certificate of occupancy
shall submit to the Superintendent of Buildings information, including the following,
as appropriate to the application, in order to determine compliance with this
Section 14.32 and to demonstrate that the proposed construction and/or
occupancy will not violate or be inconsistent with any outstanding contract or deed:
(a) measurement of total gross floor area of the building or building additions;
(b) measurement of future development commitments or limitations on the lot
specified in deed restrictions, covenants or comparable legal instruments.
14.32.4 Applicability of Section 19.20. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 19.22 (1), a
structure, any portion of which contains residential uses as set forth in Section 14.21.4
(1) above, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 19.20 – Project Review Special
Permit. In addition, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 19.22(1), any
development within the area designated on the Zoning Map as the “Ames Street
District” utilizing the 2010 Additional GFA under Section 14.32.3(2) above shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 19.20-Project Review Special Permit, with the
exception of Section 19.21.1. It is understood and agreed that the provisions of this
Section 14.32.4 shall apply only to development proposals that are not included within
the Infill Development Concept Plan process described in Section 14.32.2 above.
14.32.5 Innovation Space: A Concept Plan proposing more than one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of GFA for Office and Biotechnology Manufacturing Uses shall
14-9
include a plan for Innovation Space meeting the requirements below. Innovation
Space within the District must occupy GFA equal to, or in excess of, ten percent (10%)
of nonresidential Infill GFA. Existing GFA within the District may be converted to meet
this requirement. The Innovation Space requirement shall be met through the
provision of office spaces of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet or [ten percent
(10%) of the newly constructed non-residential GFA, if less] within a single building and
may be satisfied by means of a lease to a single user who will operate and manage a
facility meeting the requirements hereof:
a) Combined Spaces. Developers of properties within the District may collaborate
with other developers in adjacent zoning districts in the Kendall Square are
(defined as zoning districts reviewed as part of the K2 Planning Study) to develop
a Joint innovation Space Plan. In such a case, the total square footage of joint
Innovation Space. In such a case, the total square footage of joint Innovation
Space must be large enough to satisfy the sum of the requirements, if any, for
such participating developers and zoning district.
b) Characteristics. For the purposes of this Section 14.32.5, Innovation Space shall
have the following characteristics:
i. Durations of lease agreements (or other similar occupancy agreements)
with individual office tenants shall be for periods of approximately one (1)
month.
ii. No single business entity may occupy more than two thousand (2,000)
square feet or ten present (10%) of the entire Innovation Space provided
in the District, whichever is greater.
iii. The average size of separately contracted private office suites may not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet of GFA.
iv. Innovation Space shall include shared resources (i.e., co-working areas,
conference space, classroom space, office equipment, showroom, shop or
lab equipment, storage, circulation, supplies and kitchens) available to all
tenants and must occupy at least fifty percent (50%) of the Innovation
Space.
v. Individual entities occupying Innovation Space may include small
businesses, incubators, small research laboratories, office space for
investors and entrepreneurs, facilities for teaching and for theoretical,
basic and applied research, produce development and testing and
prototype fabrication or production of experimental products.
c) Variations. In approving a Concept Plan, Major or Minor Amendments to the
Concept Plan, or through subsequent design review of individual building design
per Section 14.32.2.4, the Planning Board may approve variations in the specific
characteristics set forth above if the proposed Innovation Space is found to be
consistent with the purposes of these characteristics.
14-10
14.32.6 GFA Exemptions.
The following items shall be exclude from the calculation of Aggregate GFA within the
District for the purposes of determining compliance with the intensity of development
requirements of Article 14:
1) Variances: Any GFA within the District authorized by a variance issued by the
Board of Zoning Appeal
2) Residential Outdoor Area Exemptions: Private outdoor decks or balconies for
multifamily residential development, up to eight percent (8%) of the building floor
area.
3) Innovation Space: Innovation Space GFA up to twenty percent (20%) of the Infill
GFA dedicated to Office and Biotechnology Manufacturing Uses. In order for the
Innovation Space GFA to be exempt from the Aggregate GFA limitations, at least
twenty-five percent (25%) of the Innovation Space utilization (measured by square
footage or shared space membership) must be set aside as below market rate
space to be offered by the CRA or the city to qualifying tenants for short-term
leases consistent with Section 14.32.5(b).
4) Retail: The GFA occupied by retail and consumer service uses listed in Section
14.21.3, if the following conditions are met:
a) the excluded GFA is not located above the ground level of a building
(provide, however, that the Planning Board may waive this limitation in
specific instances where it finds that the proposed use would be uniquely
beneficial to area residents, such as a grocery store or pharmacy);
b) the excluded GFA has frontage and direct pedestrian entrances onto Main
Street, Binney Street Broadway, Ames Street, Galileo Way, Pioneer Way
internal service drives or onto open space that is directly accessible and
not more than one (100) feet distant from at least one of the
aforementioned streets or service drives;
c) the excluded GFA is occupied by separate retail establishments, each
occupying no more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area
(provided, however, that the Planning Board may waive this limitation in
specific instances where it finds that the proposed use would be uniquely
beneficial to area residents, such as a grocery store, pharmacy, or an
innovative retail format where multiple small vendors occupy a larger
market space);
d) the ground level façade is designed with entrances and glazing materials
such that at least sixty percent (60%) of the façade area is transparent
providing visibility between the retail use and the public sidewalk or open
space; and
14-11
e) A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the trail space, exclusive of
retail space used for grocery stores and/or pharmacies, consists of
Independent and Local Retailers. “Independent and Local Retailers” shall
include any retail operator, which does not own or operate more than ten
(10) retail locations in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts with the same
name and retail concept.
5) Middle Income Housing Units: The square footage of any middle income housing
units as defined in Section 14.35(c).
6) Transfer of Development Rights: Any GFA acquired through the transfer of
development rights provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
14.33 Lot Density Limitation. In addition to the Aggregate GFA limitation established in
Section 14.32, there shall also be a density limitation for each lot within the District.
The following floor area ratios (as defined in Article 2.000) for each lot shall not be
exceeded, except as provided in Sections 14.32.6 and 14.33.6. The area of the lot to
be counted in determining FAR shall include land dedicated by the owner or former
owner of the lot as public open space under Section 14.42.
14.33.1 Industrial and Wholesale uses: FAR 4.0
14.33.2 Office Uses and Biotechnology Manufacturing Uses: FAR 8.0
14.33.3 Retail and Consumer Services uses: FAR 5.0
14.33.4 Residential uses:
(1) Multifamily housing: FAR 4.0
(2) Hotel/Motel: FAR 6.0
14.33.5 Other uses: FAR 4.0
14.33.6 If development on a lot is to include activities in more than one of the use groups
above, the maximum FAR for the lot shall be the FAR for the use group containing the
largest proportion of space on the lot.
14.34 Building Height Limitation. The maximum building height in the District shall be two
hundred and fifty (250) feet, except for the area of the District more than four hundred
and fifty (450) feet north of the centerline of Broadway, where the maximum building
height for any portion of a building in such area shall be two hundred (200) feet. Up to
two (2) mixed-use building may reach three hundred and fifty (350) provided, however,
that the occupied floor above two hundred and fifty (250) feet may contain only
residential and associated amenity space. Additional, the floorplate of any portion of a
building above two hundred and fifty (250) feet shall not exceed twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet.
This requirement shall not apply to chimneys, water towers, air conditioning equipment,
elevator bulkheads, skylights, ventilators, solar or wind energy systems, and other
necessary features appurtenant to buildings which are usually carried above roofs and
14-12
are not used for human occupancy. These requirements shall also not apply to (i)
domes, towers or spires above buildings if such features are not used for human
occupancy and occupy less than ten percent (10%) of the lot area, (ii) wireless or
broadcasting towers and other like unenclosed structures which occupy less than ten
percent (10%) to the lot area or (iii) rooftop terraces and enclosed structures ancillary
thereto (provided that such structure occupy less than ten percent (10%) of the lot
area.
14.35 Middle Income Housing Requirement. For any project utilizing Infill GFA, the following
requirements for Middle Income Housing Units shall apply in addition to the
Inclusionary Housing Requirements set forth below:
1) Middle Income Units (as defined below) shall occupy floor area equal to at least
five percent (5%) of the total floor are devoted to private residential dwelling units
in project utilizing Infill Development GFA. Such Middle Income Units shall be
distributed throughput the residential building in a manner approved by the
Planning Board, in consultation with City and CRA staff, in order to ensure that the
Middle Income Units are of an appropriate location, size, configuration and quality
for households intended to occupy such units. The floor area of Middle Income
Units provided per this Section 14.35 shall not be counted against the Aggregate
GFA limitation in the District.
2) For the purposes of this Section 14.35, Middle Income Units shall be defined as
residential dwelling units for which:
i. The occupancy is restricted to households whose total income does not
exceed one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the median income of
households in the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area adjusted for
family size, or such other equivalent income standard as may be determined
by the Board of Trustees of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund;
ii. The rent (including utilities) does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the
income of the renting household or, in the instance of home ownership units,
the monthly mortgage payment (including insurance, utilities and real estate
taxes) does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the income of the purchasing
household, or such other equivalent standard as may be determined by the
Board of Trustees of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
iii. The Middle-Income Units are not also designated as Affordable Units for the
purpose of meeting the Inclusionary Housing Requirements in Section 11.200
14.36 Affordable Housing Requirement. For any project utilizing the Infill GFA, the following
requirements shall apply in place of the Inclusionary Housing requirements set forth in
Section 11.200 of this Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the requirements
the number of Affordable Units.
a. No less than twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area devoted to multifamily
residential use shall be devoted to Affordable Units in accordance with the
14-13
definitions and procedures set forth in Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance.
No increase in GFA beyond the limitations set forth in Section 14.32.1 shall be
provided for a project or the District subject to the requirements of this Section
14.36.
b. The Planning Board may approve a Special Permit providing Affordable Units that
are, on average, larger in area than the other dwelling units in the building. Where
such units are larger in size and provide a greater number of bedrooms, they may
be accordingly, fewer in number within the project, provided that the requirements
set forth in 14.36(a) are satisfied.
c. If the Inclusionary Housing requirements of Section 11.200 are amended
subsequent to September 1, 2015 such that more than twenty percent (20%) of
the total number of dwelling units must be devoted to Affordable Units, then the
twenty percent (20%) total floor area requirement set forth in this Section 14.35
shall be increased to the same percentage to which the requirements have been
increased under said Section 11.200.
14.37 Dwelling Units. New multi-family residential development utilizing Infill GFA shall
include a range of dwelling unit types and sizes. At a minimum, five percent (5%) of
the residential GFA utilizing Infill GFA shall be devoted to accommodate families with
children.
To the extent legally permissible under Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance and
other applicable legal requirements, these three-bedroom units will all be Middle
Income Units and Affordable Units; provided, however, that if three-bedroom units
comprise more than five percent (5%) of the total floor area devoted to multi-family
residential units, any such units in excess of five percent (5%) of the total floor area
may be market-rate units.
14.38 Active Ground Floors:
The ground floor of newly constructed buildings utilizing fifty thousand (50,000) square
feet or more of Infill GFA, with frontage along Main Street, Broadway and Ames Street
must be occupied by (i) Retail and Consumer Service uses, as listed in
Section14.21.3, or (ii) active public gathering space (whether enclosed or open), for a
minimum street frontage length of seventy-five percent (75%) of the building façade
along this frontage. Dimensional variations and alternate uses may be approved by
the Planning Board upon determining that the specific uses and designs proposed are
consistent with the purpose and intent of this Section 14.36. Alternatively, if a Concept
Plan provides for the redevelopment of existing buildings to include new Retail and
Consumer Service uses along the ground floor of any of the identified street frontages,
then the Planning Board may permit a reduction in the required length of active street
frontage for new buildings for up to fifty percent (50%) of the length of new active street
frontage provided in existing buildings and only if the Board finds that it results in a
better outcome for the District as a whole. Banks and financial institutions shall not be
considered active ground floor uses for the purposes of meeting this requirement.
14-14
14.39 Letter of Commitment. The Letter of Commitment dated December 21, 2015 by Boston
Properties Limited Partnership is incorporated herein by reference and shall be binding
upon Boston Properties Limited Partnership and its successors and assigns.
14.40 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
14.41 Definition of Open Space. For purposes of this Section 14.40, open space shall mean
a portion of a lot or other area of land associated with and adjacent to a building or
group of buildings in relation to which it serves to provide light and air, or scenic,
recreational or similar purposes. Such space shall, in general, be available for entry
and use by the occupants of the building(s) with which it is associated, and at times to
the general public, but may include a limited proportion of space so located and treated
as to enhance the amenity of development by providing landscaping features,
screening or buffering for the occupants or neighbors or a general appearance of
openness. Open space shall include parks, plazas, lawns, landscaped areas,
decorative plantings, roof decks, balconies, pedestrian ways listed in Section 14.45,
active and passive recreational areas, including playgrounds and swimming pools.
Streets, parking lots, driveways, service roads, loading areas, and areas normally
inaccessible to pedestrian circulation beneath pedestrian bridges, decks or shopping
bridges shall not be counted in determining required open space.
14.42 District Public Open Space Requirement. A minimum of one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet within the District shall be reserved or designated as public open
space. No development shall be allowed which would reduce public open space in the
District below one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
14.21.1 Public open space shall be open space reserved for public use and enjoyment as
guaranteed through one or more of the following:
a) Retention by the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority;
b) Dedication to and acceptance by the City of Cambridge or other public entity;
c) Easements or deed restrictions over such land sufficient to ensure its perpetual
reservation for public open space purposes.
d) Dedication, by covenant or comparable legal instrument, to the community use of
the residents, lessees and visitors to the District for reasonable amounts of time on
a regular basis;
e) Lease agreements of ninety-nine (99) years or longer from the private developer or
owner to the City or other public entity.
14.42.2 In addition to the Public Open Space provisions above, development in the District
shall provide that a combination of public open spaces and private but publicly
accessible spaces such that the total open space area in the District are equivalent to
at least fifteen percent (15%) of the land area (excluding road rights-of-way) within the
District. The open spaces within the District shall contribute to an interconnected
14-15
network of public spaces in the broader Kendall Square neighborhood,
accommodating a variety of activities for employees, residents and visitors, consistent
with the place-making goals of the 2013 K2 Final Report.
14.43 Project Based Minimum Open Space Requirement. Each development project shall be
required to contribute to the open space network of the District and/or the surrounding
neighborhood consistent, in the case of Infill GFA, with an open space pan approved
through the Special Permit application as described in Section 14.32.2 and consistent
with the Open Space Requirements of Section 403 of the Kendall Square Urban
Renewal Plan.
14.45 Pedestrian Ways.
14.45.1 Pedestrian ways listed and defined below may be counted toward the open space
requirement determined in Section 14.43.
14.45.2 Pedestrian ways shall be designed to provide for public access and shall have the
following meanings:
(1) An open pedestrian bridge is a continuous open bridge having a minimum width of
6 (six) feet and spanning a street, pedestrian way, access or service road or open
space within a lot or between two adjacent lots.
(2) A raised pedestrian deck is a continuous, open platform at least twenty (20) feet in
width which is at least eight (8) feet above the mean elevation of the lot and which
extends over a street, pedestrian way, access or service road or open space within
a lot or between two adjacent lots. It shall have direct pedestrian access from
abutting buildings, shall provide seating facilities and shall be landscaped including
one tree, of at least three and a half (31/2) inch caliper, per five hundred (500)
square feet of pedestrian deck.
(3) An enclosed pedestrian bridge is a continuous, enclosed space having a minimum
width of eight (8) feet which spans a street, pedestrian way, access or service road
or open space, making connections within a lot or between two adjacent lots. At
least fifty (50%) percent of the surface area along its facades shall consist of
transparent materials.
(4) An elevated shopping bridge is a continuous, enclosed space which spans a
street, pedestrian way, access or service road or open space, making connection
within a lot or between two adjacent lots. Such a shopping bridge shall have a
minimum width of thirty-six (36) feet and a maximum width of forty-eight (48) feet,
with retail uses as allowed in Section 14.21.3 along one or both sides of a
pedestrian circulation route with a minimum width of twelve (12) feet. Such
shopping bridge shall connect, at a minimum, at both ends to other internal or
external pedestrian ways.
(5) A shopping arcade is a continuous, covered, but not necessarily enclosed, space
which extends along the front facade of a building facing a street or pedestrian way
within the District, and having retail uses as permitted in Section 14.21.3
accessible from it. It shall have a minimum continuous width, unobstructed,
14-16
except for building columns, of at least twelve (12) feet, and also have a minimum
continuous height of twelve (12) feet. Such shopping arcades shall have access
from the abutting street or pedestrian way, having its floor at the same level and
continuous with the sidewalk or other abutting pedestrian way. It shall be open to
the public at all hours.
(6) An elevated shopping way is a continuous, enclosed space which extends along
the front facade of a building facing a street or a pedestrian way and which has a
minimum width of twelve (12) feet. It shall be located on the second level of the
building and have a minimum continuous height of twelve (12) feet. It shall be
open to the public for a minimum of twelve (12) hours daily, on weekdays, and
shall have fronting retail uses as permitted in Section 14.21.3.
(7) A through block arcade is a covered space which provides a connection through a
building and connects streets, open spaces, pedestrian ways, or any combination
of the above, and is directly accessible to the public. A through block arcade shall
have a minimum area of at least two thousand (2,000) square feet and a minimum
width at any point of twenty (20) feet. A through block arcade shall have openings
at the face of the building for entrance at least twelve (12) feet in width and ten
(10) feet high. At least fifty (50%) percent of its aggregate interior frontage shall be
retail use as permitted in Section 14.21.3. Vertical circulation elements, columns,
pedestrian bridges and balconies are permitted obstructions provided they do not
cover in the aggregate more than fifteen (15%) percent of the floor area of the
arcade.
14.45.3 The minimum height of any pedestrian way above the surface of a public way over
which it is constructed shall be fourteen feet (14'-0").
14.50 VEHICULAR ACCESS, PARKING AND LOADING
14.51 Access. Buildings erected in the Kendall Center MXD District need not be located on
lots which have frontage on a street. However, provisions for access to all buildings by
emergency and service vehicles in lieu of public street access shall be made possible
by the layout and design of driveways, interior service roads, or pedestrian and bicycle
circulation corridors not normally open to vehicular traffic to the reasonable satisfaction
of the City of Cambridge Fire Department, and the Cambridge Traffic Department.
14.52 Parking Requirements. Off-street parking regulations for the Kendall Center MXD
District shall be as follows:
14.52.1 No on grade, open parking areas shall be allowed in the District except as provided for
in Section 14.524.
14.52.2 With the exception of multi-family residential development, there are no minimum
parking requirements for new development in the District. Residential development
shall provide at a minimum 0.4 automobile parking spaces per dwelling unit. All
proposed development shall be restricted from construction parking space, either on or
off the lot within the District, beyond the maximum allowances of Table 1. If a
14-17
development includes more than on category of use, then the number of spaces
allowed for the development shall be the sum of the allowance for each category of
use. Where the computation of required spaces results in a fractional number, only a
fraction of one half or more shall be counted as one. The Planning Board may
approve arrangements for shared parking of such residential parking spaces with
commercial spaces or otherwise adjust the minimum parking requirements based on
review and analysis of anticipated parking demand within the Transportation Impact
Study.
At least ten (10) additional parking spaces reserved for car-sharing vehicles shall be
provided by the first development project utilizing at least one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of Infill GFA. These spaces are not counted toward maximum
parking ratios. In the event that no car sharing or site-based care rental organization is
prepared to offer services, the designated car share spaces may be rented on a
monthly basis unless and until an organization agrees to provide the services if there is
clear documentation that such parking spaces are continuously offered to car sharing
organizations.
Table 1 MXD District Parking Requirements
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
Use Maximum number of spaces
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
Light Industrial uses allowed by Section 14.21.1 .8/1000 sq. ft.1
Office uses and Biotechnology Manufacturing Uses allowed by Section 14.21.2 .9/1000 sq. ft.
Retail and consumer establishment allowed by Section 14.21.3 .5/1000 sq. ft.
Residential uses allowed by Section 14.21.4
Multifamily residences .75 dwelling unit
Hotels or Motels 1/4 sleeping rooms
Public assembly uses allowed by Sections 14.21.3(2), 14.21.3(3), 1/15 seats or
and Section 14.21.5 (restaurants, entertainment and recreation facilities) 1/300 sq. ft.2
Other uses allowed by Section 14.21.6 and 14.21.7 .91/1000 sq. ft.
1. All space measurements are in terms of square feet of gross floor area.
2. For assembly spaces having no fixed seating.
14.52.3 The parking allowances specified in Table 1 may be satisfied in total or in part by a
lease agreement between the developer and the City, other public entity, or private
consortium for use of parking spaces in a public or pooled private parking facility
located within the District (or, in the case of the spaces required for residential uses,
located outside of the District but within one thousand (1,000) feet of the residential
building for which the parking is being provided). The total number of parking spaces
leased and constructed within the district for development on a lot shall not exceed the
maximum allowances provided for in Table 2.
14-18
14.52.4 Off street, on grade parking lots, not enclosed in a structure, may be constructed in the
District only on an interim basis in anticipation of later construction of structured
parking provided that there is compliance with each of the following:
(a) the future parking structure will be constructed within the District but it may be
located either on or off the lot;
(b) construction of the future parking structure will commence within three years
of the date of permit application for development on the lot;
(c) such future parking structure may be constructed and/or operated by the
applicant or by a public or private entity;
(d) the future parking structure will contain sufficient spaces reserved for users of
the lot to meet the parking requirements of the lot specified in Table 1
(scrivener correction from Table 3); and
(e) binding commitments shall exist to guarantee, to the reasonable satisfaction
of the Superintendent of Buildings, that requirements (a) through (d) above
shall be satisfied. Such commitments shall be made by negotiated lease
agreement, deed restriction, covenant, performance bond, or comparable
legal instrument.
14.52.5 Regulations governing the layout and design of parking facilities in Article 6.000 of this
Ordinance shall not be applicable in the MXD District. This Article 14.000 sets no such
regulations for the MXD District.
14.52.6 Bicycle parking shall be provided as set forth in Section 6.100 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
14.53 Loading Requirements. It is the intent of this Section that sufficient off-street loading
facilities be constructed within the District to meet the needs of users located there.
The requirements of Article 6.000 shall not apply in the MXD District.
14.53.1 All buildings in the MXD District shall provide the number of bays required in Table 2
(scrivener correction Table 4) unless they qualify for one or one or more of the
exemptions below:
(1) In buildings with uses in more than one use group under Section 14.21, the loading
bay requirements for that use consuming the most gross floor area shall be first
computed and required. Only fifty (50%) percent of the floor area of the other uses
shall be counted in determining the additional loading requirements.
(2) Where there are contractual arrangements for sharing loading and service facilities
with other users in the District for a period of ten (10) years of more, a fifty (50%)
percent reduction in the loading bay requirements computed in Subsection 14.53.1
or 14.53.1(1) shall be allowed. Such contractual agreement shall be guaranteed to
the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Buildings by covenant, deed restriction, or
comparable legal instrument.
14-19
Table 4 MXD Off-Street Loading Requirements
(Number of bays required by gross floor area or use)
GROSS FLOOR AREA BY USE
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
Over 200,000 sq. ft.
(1) Up to 25,001 - 40,001 - 100,001 - for each additional
Use 25,000 sq. ft. 40,000 sq. ft. 100,000 sq. ft. 200,00 sq. ft. 150,000 sq. ft.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Light Industrial Uses allowed by
Section 14.21.1 1 2 3 1
Office Uses and Biotechnology 0 1 1 2 1
Manufacturing Uses allowed by
Section 14.21.2
Retail and consumer service
establishments allowed by Section 14.21.3 1 1 2 4 1
Residential uses allowed by Section 14.21.4
Multifamily residences 0 1 1 2 1
Hotels and motels 1 1 1 2 1
Public assembly uses allowed by
Sections 14.21.3(2), 14.21.3(3) and 0 1 1 2 1
14.21.5 (restaurants, entertainment
and recreational facilities)
Other uses allowed by Section 14.21.6
and 14.21.7 0 0 1 2 1
14.53.2 Regulations governing the location, layout and design of loading facilities, specified in
Section 6.90 of this Ordinance shall not be applicable in the he MXD District. This
Article 14.000 establishes no such regulations for the MXD District.
14.60 SIGNS
During the life of the Kendall Square Urban Renewal Plan as amended, the sign
regulations of Section 7.10 shall not be applicable in the MXD District.
14.70 SPECIAL PROVISIONS
14.71.1 Special Provisions Applicable within the Ames Street District Applicability. The
provisions set forth in this Section 14.71 shall apply solely within the Ames Street
District. Where this Section 14.71 specifies some standards or makes some other
requirement contrary to the standards or requirements set forth elsewhere in this
Article 14.00 or in the Ordinance, the provisions of this Section 14.71 shall control.
14.71.2 Lot Density Limitation. Notwithstanding the Lot Density Limitations in Section 14.33,
there shall be no maximum floor area ratio for Multifamily dwelling uses. However, the
District Development Limitations in Section 14.32 shall continue to apply.
14.71.3 Lot Minimum Open Space Requirement. So long as the District Public Open space
Requirement in Section14.42 is met, and there exists within the Ames Street District a
minimum of fifty-three thousand (53,000) square feet of public open space (as defined
in Section 14.42), there shall be no open space requirement for any individual lots
within the Ames Street District.
14-20
14.71.4 Parking. The minimum number of spaces for multifamily residential uses shall be 0.50
per dwelling unit.
14.71.5 Loading Requirements. Where there are contractual arrangements for sharing loading
and service facilities with other users in the Ames Street District for a period of ten (10)
years or more, a sixty percent (60%) reduction in the loading bay requirements
computed in Subsection 14.53.1 or 14.53.1(1) shall be allowed. Such contractual
agreement shall be guaranteed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Buildings by
covenant, deed restriction, easement or comparable legal instrument.
14.72 Special Provisions Applicable Outside the Ames Street District
14.72.1 Applicability. The provisions set forth in the Section 14.72 shall apply solely within the
portion of the MXD District consisting of lots fronting on Main Street that are not within
the Ames Street District as such District is constituted as of October 1, 2014. Where
this Section 14.72 specifies some standards or makes some other requirement
contrary to the standards or requirements set forth elsewhere in this Article 14.000 or
in the Ordinance, the provisions of this Section 14.72 shall control.
14.72.2 Purpose and Intent. In furtherance of the intent provided in Section 14.12, and in
response to the Kendall Square planning process, the purpose and intent of this
Section 14.72 is to provide an incentive for improvements that will remedy a gap in the
urban street edge, promote retail and other ground floor activity to increase public
engagement, reduce parking utilization levels and enhance sustainability, and upgrade
design to current standards, in keeping with Kendall Square’s identity as a worldrenounced
research center and a vibrant neighborhood.
14.72.3 Special Permit. Where improvements are proposed to be constructed on any lot within
the portion of the MXD District fronting on Main Street and not within the Ames Street
District as such District is constituted as of October 1, 2014, and release of an open
space covenant by the City will be necessary to accommodate such improvements, the
Planning Board may grant a special permit allowing improvements containing
incremental square footage of not more than 60,000 square feet of GFA within the
limits of Section 14.32 in excess of the square footage of improvements located on
such lot as of October 1, 2014. In granting such special permit, the Planning Board
shall find the following:
(1)The lot upon which such improvements are proposed contained, as of October
1, 2014, no portion of a building located so as to create a street edge along any
part of the Main Street frontage of such lot; and the proposed improvements will
remedy that condition by including the establishment of a street edge in keeping
with the urban nature of the areas, on at least a portion of the Main Street building
façade.
(2) The ground level of the proposed improvements fronting on Main Street will
be designed to enhance public access and interaction.
14.72.4 Retail and Consumer Services Uses. If retail or consumer services uses are a part of
any improvements authorized by special permit under this Section14.72, the Gross
Floor Area of any first floor or areas situated no more than one (1) floor below grade of
such improvements devoted to such retail or consumer services uses shall be
14-21
excluded form calculations of Gross Floor Area and FAR for all purposed of this Article
14.000 and the Ordinance, provided that the portion of any individual retail or
consumer services use exceeding 5,000 square feet (or 10,000 square feet for a
grocery, market or pharmacy retail use) shall be counted as Gross Floor Area for the
purposes of calculating allowable FAR.
14.72.5 Parking and Loading. The improvements authorized by special permit under this
Section 14.72 shall not require vehicle parking or loading facilities by reason of the
incremental development authorized, and no additional parking spaces shall be
provided by reason of improvements located on such lot beyond the number of parking
spaces provided as of October 1, 2014.
14.72.6 Bicycle Parking. Additional bicycle parking shall be provided as required in Section
6.100 to the extent of the incremental development authorized by special permit under
this Section 14.72, provide that any such spaces may be located anywhere on the lot
or in such other location as the Planning Board may in its discretion approve.
14.72.7 Open Space. The Lot Open Space Requirements in Section 14.43 shall be
inapplicable on any lot on which improvements are authorized by special permit under
this Section 14.72, and the Planning Board may in its discretion waive any other open
space requirement applicable to such lot under this Ordinance. Any ground floor
publicly accessible feature, if so determined by the Planning Board, shall be excluded
from calculations of Gross Floor Area and FAR for all purposes of this Article 14.000
and the Ordinance. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for improvements
to be located within the area of the open space covenant that would need to be
released by the City notwithstanding that such open space covenant may not have
been released prior to issuance of such special permit.
14.72.8 Sustainable Design and Development. The incremental development authorized by
special permit under this Section 14.72 shall comply with the green building
requirements of Section 22.20, provided that the Planning Board may in its discretion
vary or waive any such requirements.
14.72.9 Project Review. Incremental development authorized by special permit under this
Section 14.72 shall be subject to project review by the Planning Board under the
provisions of Section 19.20.
14.72.10 Incentive for Housing Development. The incremental development authorized by
special permit under this Section 14.72 shall be considered an Incentive Project
pursuant to Section 11.200.
14.72.11 Contribution to Community Fund. Upon issuance of a Final Certificate of Occupancy
for the incremental development authorized by special permit under this Section 14.72,
the permittee shall contribute to a Community Fund, established by the City Manager,
an amount equal to $10.00 multiplied by the number of square feet of new gross floor
area for office and biotechnology manufacturing uses identified in Section 14.21.2
contained in such incremental development.
14.72.12 Public Benefits. The public benefits to be provided by a development for which a
special permit may be granted under this Section 14.72, including those provided in
Sections 14.72.10 and 14.72.11, shall be deemed to satisfy any future requirements
14-22
for public benefits that may be adopted with respect to the MXD District or any portion
thereof that may include any lot eligible for such special permit, including without
limitation any other funding requirement or exaction, any requirements to provide
innovation or other space or services, or any limitations relating to the progress or
sequence of development of residential or other space, none of which shall apply
thereto.
14.72.13 Letter of Commitment. The Letter dated March 26, 2015, by Richard McKinnon on
behalf of the Whitehead Institute and received by the City Council as Communication
#5 of March 30, 2015, and attached “Design Narrative/Zoning Guidelines”
Memorandum prepared by Andy Pecora of Tsoi/Kobus & Associates, shall be binding
upon the Whitehead Institute and its successors and assigns. The issuance of any
building permit or certificate of occupancy authorized by a special permit issued
pursuant to this Section 14.72 shall be conditioned upon certification by the Community
Development Department and all other relevant City departments to the Inspectional
Services Department that all portions of the aforementioned Letter are continuing to be
met.
14.73 INTER-AGENCY DESIGN REVIEW
Review and approval of the Infill Development Concept Plan, as described in Section
14.32.2, and subsequent building design review under Section 14.32.2.4 shall be
conducted jointly by the Planning Board and the CRA, as described in Section 506 of
the Kendall Square Urban Renewal Plan, “Inter-Agency Design Review.” The Planning
Board and CRA, shall hold at least one joint public meeting to consider the Infill
Development Concept Plan. In order to ensure high quality architectural design and
thoughtful adherence to the Concept Plan, evaluation of subsequent building proposals
shall include the review of:
a) A site plan illustrating the new building proposal in context with existing and
proposed new development within the District.
b) A proposed development program illustrating the size and location of uses
within the building.
c) Building plans, sections, elevations, and rendering sufficient to describe the
urban design setting and architectural character of the proposed building(s). A
materials board shall be provided along with annotated building elevations.
d) A digital or physical model of the building within the context of neighboring
buildings.
e) A project specific open space plan depicting the design of open space
provided on site by the project and y Public Open Space contributions to the
area to be executed by the Project. Additionally streetscape designs for
building frontages.
f) A sustainability narrative describing how the development proposal will meet
the requirements set forth in Section 14.64 below.
14-23
As set forth in Section 14.32.2.4, the procedures for ongoing design review of
subsequent building proposals shall be further define per the Concept Plan
Special Permit.
14.74 Sustainability. New buildings constructed within the District shall comply with the
provisions of Section 22.20 of the Ordinance. For those construction projects utilizing
Infill GFA subject to Section 22.23, LEED certification at the Gold level or better is
required and must enlist a Commissioning Authority to perform Enhanced
Commissioning of the building’s performance. In connection with the submission
requirements of Section 22.24.2.a, the Developer of such buildings shall submit a
Statement of Energy Design Intent produced through the EnergyStar Target Finder
tool, or comparable method. New buildings in the District utilizing Infill GFA must
incorporate an integrated design approach and incorporate best practices for meeting
sustainability in the following five (5) areas:
a) Energy and Emissions. Each new building must conserve building energy and, to
the extent applicable, reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The project proponent
must evaluate the potential for on-site energy generation or the construction or
expansion of c0-generation or district energy facilities within the District. All new
construction shall be developed to be Solar-Ready, allowing for the immediate
installation of solar voltaic units or provisions of building systems to allow future
solar installation. Building proposals shall include a study considering the
feasibility of connecting to the existing district steam system or other energy cogeneration
facility in the area.
b) Water Management. The Developer, for each new building, must explore
opportunities for;
i. potable water use reductions,
ii. storm water management using open spaces,
iii. incorporation of indigenous vegetation and,
iv. storm water for irrigation purposes.
c) Cool Roofs. All new buildings approved in the District must employ Functional
Green Roofs (as such term is defined in Article 22.000 of this Zoning Ordinance),
high-albedo “white” roofs or a functionally equivalent roofing system.
d) Monitoring. All new buildings approved in the District shall be required to conform
to the requirements of the Cambridge Building Energy Use Disclosure Ordinance,
Chapter 8.67 of the Municipal Code.
e) Rooftop Mechanical Equipment Noise Mitigation. Sound emanating from rooftop
mechanical equipment on all new or substantially altered structures shall be
minim9ized by the adoption of best available and feasible practices regarding the
location and sizing of equipment, the selection of equipment and sound attenuation
measures.
14-24
14.80 INAPPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN OTHER REGULATIONS
Where this Article 14.000 specifies some standard or makes some other requirement
contrary to a requirements elsewhere in this Ordinance, the provisions of this Article
14.000 shall control.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
15-1
ARTICLE 15.000 CAMBRIDGEPORT REVITALIZATION
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
15.10 SCOPE AND INTENT
15.20 USE REGULATIONS
15.30 INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
15.40 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
15.50 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
15.60 SIGNS
15.70 INAPPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN OTHER REGULATIONS
15.80 PUBLIC BENEFITS
15.90 SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS
15.100 CONSISTENCY WITH LETTER OF COMMITMENT
15.10 SCOPE AND INTENT
15.11 Scope. This Article regulates development within the Cambridgeport Revitalization
Development District, located as shown on the Zoning Map as amended.
15.12 Purpose. The purpose of the District is to implement the Blue Ribbon Committee
Report dated December, 1986 adopted by the Cambridge City Council February 9,
1987; to allow a diversity of land uses in close proximity within a limited area; to
provide a transition from the existing Cambridgeport residential neighborhoods to the
business oriented uses in the District; and to encourage interaction among activities
located within the District; to provide for mixed income residential uses as an extension
of the existing Cambridgeport residential neighborhood.
15.13 Approach. This Article is designed to fulfill the above purpose of the Cambridgeport
Revitalization Development District by establishing controls which will facilitate
development while protecting the public interest; by setting regulations which limit the
aggregate amount of development within the District by setting other district wide
requirements while permitting flexible development scale and configuration on
individual lots within the District; by requiring a minimum of residential development
and encouraging additional residential development within the District and by allowing
mixed uses within the District.
15.20 USE REGULATIONS
15.21 Permitted Uses. The following uses are allowed in the Cambridgeport Revitalization
Development District. All uses not listed within one of the use groups in this section
shall be prohibited. All uses within the District shall comply with the environmental
protection standards of Section 15.23.
15.21.1 Light Industry
(1) Manufacturing and fabrication, assembly, finishing work (including packaging and
bottling, but only as an accessory use) as permitted in Section 4.37 a and b.
15-2
Development on any lot in the district shall not be devoted exclusively to wholesale
uses.
(3) Printing, binding, or related establishment, as permitted in Section 4.37f.
(4) Storage warehouse, cold storage building, as permitted in Section 4.37k, but as an
accessory use only and not exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
(GFA), but not including storage or bailing of junk, scrap metal, rages, paper or
other waste materials and not including outside storage of products or materials.
(5) Automotive repair garage as permitted in Section 4.37h, provided the use is
contained within a building having other uses (including among other uses
permitted, accessory parking) and further provided that the garage occupy no
more than twenty percent (20%) of the area of the building.
15.21.2 Office Uses
(1) All uses permitted in Section 4.34.
(2) Radio or television studio as permitted in Section 4.32f.
15.21.3 Retail and Consumer Service Establishments
(1) Store for retail sale of merchandise.
(2) Eating and/or drinking establishment, whether or not liquor is sold or consumed,
including restaurant, bar, lunchroom, cafeteria and food commissary.
(3) Fast order food establishment subject to the Special Permit requirements of
Section 11.30, unless such use is enclosed in a structure principally containing
other uses and is included in a “food court” or similar specialized area.
(4) Consumer service establishment, including but not limited to hairdresser, barber
shop, laundry or dry cleaning pickup establishment, self service laundry, and shoe
repair or tailoring shop, or photography studio.
(5) Rental agency for autos or other products, but not including taxi companies. Such
agencies shall be operated entirely within a building and no major automobile
repairs shall be made on the premises.
(6) Automobile service stations where no major repairs are made.
15.21.4 Residential Uses
(1) One and two family dwellings.
(2) Townhouse development.
(3) Multifamily dwelling.
(4) Hotel or motel.
15.21.5 Entertainment and Recreational Uses
(1) Indoor commercial entertainment establishments including but not limited to
cinema, theater, concert hall, cabaret and night club.
15-3
(2) Recreation facilities including bowling alley, indoor or outdoor tennis courts, public
recreation building, health club, or skating rink. Such recreation facilities shall be
allowed only if they are located in or attached to structures containing other
principal uses.
(3) Hall, auditoriums and similar spaces used for public gatherings.
(4) Park or playground.
15.22 Multiple Uses in the Same Structure. Within the District there shall be no restriction on
combining different categories of use within the same building other than those
imposed by the State Building Code or other federal, state or local regulations other
than the Zoning Ordinance.
15.23 Environmental Protection Standards. No activity shall be permitted in the District
unless it shall be in conformity with the following standards for environmental
protection:
15.23.1 All dust, fumes, odors, smoke or vapor shall be effectively confined to the premises or
so disposed of as to avoid air pollution.
15.23.2 Any noise, vibration or flashing shall not be normally perceptible without instruments at
a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the premises.
15.23.3 All development proposals shall comply with Federal and State air pollution and water
pollution control regulations, the City of Cambridge Ordinances, and other applicable
environmental laws.
15.23.4 Except during construction activity on the lot, all refuse and other waste materials shall
be stored within buildings prior to collection and disposal.
15.24 Required Retail Uses on Massachusetts Avenue. For any building directly facing or
abutting Massachusetts Avenue, a minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the linear
ground floor frontage along Massachusetts Avenue, to a minimum average depth of
forty (40) feet from the Massachusetts Avenue building façade, shall be occupied by
Retail and Consumer Service uses as permitted by Subsection 15.21.3 or
Entertainment and Recreational Uses as permitted by Subsection 15.21.5. This
requirement shall apply in addition to the Use Limitations and Restrictions for the
Central Square Overlay District set forth in Subsection 20.304.5.
15.24.1 Marketing of Required Retail Space. As of January 1, 2012, where it is proposed to
create new retail space as required in Section 15.24, the proponent shall include a
marketing plan for such retail space as part of the Submittal for any Project Review
procedure that may be required in accordance with Section 15.36. At a minimum,
such a marketing plan shall (1) set forth target uses and users (and shall particularly
target local and/or independent retailers), (2) designate an individual responsible for
implementing the plan who shall serve as a point of contact with the Community
Development Department (through its Economic Development Division), and (3)
describe the types of economic incentives which may be offered to tenants such as
rental and fit-up allowances. Subsequent to completing all project review procedures,
15-4
the proponent shall periodically consult with the Economic Development Division on
the implementation of the marketing plan and shall, at a minimum, submit any further
modifications or clarifications of the plan to the Economic Development Division for
review. The Community Development Department shall certify to the Inspectional
Services Department that this requirement has been met prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for the required retail space.
15.30 INTENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
15.31 Applicability. The amount and density of development within the Cambridgeport
Revitalization Development District shall be governed by the provisions of this Section
15.30.
15.32 District Development Limitations. There shall be a limitation on the amount of all
development within the District and a minimum requirement of residential (excluding
hotel and motel uses) development within the District, both as specified below.
15.32.1 The aggregate of all development in the District shall not exceed (i) one million eight
hundred twenty thousand (1,820,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) in
nonresidential buildings (which term for the purpose of this Article shall exclude
parking facilities and portions of the buildings containing parking facilities and shall
include buildings and portions of buildings containing hotel and motel uses and (ii)
seven hundred twenty-five thousand (725,000) square feet of GFA in residential
buildings.
Aggregate GFA development in the District is at any time the sum of the GFA (as
defined in Article 2.000 of this Ordinance) of all such nonresidential buildings (i) which
are then located in the District and (ii) which are being constructed or may be
constructed in the District pursuant to then effective building permits.
15.32.2 As an incentive for the maximum allowable density as provided in Subsection 15.32.1
there is a minimum requirement of residential (excluding hotel and motel uses)
development within the District of four hundred (400) dwelling units as set forth in
Section 15.32.5. One hundred (100) dwelling units shall be made available for a
period not less than thirty (30) years for families having an income of eighty percent
(80%) or less of the median family income for the Metropolitan Boston Statistical Area
adjusted for family size (hereinafter identified as low income units) and an additional
fifty (50) units shall be made available for a period not less than thirty (30) years for
occupants meeting the income limits established from time to time by the
Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency for first time homebuyers, adjusted for family
size (hereinafter identified as moderate income units). A minimum of two hundred and
fifty (250) of the required dwelling units shall be located West of Sidney Street.
Notwithstanding the exclusion set forth in Section 11.202.2, the provisions of Section
11.200 of this Ordinance shall apply to any development in the District that is approved
after January 1, 2012, except for those provisions that relate to authorizations for an
15-5
increase in permissible density or intensity of use in Section 11.203.2(b) and (c), which
shall not be available beyond the overall limitations for GFA established for the District
by this Section 15.000.
15.32.3 Retail and consumer service establishments as permitted in Section 15.21.3
(excluding uses accessory to and within hotels and other accessory uses such as
newsstands and cafeterias serving primarily occupants of the development within the
District) and entertainment uses as permitted in Section 15.21.5(1) shall be limited to a
maximum of one hundred and fifty thousand (150,000) gross square feet. Any such
uses that are required by Section 15.24 shall be exempt from this limitation.
15.32.4 Any construction or change of use within the District which would cause aggregate or
cumulative GFA or dwelling unit limitations of Subsections 15.32.1, 15.32.2, and
15.32.3 to exceeded shall not be allowed.
(1) Compliance with this Section 15.32.4 shall be determined by the Superintendent of
Buildings at all times including at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy
under Section 9.20 of this Ordinance.
(2) The Superintendent of Buildings shall maintain a record of the aggregate GFA of
nonresidential buildings within the District, a record of the cumulative number of
dwelling units in the District, the GFA of such dwelling units and a list of the units
designated to satisfy the requirements of Section 15.32.2. These records shall be
updated as appropriate, from time to time, including upon issuance, revocation or
expiration of a building permit or certificate of occupancy and may relied on by any
interested party to determine compliance with the provisions and requirements of
this Article.
(3) Prior to the issuance of any building permits the Superintendent of Buildings shall
on the basis of information submitted with the building permit application determine
whether the minimum required residential development and the minimum required
publicly beneficial open space are capable of being developed within the District.
In no case, however, shall the Superintendent of Buildings issue a building permit
increasing the aggregate gross floor area of all buildings in the District beyond
1,000,000 square feet unless there exists at least one hundred ten (110) dwelling
units of which at least twenty-seven (27) are low income dwelling units, and at
least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of area have been reserved or
designated as publicly beneficial open space in partial satisfaction of the
requirements of Section 15.40; nor shall the Superintendent of Buildings issue a
building permit increasing the aggregate gross floor area of nonresidential
buildings in the District beyond 1,850,000 square feet unless there exist at least
four hundred (400) dwelling units of which at least one hundred (100) are low
income units and at least fifty (50) are moderate income units.
(4) The application for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied with the following information submitted to the Superintendent of
Buildings, as appropriate to the application, in order to determine compliance with
this Section 15.32.
15-6
(a) measurement of total gross floor area of the new nonresidential buildings or
building additions to nonresidential buildings;
(b) measurement of gross floor areas of renovations or use changes within
existing buildings;
(c) the total number of dwelling units in the new building, building addition or
renovated building, the gross floor area of such units, and the number of
such units being dedicated to families having an income maximum specified
in Section 15.32.2;
(d) the aggregate or cumulative gross floor area of all nonresidential buildings
located within the District;
(e) the aggregate or cumulative number of dwelling units located within the
District, the aggregate or cumulative gross floor area of units and the
aggregate or cumulative number of such units dedicated to families having
an income maximum specified in Section 15.32.2;
(f) the development site(s) set aside for compliance with minimum residential
development required pursuant to Section 15.32.2;
(g) the aggregate or cumulative gross floor area devoted to retail and consumer
service establishments as permitted in Section 15.21.3 (but excluding
accessory uses such as newsstands and cafeterias serving primarily
occupants of the development within the District) and entertainment uses as
permitted in Section 15.21.5(1);
(h) the aggregate total publicly beneficial open space provided in conformance
with the requirements of Section 15.40.
15.32.5 Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection 15.32.1, development in the District shall
not exceed one million and seven hundred and fifty thousand (1,750,000) square feet
of GFA in nonresidential buildings and four hundred (400) dwelling units, without first
submitting a development plan of the District to the Planning Board and obtaining the
approval of the Planning Board of the further proposed development within the District
or any portion thereof. The development plan shall show the approximate location of
all existing and proposed buildings, the aggregate GFA thereof, and the uses thereof;
and all streets, parking facilities, the number of parking spaces thereof, curb cuts,
offstreet loading areas and publicly beneficial open spaces within the District. There
shall be submitted with the development plan sufficient additional information to enable
the Planning Board to determine whether the existing improvements and uses thereof
comply within the requirements of this Article at the time that such development plan is
submitted. The development plan shall be accompanied by a traffic report containing
such information as may be necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of
subparagraph (v) of this Subsection 15.23.5 have been satisfied. In considering the
development plan the Planning Board shall conform to all requirements of procedure
applicable to requests for special permits (including requirements for public hearing
and notice) pursuant to this Ordinance. The Planning Board shall approve any
15-7
development plan under the provisions of this Subsection 15.32.5 if the following
requirements are met:
(i) The improvements and the uses thereof existing at the time of the submittal of any
development plan and the proposed improvements and uses thereof as depicted
on the development plan shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Article;
(ii) There shall have been constructed a minimum of two hundred (200) dwelling units
conforming to the provisions of Subsection 15.32.2 which include seventy-five (75)
low income dwelling units;
(iii) There shall have been dedicated and installed at least one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet of publicly beneficial open space conforming to the
provisions of Subsection 15.41;
(iv) The improvements existing at the time of the submittal of any development plan
shall have been constructed substantially in accordance with design guidelines
(including without limitation any restrictions on building heights) agreed to between
the City and owner as may be amended pursuant to the Development Consultation
Procedure; and
(v) Implementation of traffic mitigation measures which have as a standard the
maximum generation of one thousand seven hundred (1,700) two way (inbound
and outbound) vehicular trips at PM peak hour from all development within the
District measured in accordance with the traffic mitigation agreement between
Cambridge Community Development Department and owner as may be amended
pursuant to the Development Consultation Procedure; to the extent that the total
PM peak hour two way vehicle trip generation for all development with the District
measured at the time of the submission of development plan pursuant to this
Subsection 15.32.5 exceeds one thousand five hundred (1,500) trips but is less
than the maximum one thousand seven hundred (1,700) trips, additional gross
floor area shall be permitted up to the maximum limit of one hundred and fifty
thousand (150,000) square feet pursuant to such traffic mitigation agreement.
15.33 Building Height Limitation. The maximum building height within one hundred (100) feet
of the easterly sideline of Brookline Street south of Franklin Street shall be forty (40)
feet. The maximum building height within two hundred twenty-five (225) feet of the
easterly sideline of Brookline Street north of Franklin Street shall be eighty (80) feet.
The maximum building height north of Green Street shall be eighty (80) feet, except
that east of Blanche Street the height may be increased to ninety-five (95) feet
provided that for at least two-thirds of the Massachusetts Avenue frontage of any
building, there shall be a cornice line at or below sixty-five (65) feet, above which any
taller portions of the building shall step back at least fifteen (15) feet from the
Massachusetts Avenue facade. The maximum building height within two hundred
(200) feet westerly of the westerly sideline of Sidney Street and within two hundred
(200) feet northerly of the northerly sideline of Pacific Street shall be one hundred and
five (105) feet. The remaining portion of the District shall have a maximum building
height of seventy (70) feet except that buildings or portions thereof shall be allowed to
exceed such seventy (70) feet maximum building height to the following extent.
Easterly of Sidney Street up to one million ninety thousand (1,090,000) gross square
15-8
feet of building area within not more than five (5) buildings or portions thereof may
exceed the seventy (70) feet height limitation to the maximum building height of one
hundred and sixty (160) feet and one of such buildings or portions thereof shall be
permitted to the maximum building height of two hundred and five (205) feet if it is
located easterly of Landsdowne Street.
15.34 Maximum Floor Area Ratio Requirements
For the area west of Sidney Street the following aggregate FAR limitations shall be in
effect:
(1) For the subarea bounded by Sidney, Franklin, Brookline, and Pacific Streets, the
maximum aggregate FAR shall be 3.0 except that for the portion of the subarea
within one hundred and seventy-five (175) feet of the easterly sideline of Brookline
Street the maximum aggregate FAR shall be 1.5.
(2) For the subarea bounded by Sidney, Green, Brookline, and Franklin Streets the
maximum aggregate FAR shall be 3.0 with the following exceptions:
(a) for the portion of the subarea within 100 feet of the easterly sideline of
Brookline Street, the maximum aggregate FAR shall be 2.0.
(b) renovation of the existing building in the block (commonly known as the
Fenton Shoe Building) shall be permitted to exceed the 3.0 aggregate FAR
limitation, to no more than 4.4.
As used herein, the term “aggregate FAR” shall mean the ratio of Gross Floor Area of
all structures within the applicable subarea (or portion thereof) to the total area of all
lots within the applicable subarea (or portion thereof).
15.35 Dimensional Requirements. There shall be no minimum lot size in the District. There
shall be no requirement with respect to minimum lot widths or minimum front, side or
rear yards in the District.
15.36 Project Review. All development occurring after January 1, 2012 within the
Cambridgeport Revitalization Development District shall be comply with the applicable
project review requirements set forth in Article 19.000 of the Zoning Ordinance. The
Cambridgeport Revitalization Development District shall be considered an area of
special planning concern and a district in which the Project Review Special Permit
provisions set forth in Section 19.20 are applicable, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in Section 19.22. All development within the District must comply with the
Procedures specified in Article 19.000 except as herein modified:
(1) the Planning Board shall conduct the Development Consultation Procedure in lieu
of the Community Development Department;
(2) the Large Project Procedure (Section 19.43.3) shall be modified so that the
required consultation session shall occur within fourteen (14) days of the
15-9
submission of the required documents and the required written comments shall be
issued within fourteen (14) days of that session;
(3) the Submittal Requirements for any project review procedure shall, in addition to
those detailed in the applicable Sections of Article 19.000, include the following:
(a) a schematic master development plan of the entire district with anticipated
phasing as it is known at the time of submission;
(b) details of the design of at least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of
publicly beneficial open space, to be provided for review prior to the
issuance of building permits for nonresidential development exceeding nine
hundred and fifty thousand (950,000) square feet;
(c) details of the design of the one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
publicly beneficial open space required under Section 15.32.5, to be
provided or reserved prior to the issuance of building permits for
nonresidential development exceeding one million five hundred thousand
(1,500,000) square feet;
(d) a status report on the implementation of and effectiveness of the traffic
mitigation measures in place including those counts of traffic generated
within the District at intervals required under the Traffic Mitigation
Agreement.
15.37 For those portions of the District along Massachusetts Avenue located within the Central
Square Overlay District, notwithstanding anything set forth in Section 20.300, the Large
Project Review shall be undertaken by the Planning Board. Where applicable, the
Planning Board shall be guided by the objectives and criteria contained in the
publications “Central Square Action Plan”, City of Cambridge, November 1987, and
“Central Square Development Guidelines”, June 1989, and by any additional relevant
zoning or planning studies subsequently undertaken by or on behalf of the City. To the
extend any provision in these documents is in conflict with the Design Guidelines for the
Cambridgeport Revitalization Development District (“CRDD”), the Planning Board shall
determine which guideline is most appropriate to be considered in the Large Project
Development Consultation.
15.40 PUBLICLY BENEFICIAL OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT
15.41 Public Open Space Requirement. As an incentive for the maximum allowable density
as provided in Subsection 15.32.1 there is a requirement that a minimum amount of
one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of open space within the District be permanently
reserved or designated (without reference to location) as publicly beneficial open
space accessible at ground level as set forth in Section 15.32.5. No development shall
be allowed which would permanently reduce publicly beneficial open space in the
District below one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. A minimum of fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet of contiguous publicly beneficial open space shall be
located west of Sidney Street. The initial location of the required publicly beneficial
open space shall be guaranteed through one or more of the following.:
15.41.1 Dedication to and acceptance by the City of Cambridge or other public entity;
15-10
15.41.2 Easements or deed restrictions over such land sufficient or ensure that reservation for
public open space purposes for at least seventy-five (75) years or longer to the the City
or other public entity;
15.41.3 Lease agreements of seventy-five (75) years or longer to the City or other public entity;
15.41.4 Dedication, by covenant or comparable legal instrument, enforceable by the City and
binding on the owner for seventy-five (75) years or longer.
15.41.5 Compliance with this provision shall be determined as satisfying the requirements of
Section 19.59 of this Ordinance.
15.50 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
15.51 Parking and Loading requirements. Off Street parking and loading requirements for
the Cambridgeport Revitalization Development District shall be the same as set forth in
Article 6.000 and in the Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements applicable to
Residence C-3, Office 3, Business B and Industry B Districts.
15.51.2 The parking requirement may be satisfied in total or in part by a pooled private or
public parking facility located anywhere within the District.
15.51.3 For any development that is approved in the District after January 1, 2012, the
provisions of Section 6.37 pertaining to Bicycle Parking requirements shall apply
regardless of whether the automobile parking requirements for the development are
fulfilled with newly-constructed or pre-existing parking spaces.
15.60 SIGNS
The sign regulations of Article 7.000 applicable to Office and Industrial Districts shall
be applicable in the Cambridgeport Revitalization Development District.
15.70 INAPPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN OTHER REGULATIONS
Where this Article 15.000 specifies some standard or makes some other requirements
contrary to a requirement or standard established elsewhere in this Ordinance
including any dimensional limitations contained in Article 20.300, the provisions of this
Article 15.000 shall control.
15.80 PUBLIC BENEFITS
The obligations to limit development to the aggregate gross floor area set forth in
Section 15.32.1, to provide residential development pursuant to Section 15.32.2 and to
create publicly beneficial open space pursuant to Section 15.41 , and to conform to the
requirements set forth in this Article 15.000 and all other applicable requirements set
forth elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance shall satisfy the obligations to provide public
benefits, linkage payments or hereinafter required in the City of Cambridge.
15-11
15.90 SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS
15.91 Green Building Standards. Any new building that is approved in the District after
January 1, 2012 and that is subject to the provisions of Section 22.20 of the Ordinance
shall required to meet the requirements of the most current applicable LEED building
rating system at the level ‘Gold’ or better. Additionally, the submission requirements
under Section 22.20 for each new building shall include a Statement of Energy Design
Intent produced through the Energy Star Target Finder tool, or comparable method.
15.92 Energy Monitoring. All new buildings approved in the District after January, 2012 shall
track and report energy use to the City using EnergyStar, Labs21, LEED-EBOM or a
comparable mechanism. Such reporting shall occur on an annual basis beginning at
initial building occupancy, then once every five (5) years thereafter.
15.93 Cool Roofs. All new buildings approved in the District after January 1, 2012 must
employ Functional Green Roofs (as such term is defined in Article 22.000 of this
Zoning Ordinance) or high albedo “white” roofs.
15.100 CONSISTENCY WITH LETTER OF COMMITMENT
The Letter of Commitment dated February 25, 2013, by Forest City Commercial Group
shall be binding upon Forest City Commercial Group and its successors and assigns.
The issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy for new development
occurring after January 1, 2012 shall be conditioned upon certification by the
Community Development Department and all other relevant City departments to the
Inspectional Services Department that all portions of the Letter of Commitment dated
February 25, 2013 by Forest City Commercial Group are continuing to be met.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
16-1
ARTICLE 16.000 NORTH POINT RESIDENCE,
OFFICE AND BUSINESS DISTRICT
16.10 SCOPE AND INTENT
16.20 USE REGULATIONS
16.30 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION STANDARDS
16.40 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
16.50 PARKING LOADING REQUIREMENTS
16.60 SIGNS
16.70 EASTERN CAMBRIDGE DESIGN GUIDELINES
16.80 INAPPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN OTHER REGULATIONS
16.10 SCOPE AND INTENT
16.11 Scope. This Article regulates development within the North Point Residence District (the
“District”), located as shown on the Zoning Map, as amended.
16.12 Intent. The purpose of the District is to limit as of right development due to limited
road access and general traffic concerns. The intent of this Article 16.000 is to
provide for use development of the area into a residential community with limited retail
and office uses at a modest density through the provisions of this Article or at a higher
density through the PUD process provided in Section 13.70.
16.20 USE REGULATIONS
16.21 Permitted Uses. The following uses are allowed in the District. All uses not listed
within one of the use groups in this section shall be prohibited. All uses within the
District shall comply with the environmental protection standards of Section 16.22.
The provisions of Section 4.50 et seq. shall not apply to institutional uses permitted
within the District pursuant to Section 16.21.5.
16.21.1 Residential Uses, Section 4.31. The following residential uses shall be permitted.
(1) One and two family dwelling (Sections 4.31 a, b, and c).
(2) Townhouse development (Section 4.31.d).
(3) Elderly congregate housing (Sections 4.31 e and f).
(4) Multifamily dwelling (Section 4.31.g and h).
16.21.2 Office and Laboratory Uses, Section 4.34.
The following office and laboratory uses shall be permitted provided they are in a
building in existence as of June 1, 2001 that, if vacant, has not been occupied by a
residential use in the five years immediately preceding the time of application for a
Certificate of Occupancy for the proposed office use, or if occupied, the current use is
any office and laboratory use, Section 4.34; any retail business and consumer service
establishment, Section 4.35; any light industry, wholesale business or storage use,
Section 4.37; or any heavy industry us, Section 4.38. In permitting such office and
16-2
laboratory uses, additional Gross Floor Area up to 10% of the existing Gross Floor
Area in the building shall be permitted provided the total FAR does not exceed 1.0.
(1) Office of a physician, dentist or other medical practitioner not located in a clinic
listed in Subsection 4.33d, as an accessory use occupying not more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the aggregate gross floor area of all buildings on a lot,
excluding from that calculation any Gross Floor Area devoted to parking facilities
(Section 4.34.a).
(2) Office of an accountant, attorney, or other nonmedical professional person
(Section 4.34.b).
(3) Real estate, insurance or other agency office (Section 4.34.c).
(4) General office use (Section 4.34.d).
(5) Bank, trust company or similar financial institution (Section 4.34.e).
(6) Technical office for research and development, laboratory and research facility
(Section 4.34.f),
16.21.3 Retail and Consumer Service Establishments (Section 4.35).
The following uses shall be permitted provided they are located on the first floor of the
structure, front on a public way, and occupy no more than 10 (10) percent of the total
Gross Floor Area of the structure in which they are located, excluding from that
calculation any Gross Floor Area devoted to parking facilities located in the structure.
(1) Store for retail sale of merchandise [Section 4.35 a(1) and (2)].
(2) Eating and /or drinking establishment, whether or not liquor is sold or consumed,
including restaurant, bar, lunchroom, cafeteria and food commissary. (Sections
4.35 e, f, g).
(3) Fast order food establishment subject to the Special Permit requirements of
Section 11.30 (Section 4.35.q).
(4) Consumer service establishment, including but not limited to hairdresser, barber
shop, laundry or dry cleaning pickup establishment, self service laundry, shoe
repair or tailoring shop, or photography studio (Section 4.35 c, d, and similar
establishments).
(5) Bank, trust company or similar financial institution located on the first floor
(Section 4.34.e).
16.21.4 Utilities, Section 4.32.g(1) and Section 4.32.g (2) by special permit subject to the
following provisions:
Any Telephone Exchange use [Section 4.32.g (1)] proposed having a floor area greater
than four hundred (400) square feet shall only be permitted in a building in existence as
of June 1, 2001 that, if vacant, has not been occupied by a residential use in the five
years immediately preceding the time of application for a Certificate of Occupancy for the
proposed office use or if occupied, the current use is any office and laboratory use,
Section 4.34; any retail business and consumer service establishment, Section 4.35; any
16-3
light industry, wholesale business or storage use, Section 4.37; or any heavy industry
use, Section 4.38.
16.21.5 Institutional Uses.
(1) All uses permitted in Sections 4.33 a, b, c, d, e, f, and g.
(2) All uses permitted in Section 4.33 h, 1 or 2.
(3) Any institutional use not referred to in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above, but only
by special permit from the Planning Board pursuant to Section 10.40.
16.21.6 Bus, Transit or Railroad Passenger Station, Section 4.32 a
Any such facility operated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any of its
agencies, subdivisions, or bodies politic.
16.30 Environmental Protection Standards. No activity shall be permitted in the District
unless it shall conform to the following standards for environmental protection:
16.31 All dust, fumes, odors, smoke or vapor shall be effectively confined to the premises or
disposed of in compliance with applicable environmental laws.
16.32 Any noise, vibration or flashing shall not be normally perceptible without instrument
measurement at a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more from the premises.
16.33 All development proposals shall comply with the Federal and State air pollution and
water pollution control regulations, City of Cambridge Ordinances, and other
applicable environmental laws.
16.34 Except during construction activity on the lot, all refuse and other waste materials shall
be stored within buildings prior to collection and disposal.
16.40 Dimensional Regulations
16.41 Lot Density Limitation. For each lot within the District, a permitted floor area ratio (as
defined in Article 2.000) of 1.0 is hereby established for each lot, and shall not be
exceeded. The area of the lot to be counted in determining the floor area ratio shall
include land dedicated (after adoption of this Article 16.000) by the owner or former
owner of the lot, whether in fee or by easement, deed restriction, covenant or comparable
legal instrument enforceable by the City of Cambridge or other public entity, as a public
way, private way open to the public use, or public open space.
16.42 Building Height Limitation. The maximum building height for all buildings within the
District shall be forty (40) feet.
16.43 Open Space. Publicly beneficial open space, as defined by this ordinance, shall be
provided on every lot and shall in the aggregate equal at least twenty 920) percent of the
area of such lot.
16.44 Other Dimensional Regulations. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirement in
the District shall be six hundred (600) square feet. There shall be no requirement with
respect to minimum lot width. Minimum front, side or rear yards shall be as required in
the Residence C-2 District. The minimum lot area shall be twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
16.50 Parking and Loading Requirements
16-4
16.51 Parking and Loading Requirements. Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be
the same as currently specified in Article 6.000 and in the Schedule of Parking and
Loading Requirements applicable to the Residence C-3, Office 3, Business B and
Industry B districts, except as modified below.
16.51.1 Parking facilities may be located on the lot they serve or, by special permit from the
Planning Board under Section 10.40 or Section 13.70, may be located in whole or in part
in one or more pooled private or public parking facilities located anywhere within the
North Point Residence District. The Planning Board shall not withhold a special permit
permitting such a pooled parking facility so long as the limitations of the maximum
amount of parking provided in this Section 16.50 are observed with respect to all affected
lots, in the aggregate.
16.51.2 Minimum and Maximum Parking Requirements: Accessory off street parking shall be
provided as follows:
(1) Residential Uses: 1 space per unit minimum and 1.5 spaces per unit
maximum.
(2) General Office Use: 1 space per 1,250 gross square feet minimum and 1
space per 625 gross square feet maximum.
(3) Technical Office for Research and Development Uses: 1 space per 1,675
gross square feet minimum and 1 space per 840 gross square feet maximum.
(4) Retail and Consumer Service Uses: No accessory parking shall be required if
the retail and consumer service uses are located on the ground floor and front on
and have a public entry directly onto a publicly accessible street.
All other uses shall be subject to the requirements of Article 6.000
16.51.21 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.51.2 above, the total number of parking
spaces serving non-residential uses in the North Point Residence District shall not
exceed 2,500 spaces, allocated to each lot in the district at the rate of 1.2 spaces per
1,000 square feet of lot area.
16.60 Signs
16.61 The sign regulations of Article 7.000 applicable to Retail, Office and Industrial Districts
shall be applicable in the District.
16.70 Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines. In reviewing any special permit that may be
required for development in the North Point Residence District, the permit granting
authority shall find that any development proposal is generally consistent with the policy
objectives set forth in the Eastern Cambridge Plan and the guidance provided in the
Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines. Any development permitted as-of-right is
encouraged to be consistent with these Guidelines.
16.80 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations
16-5
16.81 Where this Article 16.000 specifies some standard or establishes some other
requirement contrary to or inconsistent with a requirement elsewhere in this Ordinance,
the provisions of this Article 16.000 shall control.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
17-1
ARTICLE 17.000 SPECIAL BUSINESS, OFFICE
AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
17.10 SPECIAL DISTRICT 1
17.20 SPECIAL DISTRICT 2
17.30 SPECIAL DISTRICT 3
17.40 SPECIAL DISTRICT 4 AND 4A
17.50 SPECIAL DISTRICT 5
17.60 SPECIAL DISTRICT 6
17.70 SPECIAL DISTRICT 7
17.80 SPECIAL DISTRICT 8 AND 8A
17.90 SPECIAL DISTRICT 9
17.100 SPECIAL DISTRICT 10
17.200 SPECIAL DISTRICT 11
17.300 SPECIAL DISTRICT 12
17.400 SPECIAL DISTRICT 13
17.500 SPECIAL DISTRICT 14
17.600 SPECIAL DISTRICT 15
17.10 SPECIAL DISTRICT 1
17.11 Scope. This Section 17.10 regulates development within the Special District 1 at
Monsignor O’Brien Highway as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as
amended. Except as herein provided in this Section 17.10, all requirements of and
regulations applicable to the Industry A-1 District shall apply equally to the Special
District 1.
17.12 Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the Industry A-1 District shall be equally allowed in
the Special District 1 with the exception of the following:
(1) The following uses shall be permitted by special permit from the Board of Zoning
Appeal:
a. Hotel and Motel Uses, Section 4.31 i (2)
b. Car washing establishments using mechanical equipment for the purposes of
cleaning automobiles and other vehicles, Section 4.36 h.
(2) The following uses shall be prohibited:
Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b.
17.13 Dimensional Regulations
17.13.1 Maximum FAR
(1)The maximum FAR for any lot in the district shall not exceed 3.0 as of right for
Residential Uses, Section 4.31 a-h, and 1.50 for all other permitted uses;
(2)The maximum FAR for any lot northeasterly of Monsignor O’Brien Highway may be
increased by special permit from the Planning Board to 3.5 for Residential Uses,
17-2
Section 4.31 a-h, provided the requirements and conditions of Section 17.17.4 d and
e are met.
17.13.2 Building Height Limitation. The maximum height permitted in the district shall be
eighty-five (85) feet except as modified below:
(1) For lots lying northeasterly of Monsignor O’Brien Highway, the maximum height
may be increased to one hundred and twenty (120) feet provided no portion of the
building rises above a forty-five (45) degree bulk control plane beginning at an
elevation of eighty-five (85) feet above the O’Brien Highway front lot line and rising
thereafter in a northeasterly direction.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Subsection 17.13.2 above no building may
exceed thirty-five (35) feet within fifty (50) feet of the Special District 1/Residence
C-1 zoning district line, or where the zoning district line splits a lot, within fifty (50)
feet of the lot line located in the residential district.
17.13.3 Minimum Yard Requirements. Only the following yard requirements shall apply in the
Special District 1.
a. Front Yard - a minimum three feet, measured from the property line, shall be
required at the Monsignor O’Brien Highway lot line; no front yard shall be required
however for any structure in existence as of May 1, 1989.
b. Side Yard - None
c. Rear Yard - None
d. Notwithstanding the requirements of Paragraphs a - c above all buildings shall be
set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any Special District/Residence C-1
district line; said setback shall consist exclusively of landscaped green area as
defined in Article 2.000. Where the zoning district line splits a lot the setback shall
be measured from the lot lines located in the residential district.
17.13.4 Residential Density. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be three hundred
(300) square feet.
17.14 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements
17.14.1 Minimum Parking Requirements. Off street parking and loading requirements shall be
as specified in Article 6.000 for uses in Business B, Industry B and Residence C-3
zoning districts.
17.14.2 Maximum Parking Requirements. The maximum accessory parking permitted for all
nonresidential uses shall be 4.5 spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of
lot area. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.31.3, accessory parking provided
to meet the requirements of Section 17.14 shall not exceed that number permitted in
this Section 17.14.2 under any circumstances.
17.15 Special Development Standards
All buildings constructed in the Special District 1 shall meet the following requirements.
17-3
17.15.1 Building Facades. Building facades should be designed so as to enhance the visual
quality of the district. The following standards shall apply:
(1) A principal building entrance shall face Monsignor O'Brien Highway;
(2) Building facades and roof lines shall be articulated and expanses of unbroken wall
planes shall be limited to thirty-five (35) linear feet for those facades facing public
open spaces and/or public roadways;
(3) Ground floor levels shall include a minimum of thirty (30) percent transparency
(non-reflective glass) to enliven and enrich the public environment where such
levels contain active gross floor area (i.e. habitable space occupied by persons
throughout the day) as defined in Article 2.000.
17.15.2 Tree Planting. At least one street tree, having a minimum caliper of three(3) inches,
shall be located in the front yard provided along Monsignor O’Brien Highway, for each
twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on the Highway. Where sufficient front yard is not
provided said trees may be located within the public right of way consistent with the
requirements for street tree planting established by the City of Cambridge.
17.15.3 Siting of Parking Areas. Parking areas shall not be located in the front yard required
for any lot in the district. Enclosed parking facilities are encouraged. On grade open
parking areas shall be located behind the building or buildings served or arranged in
such a way as to minimize their visibility from public ways. Where enclosed, or
structured parking is provided, the structure shall be finished in materials equal in
quality to that used on the principal structures on the site to which the parking facility is
accessory.
17.15.4 Mechanical Equipment and Refuse Storage Areas:
(1) No refuse storage areas nor mechanical equipment areas shall be located in a
front yard within the district. Where such areas are outside a building they shall be
screened from view from street and parking areas, residential districts and open
space areas, by a six (6) foot high, durable nonliving barrier (or earth berm)
planted with at least one shrub or vine for each ten (10) feet of barrier towards the
abutting property.
(2) Mechanical equipment on the roof of any building shall be permanently screened
from view from the ground.
17.16 Special District 1 shall be considered an area of special planning concern and shall be
subject to the Development Consultation Procedure, Section 11.40.
17.17 Transfer of Development Rights. Notwithstanding the limitations of Article 2.000 with
regard to the definition of “lot” and “owner”, the Planning Board may be special permit
authorize the transfer of some or all of the allowed gross floor area, as determined by
Section 17.13.1 above, from one or more lots (donating lots) to one or more to other
lots (receiving lots) anywhere within the Special District 1 without regard to location of
the lot or lots or their ownership, provided the following conditions are met or findings
made:
17-4
(1) The receiving lot and donating lot in combination are at least twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in area.
(2) The receiving lot is located northeasterly of Monsignor O’Brien Highway.
(3) The development plans for both the donating and receiving lots meet the intent
and requirements of this Section 17.10 as a whole and this Subsection 17.17 and
are both subject to the special permit authorization and such conditions as may be
attached thereto.
(4) The resulting development on both, or the several, lots provides a superior site and
building design than might occur without the special permit authorization. Among
the conditions which may be reviewed by the Planning Board in reaching such a
finding are the following:
a. reduction in density of development is achieved on lots adjacent to residential
uses or zoning districts;
b. An increase in open space and green area is achieved adjacent to residential
uses and zoning districts;
c. Active gross floor area uses are located at the base and perimeter of the
buildings constructed on the site (sites) where visible from public streets or
residential uses;
d. Overall reduction in the bulk of the building(s) is achieved through location of
some or all of the required parking below grade;
e. Parking located above grade is screened from view from public streets and
residential uses by active gross floor area uses;
f. Improved building design is achieved through the use of quality masonry
materials and other quality details as well as an improved pedestrian
environment along major public streets.
(5) All site and building designs shall be subject to binding design review by the
Planning Board.
17.20 SPECIAL DISTRICT 2
17.21 Scope. This Section regulates development in Special District 2 as shown on the
Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein provided this
Section 17.20, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the Residence B
District shall apply equally to the Special District 2.
17.22 Purpose. It is the intent of this Special District 2 to encourage the establishment of
residential uses in the district in a form and density compatible with the adjacent
residential neighborhood. However, given the significant presence of nonresidential
uses in the district, provision is made for the conversion of those existing
nonresidential uses to other nonresidential uses more compatible with the residential
neighbors, with the intent that all nonresidential uses will, over time, be replaced with
permitted residential use.
17-5
17.23 Use Regulations. The uses allowed in the Residence B district shall be equally
allowed in Special District 2 except as modified by the following provisions.
17.23.1 Additional Permitted Residential Uses. Multifamily Dwelling, Section 4.31.g shall be
permitted, subject to the special permit requirements for Townhouse development in
a Residence B District.
17.23.2 Permitted Non Residential Uses.
17.23.21 The following nonresidential uses, not otherwise permitted in a Residence B District,
shall be permitted as of right in this Special District 2 provided the conditions set forth
in Section 17.23.22 are met. Nevertheless, for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance,
Special District 2 shall be considered a residential district.
(a) Section 4.34 – Office and Laboratory Use, Paragraph a (medical professional),
Paragraph b (nonmedical professional), Paragraph c (agency office), Paragraph d
(general office).
(b) Section 4.35 – Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments,
Paragraph q (arts and crafts studio).
(c) Section 4.36 - Open Air or Drive-In Retail and Service, Paragraph a (sale of
flowers, garden supplies, and commercial greenhouses).
17.23.22 The above nonresidential uses shall be permitted to occupy a nonresidential building
in existence as of September 1, 1998 provided the current use of the building, if
occupied, is any use described in Section 4.34 (office and laboratory use), Section
4.35 (retail business and consumer service establishment), Section 4.36 (open air
and drive-in retail and service), Section 4.37 (light industry) or Section 4.38 (heavy
industry). Where the building is unoccupied it may be so occupied with permitted
nonresidential uses provided the building has not been occupied by a residential use
in the five years immediately preceding the time of application for a certificate of
occupancy for the new nonresidential use.
17.24 Dimensional Requirements. The dimensional requirements of the Residence B
district shall apply to the Special District 2, except as modified by the provisions set
forth below.
17.24.1 Maximum FAR.
1. The FAR applicable in the Special District 2 shall be 0.50.
2. Notwithstanding the limitations of Paragraph (1) above, where it is proposed to
reuse a nonresidential structure in existence as of September 1, 1998 for
permitted residential uses, the following Gross Floor Area shall be permitted.
1. The Gross Floor Area that is the result of the application of the FAR generally
permitted in the district, or the existing Gross Floor Area of the structure itself,
whichever is greater.
17-6
2. Additional Gross Floor Area may be added to the nonresidential structure
without limit provided all construction creating additional Gross Floor Area
occurs within the limits of the existing structure.
3. Where it is proposed to demolish an existing nonresidential structure that has a
Gross Floor Area greater than that permitted by the application of an FAR of 0.50
for the purpose of converting the site entirely to permitted residential uses, the
total Gross Floor Area contained in the nonresidential structure shall be permitted
in the new residential structures up to a maximum FAR of 0.50.
17.24.2 Minimum Lot Area for Each Dwelling Unit.
1. The Minimum Lot Area for Each Dwelling Unit shall be two thousand and five
hundred (2,500) square feet.
2. Where it is proposed to reuse a nonresidential structure in existence as of
September 1, 1998 for permitted residential uses, the number of units permitted
in the structure shall be that number permitted in Paragraph (1) above or that
number of units which is the Gross Floor Area of the structure as permitted in
Section 17.24.1(2) above divided by one thousand and two hundred (1,200)
square feet, whichever is greater.
3. Where it is proposed to demolish an existing nonresidential structure that has a
Gross Floor Area greater than that permitted by the application of an FAR of 0.50
for the purpose of converting the site entirely to permitted residential uses, the
number of units permitted in the new structures shall be the Gross Floor Area of
the structures as permitted in Section 17.24.1(3) above divided by one thousand
and eight hundred (1,800) square feet.
17.24.3 Other Dimensional Requirements.
1) The provisions of Section 5.53 related to multiple buildings on a lot in Residence
B districts shall not apply in Special District 2.
2) Where it is proposed to convert an existing nonresidential structure to residential
use, and where that structure covers fifty (50) percent or more of its lot, the
Minimum Ratio of Private open space to Lot Area may be reduced to the ratio
existing on the site at the time of conversion, if any. However, if the land area
required for provided parking outside the building, including required setbacks is
less than the area of land that has no structure on it, the remainder of the open
land shall have any paving material (asphalt, concrete, or gravel) removed,
topsoil of a minimum two foot depth shall be added, and the space shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs, and/or grass up to the maximum percentage of
the lot required to be Private open space in the Ordinance.
3) The maximum building height shall be forty (40) feet with a cornice height not to
exceed thirty (30) feet. However, any portion of a building located fifty (50) feet or
less from the boundary of any other zoning district with a maximum building
17-7
height of thirty-five (35) feet or less or from the sideline of a street shall have a
maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet.
4) Additional Special Permit Criteria. In evaluating applications for Multifamily or
Townhouse Special Permits in Special District 2, in addition to the existing criteria
set forth in Section 10.47.4, the Planning Board shall also consider as a criterion
the development of residential units of various sizes and with various numbers of
bedrooms, with specific attention to three and more bedroom units, with the
overall goal of providing dwelling units suitable for diverse household sizes.
17.25 Protection of the Linear Park Open Space. Any fences within the building setback of
the Linear Park Open Space will be such that sight lines are minimally obstructed.
Examples of conforming fences are wrought iron, wire, or chain link. Examples of
non-conforming fences are board, stockade, or concrete walls.
17.30 SPECIAL DISTRICT 3
17.31 Scope and Purpose. This Section 17.30 regulates development in Special District 3 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended.
It is the intent of this Special District 3 to permit a modest level of residential and
nonresidential development in the District consistent with the public interest in protecting
regulated wetlands where they occur within the district; maintaining flood storage capacity
in the district consistent with federal regulations; minimizing the amount of additional
traffic passing through congested intersections on arterial streets, and on local,
neighborhood streets, that could provide access to the district; limiting stormwater runoff
onto property located outside the district ensuring adequate visual buffers and screening
of buildings and parking facilities from adjacent public parks and recreation facilities;
minimizing the disturbance of existing soil within the district to limit dispersal and
exposure to possible harmful residual substances in the soil; and in enhancing the
parkway character of the Parkway Overlay District.
17.32 Use Regulations. The following uses are allowed in the Special District 3.
17.32.1 Permitted Residential Uses.
Section 4.32 – Residential Uses, Paragraphs a-I
17.32.2 Permitted Nonresidential Uses.
Section 4.34 – Office and Laboratory Use, Paragraphs a-f
Section 4.33 – Institutional Uses, all uses.
Section 4.35 – Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments, Paragraph a, c, d,
e, f,(1), q, and r provided that no individual retail establishments exceeds one thousand
and two hundred (1,200) square feet in gross floor area, except that a single retail
establishment containing a grocery store or supermarket may total no more than fifty-five
thousand (55,000) square feet provided that nothing in this section alters any other
limitations as set forth in this district.
17-8
17.32 Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply in
Special District 3.
17.33.1 Total Gross Floor Area Permitted
17.33.11 Total Development Permitted. The total Gross Floor Area (GFA) permitted in Special
District 3 shall be seven hundred, eighty two thousand and five hundred (782,500)
square feet, exclusive of Gross Floor Area occupied by the MBTA Red Line transit
station and any structure in existence at the time of adoption of this Section 17.30 that
is used exclusively for residential use. Total Gross Floor Area in the District is at any
time the sum of the Gross Floor Area of all structures then located in the District
(excepting the above described structures and those other structures required to be
demolished prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any newly
constructed building in the district) and those which are being constructed or may be
constructed in the District pursuant to a then effective building permit. At no time may
a building permit be issued for any structure that would result in the above Gross Floor
Area limit for all structures in the District (excepting the above described structures and
those other structures required to be demolished prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any newly constructed building in the District) being exceeded.
Development within the District shall be further regulated as set forth below.
17.33.12 Allocation of GFA to Lots in Existence as of the Date of Adoption of this Section 17.30.
In allocating the total permitted GFA within the district, each lot in existence as of the
date of adoption of this Section 17.30 shall be allocated a minimum gross floor area
equal to the allocation of a Floor Area Ratio of 0.45 to the lot area. No building permit
shall be issued for any lot that would require the reduction of GFA allocated to any
such existing lot below that which is allowed by the application of the FAR of 0.45
without the written consent by the owner of such existing lot. Future subdivision of any
existing lot shall be permitted, but in no event shall the amount of GFA permitted on
the original existing lot as set forth in this Section 17.33.12 be increased by such
subdivision. For the purposes of this Section 17.33.12, a lot may consist of parcels of
land held in separate ownership but developed as a single zoning lot.
17.33.13 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. There shall be no FAR limit with regard to the amount of
GFA on any single lot within the District, subject to the total development limits set forth
in Sections 17.33.11 and 17.33.12 above. Additional GFA above that permitted by the
application of an FAR of 0.45 to any lot, may be constructed on any lot to the extent
that the total amount of development (GFA) at the time within the entire Special District
3 is less than that permitted in Section 17.33.11 above.
17.33.2 Minimum Lot Area of Each Dwelling Unit. The minimum Lot Area per Dwelling
Unit shall be two thousand and five hundred (2,500) square feet.
17.33.3 Minimum Lot Size and Minimum Lot Width.
1. The minimum lot size shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. There shall be a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet.
17-9
17.33.4 Minimum Yard Requirements. There shall be no minimum yard requirements in
the district except as set forth below.
1. For those portions of a lot abutting Alewife Brook Parkway and Whittemore Avenue a
minimum front yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet shall be required and it shall consist
entirely of Green Area Open Space as defined in Article 2.000 with the exception of
necessary driveways crossing the yard in a generally perpendicular manner to provide
access to other portions of the lot.
2. For those portions of a lot abutting Rindge Avenue, any Open Space District, and any
public park or recreation area, a minimum yard setback from that property line of fifty (50)
feet shall be required. The first twenty-five (25) feet from the lot line of that required
setback shall consist entirely of Green Area Open Space as defined in Article 2.000 with
the exception of necessary driveways crossing the yard in a generally perpendicular
manner to provide access to other portions of the lots. Notwithstanding any provision of
Article 6.000, accessory parking, circulation and loading facilities shall be allowed within
the second twenty-five (25) feet of the required setback where such setback is a front
yard.
3. Notwithstanding the minimum yard requirements set forth in Paragraphs (1) and (2)
above, the following yard setbacks shall be required for that portion of any new structure
containing residential use; or for any new structure containing nonresidential uses that is
within one hundred (100) feet of a lot containing a public park, recreation area, or a
structure containing a residential use, or a residential or open space zoning district line: a
side yard of (H+L)/7 and a rear yard of (H+L)/5.
4. Notwithstanding the minimum yard requirements set forth in Paragraph (1) above with
respect to Whittemore Avenue, the buildings located on Whittemore Avenue existing at
the time of adoption of this Section 17.30 shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
minimum yard requirements of this Section 17.33.4. However, any alteration,
reconstruction, extension, or structural change of such buildings shall be subject to the
minimum yard requirements of Section 17.33.4 in the following circumstances:
(a) The height or footprint of the existing building is increased or extended;
(b) The installation of any loading bay or installation of any mechanical equipment on
the roof that is otherwise exempt from the height limit or prohibited from any
required yard; or
(c) The demolition and reconstruction of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the
area or volume of that portion of a building within the minimum yard required in
Section 17.33.4.
17.33.5 Maximum Height. The maximum height in Special District 3 shall be fifty-five (55)
feet except as modified below.
1. For that portion of a structure exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, a setback shall
be required from any public park or recreation area equal to one and a half (1.5) feet
for every foot of building height.
17-10
2. A maximum height of seventy (70) feet shall be permitted within the following area
bounded by:
(a) A line parallel to and abutting the southerly façade of the structure known as the
MBTA Red Line east headhouse;
(b) A second line perpendicular to Line (a) and proceeding north from a point on line
(a) one hundred and twenty (120) feet easterly of the southwesterly corner of the
MBTA headhouse;
(c) A third line proceeding in a westerly direction that is perpendicular to Line (b) and
parallel to and three hundred and twenty (320) feet northerly of Line (a); and
(d) The centerline of Alewife Brook Parkway.
17.34 Parking and Loading Requirements. The requirements of Article 6.000 shall
apply in Special District 3 except as modified below.
17.34.1 Minimum Off Street Accessory Parking Requirements. There shall be no minimum
parking requirement for any use within Special District 3.
17.34.2 Maximum Off Street Accessory Parking Requirements
1. No more than one thousand (1,000) parking spaces shall be permitted within Special
District 3. That number may be increased by one paring space for each parking
space, accessory to uses located within Special District 3 and in existence as of the
date of adoption of this Section 17.30, that is removed permanently from Lots 7, 62,
70, 72, and 73 as shown on Assessor’s Plat numbered 187, and Lots 25, 28, 29, 55,
and 121 on Assessor’s Plat numbered 188; the area occupied by such removed
parking space shall remain unused or converted to any permitted residential use.
2. Parking facilities may be located in whole or in part in one or more pooled parking
facilities located anywhere within Special District 3.
17.35 Required Open Space. Any combination of Private open space, Publicly Beneficial Open
Space, or Green Area Open Space shall be provided on every lot and shall in the
aggregate equal to at least twenty (20) percent of the area of such lot. Owners of lots
within Special District 3 may pool such open space at any location within the District
provided its permanency is guaranteed by dedication, easement, deed restriction
covenant or comparable legal instrument. The surface area of the body of water known
as Jerry’s Pond shall not be included within the required open space.
17.36 Other Regulations
17.36.1 Limitations on Construction Below Existing Grade. No portion of a building or structure,
including parking structures, shall be located below the existing mean grade of the ground
adjacent to the proposed building or structure prior to construction except as may be
required to reasonably accommodate necessary utility systems and building foundations
(e.g. elevator shafts, foundation pilings, etc.).
17-11
17.36.2 Limitations on Storm Water Runoff Beyond Property Lines. No net increase in the peak
runoff rate of storm water beyond any property line shall be permitted as a consequence
of any construction on a lot consistent with the state Department of Environmental
Protection Stormwater management Policy. Property owners within the Special District
may combine lots, retention areas and drainage facilities in meeting this requirement.
Conformance with this requirement shall be certified by a engineer registered in the
Commonwealth and competent to make such certification.
17.36.3 Access to Harvey Street. No building, structure, parking facility or access road within
Special District 3 may have access to Harvey Street except as may be necessary for
emergency vehicles.
17.36.4 Pedestrian and Bicycle Connections. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.33.11,
no building permit shall be issued that allows the total amount of development in the
District (GFA) to exceed seven hundred and seven thousand and five hundred (707,500)
square feet until a pedestrian and bike connection has been constructed, or the property
owner has guaranteed such construction in a manner satisfactory to the City of
Cambridge and prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for space constructed
pursuant to such building permit, within the District between the Linear Park and
Whittemore Avenue in the vicinity of Madison Avenue, to a standard comparable to the
improvements in the Linear Park and the Minuteman Bikeway.
17.36.5 Area of Special Planning Concern. Special District 3 shall be considered an area of
Special Planning Concern. All development within the District shall comply with the
Development Consultation Procedures as specified in Section 11.40, except as
modified below:
1. The Planning Board shall conduct the Large Project Procedure in lieu of the
Community Development Department.
2. The Large Project Procedure shall be modified so that the Community Development
Department shall have ten (10) business days to certify that an application is
complete, ten (10) business days from certification to hold a public meeting, and ten
(10) business days thereafter to make a report.
3. In reviewing a proposal the Planning Board shall be guided by the provisions of the
Design Guidelines for Special District 3.
17.36.6 Traffic Study. Before issuance of any building permit for construction of GFA within
Special District 3, a Traffic Study shall be prepared and made available to the Planning
Board for the Large Project Procedure. The traffic study may be prepared for the total
amount of development allowed in the District when the first building permit is requested
and shall be applicable to all future building permits issued in the district except that traffic
data shall be updated at least every five (5) years after the initial submission of the study
whenever a new building permit is sought. The Traffic Study shall include the following
elements.
17-12
1. A Transportation Demand Management Plan, which at a minimum shall include a
program to subsidize transit passes for employees at the site in the amount of at least
fifty (50) percent of the cost of such passes; joining the Alewife Transportation
Management Association (TMA); provision of secure indoor bicycle parking, showers,
and lockers/changing rooms; and reservation of ten (10) percent of available parking
spaces for ridesharing commuters.
2. Data, which at a minimum, shall include current traffic volumes, projected future trip
generation, distribution of trips on area roadway network, evaluation of roadway
operations and safety, and identification of traffic operation and safety improvements.
3. A commitment to implement the provisions of the Transportation Demand
Management Plan and a commitment of the proponent to work in a cooperative
manner to assist the City in implementing a neighborhood protection plan including
reasonable traffic mitigation measures such as institution of one way streets, traffic
calming, signal timing changes and other traffic control measures and initiatives
which may affect traffic flows relating to development in the District.
4. A procedure by which implementation of the recommendations in the plan will be
periodically monitored and reported to the Planning Board.
17.37 Certification. Before issuance of any building permit for new Gross Floor Area within
Special District 3 the following certifications shall be made to the Superintendent of
Buildings. In making an application for a building permit the applicant shall provide all
information necessary to determine whether the requirements of this Section 11.70 with
regard to limitations on GFA are being met.
1. Certification from the Planning Board that the Large Project Procedure has been held.
2. Certification from the Conservation Commission that the requirements of the state
Wetlands Act with regard to flood storage retention and peak storm water runoff have
been met, or alternatively, delivery of an outstanding Order of Conditions issued under the
Wetlands Act.
3. Certification from the Community Development Department and the Department of
Traffic, Parking and Transportation, in consultation with the Planning Board, that the
Traffic Study has been prepared.
4. Certification by the Community Development Department that all other requirements of
the District have been met.
5. Failure to issue such certification, or notice that the requirements have not been met,
within twenty-five (25) days of application for a building permit shall be deemed to be
positive certification.
17.38 Exemption from Section 11.500. Section 11.500 of the Zoning Ordinance, adopted as
Ordinance #1209, shall not apply to any construction in Special District 3 as regulated by
this Section 17.30.
17-13
17.40 SPECIAL DISTRICT 4 AND 4A
17.41 Scope and Purpose. This Section 17.40 regulates development in Special Districts 4 and
4A as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended.
It is the intent of these Special Districts 4and 4A to permit an appropriate level of
residential and nonresidential development in the Districts consistent with the public
interest in protecting regulated wetlands where they occur; maintain in flood storage
capacity consistent with federal, state and local regulations; restoring areas currently
developed to urban uses to their natural state in order to eliminate harmful impacts on
sensitive wetlands environments; limiting the extent of land covered by impervious
surfaces; and minimizing the amount of additional traffic passing through congested
intersections on arterial and neighborhood streets. Further enhancement of the parkway
character of Concord Turnpike is also intended.
Except as herein provided, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the Office 2
district shall apply equally to Special Districts 4 and 4A.
Except as noted, the provisions of this Section 17.40 shall apply equally to Special District
4 and Special District 4A.
17.42 Dimensional Requirements
17.42.1 Total Development Permitted
17.42.11 Special District 4. Other than as may be temporarily allowed in Section 17.46.1, the
Gross Floor Area (GFA) permitted in Special District 4 shall be nine hundred thousand
(900,000) square feet, exclusive of GFA occupied by structured parking not otherwise
exempt as set forth in Section 5.25. An additional four hundred thousand (400,000)
square feet of GFA shall be permitted for the exclusive use of structured parking not
otherwise exempt from the calculations as to GFA, as set forth in Section 5.25. The
permitted GFA shall be further limited by the requirements of Section 17.45 below.
There shall be no maximum FAR limit imposed on any lot within the Special District 4.
The provisions of Section 5.25.42 shall not apply in this Special District 4.
17.42.12 Special District 4A. The maximum permitted FAR shall be 1.14 for all nonresidential
uses and 1.5 for Residential Uses, Section 4.31 a-h and Dormitory Uses, Section
4.33.b.7.
17.42.2 Yard Requirements. The minimum yards required in the Districts may be waived by
the Planning Board by Special Permit. In no case, however, shall the front yard
required in the Parkway Overlay District, Section 11.60, be waived.
17.42.3 Maximum Height. The maximum height in the Districts shall be sixty (60) feet except
that it may be increased to eight-five (85) feet for nonresidential uses and ninety (90)
for residential uses, by special permit from the Planning Board. The special permit
shall be granted where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that
the additional height will better serve the objectives of this Section 17.40 to increase
17-14
the amount of open space in the district and to limit the extent to which building and
other hard surfaces cover the ground.
17.43 Parking and Loading Requirements. The requirements of Article 6.000 shall apply in the
Districts except as modified below.
17.43.1 Maximum Off-Street Accessory Parking Permitted in Special District 4. No more than one
thousand and fifty-two (1052) parking spaces shall be permitted within Special District 4
and in no event shall the number of surface parking spaces in the district exceed the
amount that existed at the time of enactment of this Section 17.40. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Article 6.000, one thousand and fifty-two (1052) parking spaces shall be the
maximum required for any amount of development in Special District 4, up to the nine
hundred thousand (900,000) square feet of GFA (exclusive of GFA occupied by
structured parking) permitted in Special District 4, or such temporary exceedance of that
GFA limit as may be allowed by Section 17.46.1.
17.44 Permanent Natural Areas in Special District 4. No building construction, other than
restoration following catastrophe, whether consisting of GFA or not, or construction
associated with the provision of parking access to parking that is not accessory to a
recreational use permitted in an Open Space zoning district, shall be permitted in the
large Wetland Area described in Section 17.44.1 and the Little River Area described in
Section 17.44.2. These areas consist substantially of natural wetland, and their
associated uplands, or areas abutting the Little River that were formerly natural wetlands
and uplands and which are intended to be preserved or restored as natural areas and
open space by the provisions of Special District 4. Where buildings or parking facilities
exist in these areas at the time of adoption of this Section 17.40, no expansion of the
footprint of the buildings of their GFA and no expansion of the area devoted to parking
facilities and access to them shall be permitted.
The MDC Parking Facility Area described below in Section 17.44.3 lies outside Special
District 4 in an Open Space zoning district but provides accessory parking for uses
located within Special District 4. Provisions in Section 17.45 are designed to facilitate the
restoration of this area to its natural state as part of the Alewife Reservation.
17.44.1 Large Wetland Area
The Large Wetland Area shall be that area bounded on the northwest and west by the
Belmont-Cambridge municipal boundary line; on the northeast by the northeastern lot line
of lot #157, the northwesterly lot line of Lot #268, the southwesterly lot line of Lot #269,
and the southwesterly lot line of Lot #270 (all of which lot lines constitute the Special
District 4A zoning district boundary line) to its intersection with a line parallel to and 880
feet southeasterly of the Belmont-Cambridge municipal boundary line; on the southeast
by a line parallel to and 880 feet southeasterly of the Belmont-Cambridge municipal
boundary line; and on the south by the Special District 4 – Open Space zoning district line
and the Special District 4-Special District 4A zoning district line. All lots are located on
Assessor’s Plat #267(1).
17-15
17.44.2 Little River Area
The Little River Area shall be that area located generally south of Acorn Park Road that is
bounded on the north by the centerline of Acorn Park Road and on the west, south and
east by the Special District 4 – Open Space zoning District line. The area encompasses
all of Lots #260, 197, 258, and 259, located on Assessor’s Plat #267(2).
17.44.3 MDC Parking Facility Area
This area is located within the Alewife Reservation and is designated as an Open Space
zoning district on the City of Cambridge Zoning Map. It currently contains nonconforming
accessory parking spaces that serve uses located in Special District 4.
The MDC Parking Facility Area shall be that area bounded on the west by the easterly lot
line of Lot #258 and its southerly extension on Assessor’s Plat #267(2), which is the
Special District 4 – Open Space zoning district line; on the north by the Arlington –
Cambridge municipal boundary line; and on the south by the centerline of the channel of
the Little River.
17.45 Allocation of Permitted Gross Floor Area in Special District 4. No building permit, special
permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for construction in Special District 4
that will result in a total amount of GFA in the Special District 4 district exceeding four
hundred and sixteen thousand (416,000) square feet for all uses including structured
parking, except as permitted below.
17.45.1 Phase One: Total Gross Floor area exceeding four hundred and sixteen thousand
(416,000) square feet in the District. A building or special permit may be issued for
construction in Special District 4 that will result in a total amount of GFA in the district
greater than four hundred and sixteen thousand (416,000) square feet but in no case
more than nine hundred and sixteen thousand (916,000) square feet for all uses
including structured parking, but no case more than six hundred and sixty-six thousand
(666,000) square feet for all uses exclusive of structured parking, provided the
following requirements are met:
(a) All leases, licenses, rental agreements or agreements of any other description,
between the Metropolitan District Commission (or any successor owner of the
MDC Parking Facility Area) and the property owner/applicant, its affiliates, or their
tenants for principal or accessory parking in the MDC Parking Facility Area
described in Section 17.44.3 above are permanently terminated prior to or
simultaneously with the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for new GFA
whether for structured parking or otherwise, and provided that such parties shall
not thereafter enter into any subsequent lease, license, rental agreement, or
agreements of any other description for the same purposes in the MDC Parking
Facility Area. Any owner of property in Special District 4 seeking a Certificate of
Occupancy of new GFA that will result in the total amount of GFA in the district
exceeding four hundred and sixteen thousand (416,000) square fee shall as a
17-16
condition of such certificate be required to certify, in a form satisfactory to the City
of Cambridge, that all leases, licenses, rental agreement, or agreements of any
other description for principal or accessory parking held by said property
owner/applicant, its affiliates or their tenants have been so terminated as required
by the Paragraph (a).
(b) The owner applying for any building permit or special permit shall prepare a plan
for the restoration of the MDC Parking Facility Area and the Little River Area such
that at least ninety (90) percent of the area will consist of Green Area Open Space
as defined in this Ordinance. Such Plan shall be prepared by the owner, and
approved by the Planning Board, prior to the issuance of any building permit for
any development authorized under this Section 17.45.1. The owner of property
shall actively seek approval for the design and implementation of said Plan from
the Cambridge Conservation Commission, with respect to those areas under the
Commission's jurisdiction and of the Metropolitan District Commission with respect
to the MDC Parking Facility Area.
(c) The owner shall bear the cost of restoration of the MDC Parking Facility Area. The
owner shall post a bond or other instrument satisfactory to the City of Cambridge
with the Cambridge Conservation Commission in an amount equal to the
estimated cost of restoration of the MDC Parking Facility Area as proposed in the
plan required in Condition (b) above prior to the issuance of the first Certificate of
Occupancy for any permitted structures authorized by this Section 17.45.1. Said
bond shall be in force and effect until the area is restored or the construction
authorized in Section 17.45.22 – Phase Three has been granted a final Certificate
of Occupancy.
(d) For the purposes of Condition (a) above, Certificate by the Office of the City
Solicitor that the lease or leases have been terminated shall be determined in
establishing compliance with that requirement. For the purposes of Condition (b)
above, approval of the restoration plan by the Cambridge Conservation
Commission, the Metropolitan District Commission, or the Cambridge Planning
Board, as necessary, shall be determinative in establishing compliance with that
requirement. For the purposes of Condition (c) above, Certification by the
Cambridge conservation Commission that the bond has been properly posted shall
be determinative in establishing compliance with that requirement.
17.45.2 Phases Two and Three: Total Gross Floor Area exceeding eight hundred and fifteen
thousand (815,000) square feet in the District.
A building or special permit may be issued for construction in Special District 4 that will
result in a total amount of GFA in the district greater than nine hundred and sixteen
thousand (916,000) square but in no case more than one million and three hundred
thousand (1,300,000) square feet subject to the following provisions:
17-17
17.45.21 Phase Two
A building or special permit may issued for construction in Special District 4 that will
result in a total amount of GFA in the district greater than nine hundred and sixteen
thousand (916,000) square feet but in no case more than one million and two hundred
and fifty thousand (1,250,000) square feet for all uses including structured parking, but
in no case more than eight hundred and fifty thousand (850,000) square feet for all
uses exclusive of structured parking, provided the following requirements are met:
a. Those existing buildings within the Little River Area identified as Buildings 1-5 on
May 17.41 shall be demolished provided that the demolition shall not be required
for any building for which demolition approval is permanently refused on historic or
other statutory grounds by a local, state or federal agency of competent
jurisdiction.
However, in the event that the demolition of one or more buildings is not allowed
by the lawful action of a local, state or federal agency, the owner shall be obligated
to demolish any other buildings required to be demolished in Section 17.42.2 and
shall restore to its natural state all portions of the Little River Area not occupied by
buildings required to remain, as required in Section 17.42.2.
The owner shall restore, and bear the full cost thereof, at least fifty (50) percent of
area within the Little River Area consistent with the plan for the restoration of that
area required to be prepared in Condition (b) of Section 17.45.1. The required
demolitions and restoration shall be complete prior to the issuance of a final
Certificate of Occupancy for the nonstructured parking portion of the authorized
construction.
b. The MDC Parking Facility Area shall have been restored to the plan identified in
Section 17.45.1(b) above, or the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the conservation commission that the restoration could not occur prior to the
issuance of any final Certificate of Occupancy for any construction authorized by
this Section 17.45.21. If the MDC has not authorized the applicant to restore the
MDC Parking Facility Area within six (6) months following the applicant’s written
request for such authorization, the applicant may pay to the City of Cambridge the
amount of the bond or other instrument, and the applicant shall have no further
obligations with respect to the restoration of the MDC Parking Facility Area.
17.45.22 Phase Three
Any subsequent new construction for any use beyond that authorized in Section
17.45.21 – Phase Two above shall be permitted provided the total GFA permitted in
Special District 4 shall not exceed nine hundred thousand (900,000) square feet,
exclusive of GFA occupied by structured parking plus four hundred thousand (400,000)
square feet of GFA exclusively for use as structured parking, provided the following
conditions are met:
a. The conditions set forth in Section 17.45.21 – phase Two have been met.
17-18
b. All remaining buildings in the Little River Area shall have been demolished and the
entire area restored to a natural state by the owner pursuant to the restoration plan
required in Condition (b) of Section 17.45.1 above prior to the issuance of the Final
Certificate of Occupancy for any construction permitted by this Section 17.45.22.
17.46 Other Provisions
17.46.1 Total Gross Floor Area Temporarily Exceeding one million and three hundred
thousand (1,300,000) Square Feet.
In the event that demolition of structures and restoration of their sites to a natural state
as required in Section 17.45.2 above cannot reasonably occur before the issuance of
any interim Certificate of Occupancy for any new construction permitted in Section
17.45.2, the total GFA permitted in Special District 4 may temporarily exceed one
million, three hundred thousand (1,300,000) square feet, or any intermediate threshold
established in this Section 17.40, for that period necessary to secure the demolition of
the existing structures located in the Little River Area and the required restoration of a
portion of or the entire area thereafter. No final Certificate of Occupancy for any
construction authorized in 17.45.22 – Phase Two shall be issued until all requirements
of Section 17.45.22 have been met.
17.46.2 Measurement of Compliance.
Nothing in this Section 17.40 shall prevent the Planning Board, when issuing a special
permit for any construction within the Special District 4, from establishing as a
condition of the permit further monitoring and management provisions that will assure
complete compliance within the requirements of this Section 17.40.
17.50 SPECIAL DISTRICT 5
17.51 Scope. This Section 17.50 regulates development within the Special District 5 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.50, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Office 2 District shall apply equally to the Special District 5.
17.52 Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the Office 2 District shall be equally allowed in the
Special District 5 with the exception of the following:
a. The following additional uses shall be permitted:
(1) Manufacturing, processing, assembly and/or packaging of articles and
products listed in Section 4.37 a, and Section 4.37 b 4,5,9 provided the fully
assembled product regularly produced shall not exceed two hundred (200)
pounds in weight.
(2) Retail, Business and Consumer Service Establishments, Section 4.35 a and b
as would otherwise be permitted in a Business B District, provided such uses
are in a building containing uses permitted in an Office 2 District and do not
exceed in area an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of
17-19
the building in which they are located, or twenty-five thousand (25,000) square
feet, whichever is less.
(3) Residential Uses Section 4.31 a-h shall be permitted as of right.
b. The following uses shall be prohibited:
Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b.
17.53 Dimensional Regulations. The following Dimensional Regulations shall apply to all
development proposals within the district.
17.53.1 Maximum FAR. The FAR applicable on any lot in the district shall not exceed 1.25 for
all permitted uses. However, the applicable FAR may be increased by an additional
0.75 to a maximum of 2.0, by special permit from the Planning Board, for permitted
residential uses, excluding hotels and motels, and for dormitory uses, Section 4.33
b(7).
17.53.2 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height for permitted uses shall be eightyfive
(85) feet and may be increased to one hundred (100) feet for all permitted uses
excluding hotels and motels after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning
Board.
17.53.3 Front Yard Requirements.
a. The minimum front yard setback from Memorial Drive for the principal front wall
plane for any structure shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the street line.
The required front yard setback shall apply to any portion of a structure below
ground as well as those portions of a structure above ground.
b. The required Memorial Drive front yard shall consist entirely of Green Area Open
Space as defined in Article 2.000 with the exception of paving necessary for
vehicular access. Such paved access area shall be limited to one twenty-four (24)
foot driveway for each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof,
located so as to provide the most direct access to parking facilities located
elsewhere on the site. It is preferred that all vehicular access be provided from
other than Memorial Drive.
c. The Memorial Drive front yard shall contain at least one three and one-half (3 1/2)
to four (4) inch caliper tree for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of street frontage.
d. All other yards shall conform to the requirements of the Office 2 District, except
that there shall be no front or side yard setback requirements for the existing
building that lies adjacent to the northwest sideline of the Main Line railroad right of
way as shown on Assessor's Plat #64.
17.54 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements
17.54.1 Off street parking and loading requirements shall be as specified in Article 6.000 for
uses in the Office 2 District except as provided below.
17.54.2 Minimum Parking Requirement. The minimum parking requirement shall be one
space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area for any use in the
17-20
District, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, one parking space shall be
required for each dwelling unit, and for dormitory uses, Section 4.33 b(7), one parking
space for each twelve (12) beds.
17.54.3 Maximum Parking. The maximum accessory parking permitted for all uses in the
district shall be one parking space for each six hundred and fifty (650) square feet of
gross floor area, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, there shall be no
maximum accessory parking. No parking shall be provided which exceeds the
maximum parking permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.31.3.
17.60 SPECIAL DISTRICT 6
17.61 Scope This Section 17.60 regulates development within the Special District 6 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.60, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Residence C-3 District shall apply equally to the Special District 6.
17.62 Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the Residence C-3 District shall be equally allowed
in the Special District 6 with the exception of the following:
a. The following uses shall be prohibited:
(1) Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b.
(2) Hotel and Motel uses, Section 4.31 i (2).
17.63 Dimensional Regulations
17.63.1 Yard Requirements. There shall be no minimum yard requirements for structures
within the Special District 6.
17.63.2 Maximum Height. The maximum height permitted in the district shall be one hundred
(100) feet except as permitted or further restricted below:
a. In that portion of the district lying southwesterly of a line, which line is the
southeasterly projection of a line one hundred feet northeasterly of and parallel to
the southwesterly sideline of Reardon Street the maximum height shall be sixty
(60) feet
b. The maximum height may be increased above one hundred (100) feet to a
maximum of one hundred and eighty (180) feet in that portion of the district lying
northeasterly of the line described in Paragraph a above and between the
centerline of Vassar Street and the centerline of the main line railroad right of way
after the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board, provided that portions
of buildings exceeding one hundred (100) feet but not exceeding one hundred and
eighty (180) feet in height contain no more than 165,000 square feet of gross floor
area, in total for the entire district.
c. In granting a special permit for additional height the Planning Board shall consider
the following:
17-21
1. The height of the other buildings or portions of buildings constructed in the
district is reduced to significantly below the one hundred (100) foot height
permitted as of right.
2. In the vicinity of Fort Washington buildings are constructed below the one
hundred (100) foot height permitted or green space is created so as to
increase the views from Fort Washington across the MIT campus to the river
and to the Boston skyline beyond.
3. The view corridors along residential Cambridgeport streets, such as Erie and
Pacific Streets, are uninterrupted by buildings, wherever possible.
4. Green space is created in the district at grade where it can be visible to the
general public.
5. The buildings are distributed in the district so as to create a visual penetration
as viewed from the residential Cambridgeport neighborhood to the MIT
campus and to the River Beyond.
17.64 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off street parking and loading requirements shall be the same as specified in Article
6.000 for uses in the Residence C-3 District except as provided below.
17.64.1 Minimum Parking Requirement. The minimum parking requirement shall be one
space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area for any use in the
District, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, one parking space shall be
required for each dwelling unit, and for dormitory uses, Section 4.33 b(7) one parking
space for each twelve (12) beds.
17.64.2 Maximum Parking. The maximum accessory parking permitted for all uses in the
district shall be one parking space for each six hundred and fifty (650) square feet of
floor area, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, there shall be no
maximum accessory parking. No parking shall be provided which exceeds the
maximum parking permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.31.3.
17.70 SPECIAL DISTRICT 7
17.71 Scope. This Section 17.70 regulates development within the Special District 7 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.70, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Business B District as modified by the Central Square Overlay District shall apply
equally to the Special District 7.
17.72 Additional Permitted Uses
a. The following uses shall be permitted as of right:
Assembly or packaging of articles (Section 4.37a) and manufacture, processing,
assembly and/or packaging of specified articles and products (Section 4.37 b, 1-
15) shall be permitted on any lot on which any one or combination of the above
uses has been established on or before January 1, 1991 and which uses remain
17-22
in continuous operation thereafter. Once said industrial uses have been
discontinued on the lot, the lot shall only be used for those uses permitted in the
Business B District.
b. The following uses shall be prohibited:
Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b.
17.73 Dimensional Regulations
17.73.1 Maximum FAR. The maximum FAR for any lot in the district shall not exceed 3.0 for
Residential Uses, Section 4.31 a-h, and Dormitory Uses, Section 4.33 b(7) and 2.0 for
all other permitted uses.
17.73.2 Additional Height. The maximum height permitted in the district may be increased to
one hundred (100) feet by special permit from the Planning Board; all other height
limitations imposed by the Central Square Overlay District shall apply.
17.74 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements
17.74.1 Off street parking and loading requirements shall be the same as specified in Article
6.000 for uses in the Office 2 District except as provided below.
17.74.2 Minimum Parking Requirement. The minimum parking requirement shall be one
space for two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area for any use in the
District, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, one parking space shall be
required for each dwelling unit.
17.74.3 Maximum Parking. The maximum accessory parking permitted for all uses in the
district shall be one parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor
area, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, there shall be no maximum
accessory parking. No parking shall be provided which exceeds the maximum parking
permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.31.3.
17.80 SPECIAL DISTRICT 8 AND SPECIAL DISTRICT 8A
17.81 Special District 8
17.81.1 Scope. This Section 17.81 regulates development within the Special District 8 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.81, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Industry A-1 District shall apply equally to the Special District 8.
17.81.2 Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the Industry A-1 District shall be equally allowed in
the Special District 8 with the exception of the following:
a. The following additional uses shall be permitted as of right:
(1) Dormitory and resident fraternity or sorority, Section 4.33 b (7).
(2) Residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h.
17-23
(3) Heavy Industry, Section 4.38 e, but only if the specific use has been
established on a lot on or before January 1, 1991 and which use shall remain
in continuous operation thereafter. Once said industrial use has been
discontinued, the lot shall only be used for those uses otherwise permitted in
this Special District 8.
b. The following uses shall be prohibited:
(1) Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b.
(2) All Retail, Business and Consumer Service Establishments Section 4.35 with
the exception of 4.35 a (1) and 4.35 b-e.
17.81.3 Dimensional Regulations. The dimensional requirements of the Industry A-1 district
shall apply the Special District 8 except as provided below:
17.81.31 Maximum FAR. The FAR applicable on any lot in the district shall be increased to 1.75
for permitted dormitory uses.
17.81.32 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height permitted in the district shall be sixty
(60) feet for all uses except as modified by the provisions of Sections 17.81.32.1 and
17.81.5.
17.81.32.1 For all uses, the maximum height shall be further limited as follows:
(a) Any portion of a building exceeding a height of sixty (60) feet shall be set back a
minimum of twenty (20) feet from the adjacent front property lines on all abutting
streets.
(b) Height shall be limited to forty-five (45) feet in that area defined by a line one
hundred (100) feet distant from and parallel to all front and side property lines of
Fort Washington Park, lot #72, Assessor's Plat #66, to the extent that the
described area is within the Special District 8.
(c) Height shall be limited to forty-five (45) feet within one hundred (100) feet from the
boundary of the existing Residence C-1 District.
17.81.33 Yard Requirements. A minimum five (5) foot front yard setback shall be required for all
development in the district.
17.81.33 Restrictions in Required or Provided Front Yard Setbacks. That area between the
principal front wall plane of a building and a public street, whether required or provided,
shall be devoted to Green Area Open Space as defined in Article 2.000 of this
Ordinance, an expansion of the adjacent public sidewalk, or other landscaped or
paved area devoted exclusively to pedestrian use and extending along the entire
length of that portion of a lot abutting the street. Areas devoted to vehicular use are
prohibited from this area with the exception of access drives located to provide the
most direct access to parking facilities located elsewhere on the site. Said access
drives shall be limited to a total of thirty (30) feet of width for each one hundred (100)
feet of lot frontage. Where a lot is bounded by more than one street, the provisions of
this subsection 17.81.33 shall apply fully only to a single street, which street shall be
the principal, major or most important street abutting the lot. For all other streets the
17-24
provisions of this subsection 17.81.33 shall apply only to the required front yard
setback.
17.81.34 Residential Density. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six hundred and
fifty (650) square feet.
17.81.4 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements
17.81.41 Off street parking and loading requirements shall be the same as specified in Article
6.000 for the applicable base zoning district except as provided below.
17.81.42 Minimum Parking Requirement. The minimum parking requirements shall be one
parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area for any
use in the District, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, one parking space
shall be required for each dwelling unit and for dormitory uses, Section 4.33 b.(7) one
parking space for each twelve (12) beds.
17.81.43 Maximum Parking. The maximum parking permitted for uses in the district shall be
one parking space for each six hundred and fifty (650) square feet of gross floor area,
except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, there shall be no maximum
accessory parking. No parking shall be provided which exceeds the maximum parking
permitted, notwithstanding the provision of Section 6.31.3; however the Planning Board
may permit by special permit the number of parking spaces to exceed the maximum
allowed under this Section 17.81.43 provided the number of parking spaces authorized
by special permit does not exceed that number which would be permitted on the lot if
the maximum parking ratio of 650 were applied to the maximum gross floor area
permitted on the lot, notwithstanding the fact that all such allowed gross floor area is
not in fact proposed to be constructed.
17.81.44 No special permit shall be issued in this district which permits the total number of
parking spaces on a lot to exceed (a) that number permitted in Section 17.81.43 for
development authorized by the special permit plus (b) any additional parking present
on the site before the date of application for uses not located on the lot, which parking
is provided as legally established required accessory parking, not exceeding the
minimum required in Article 6.000 at the time of the granting of the special permit in
the zoning district applicable to such uses.
Where the parking provided on the site at the time of the special permit approval
exceeds that quantity permitted above, the approved Special Permit shall provide a
schedule by which the parking on the development parcel shall be brought into
compliance with this subsection 17.81.44.
17.81.5 Transfer of Development Rights and/or Additional Height to secure Publicly Accessible
Open Space.
Transfer of permitted Gross Floor Area between two or more lots that may not be
contiguous or held in common ownership shall be permitted in Special Districts 8,
8A, 9, and 10 pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.30 of the Zoning Ordinance.
17-25
Additional height to accommodate such transferred GFA shall also be permitted
subject to the limitations set forth in Section 21.30.
17.82 Special District 8A
17.82.1 Scope. This Section 17.82 regulates development within the Special District 8, as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section17.82, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Residence C-1A District shall apply equally to the Special District 8A.
17.82.2 Permitted Uses. Use permitted in the Residence C-1A district shall be equally allowed
in the Special District 8A subject to the following additions and limitations.
17.82.21 Retail, business and Consumer Service Establishments Section 4.35a(1) and 4.35 b-e
shall be permitted as of right provided they are located in a building with other
permitted uses, are located on the first floor or the basement of the building, do not
exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total Gross Floor Area of the building in which
they are located. No individual establishment may exceed two thousand and five
hundred (2,500) gross floor feet in area.
17.82.22 The following uses shall be prohibited:
Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32b.
17.82.3 Dimensional Regulations. The dimensional requirements of the Residence C-1A
district shall apply in the Special District 8A district except as provided below:
17.82.31 Maximum FAR. The FAR applicable on any lot in the district shall not exceed 0.75 for
permitted nonresidential uses, 1.50 for permitted residential uses, and 1.75 for
permitted dormitory uses.
17.82.32 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height permitted in the district shall be sixty
(60) feet for all uses except as the permitted height may be modified by the provisions
of Section 17.82.32.1 below.
17.82.32.1 For all uses, the maximum height shall be further limited as follows:
(a) Any portion of a building exceeding a height of sixty (60) feet shall be set back a
minimum of twenty (20) feet from the adjacent front property lines on all abutting
streets.
(b) Maximum height shall be limited to forty-five (45) feet in that area defined by a line
one hundred (100) feet distant from and parallel to all front and side property lines
of Fort Washington Park, lot #72, Assessor’s Plat #66.
(c) Maximum height shall be limited to forty-five (45) feet within one hundred (100)
feet from the boundary of a Residence C-1 district.
17-26
17.82.33 Yard Requirements.
17.82.33.1 Restrictions in Required or Provided Front Yard Setbacks. That area between the
principal front wall plane of a building and a public street, whether required or provided,
shall be devoted to Green Area as defined in Article 2.000 of this Ordinance, an
expansion of the adjacent public sidewalk, or other landscaped or paved area devoted
exclusively to pedestrian use and extending along the entire length of that portion of a
lot abutting the street. Areas devoted to vehicle use are prohibited from this area with
the exception of access drives located to provide the most direct access to parking
facilities located elsewhere on the site. Said access drives shall be limited to a total of
thirty (30) feet of width for each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage. Where a lot is
bounded by more than one street, the provisions of this subsection 17.82.33.1 shall
apply fully only to a single street, which street shall be the principal, major or most
important street abutting the lot. For all other streets the provisions of this subsection
17.82.33.1 shall apply only to the required front yard setback.
17.82.33.2Where lots abut the railroad right of way, there shall be no minimum yard requirement
for that yard abutting the right of way.
17.82.34 Residential Density. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six hundred and
fifty (650) square feet.
17.82.4 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements.
17.82.41 Off street parking and loading requirements shall be as specified in Article 6.000 for
the applicable base zoning district except as provided below.
17.82.42 Minimum Parking Requirement. The minimum parking requirements shall be as
provided in Section 17.81, for those uses permitted in this Section 17.82.
17.82.5 Interim Non-Residential Uses.
17.82.51 Any use allowed in Special District 8 may be allowed in the Special District 8A district
on an interim basis by Special Permit from the Planning Board subject to the following
conditions and limitations:
(a) The authorized use is located in a nonresidential building in existence as of June
1, 2001.
(b) A Special Permit under this section has been applied for by no later than January
1, 2003.
(c) The use is authorized for a period not to exceed seven years in total from the date
at which a final Certificate of Occupancy for the authorized nonresidential use is
issued by the Superintendent of Buildings.
(d) All nonresidential use on the site shall cease after expiration of the period granted
by the special permit for the authorized nonresidential use. Thereafter the site
shall only be use for residential uses.
17-27
(e) In no case may any special permit under this Section 17.82.5 authorizing an
interim nonresidential use be granted after January 1, 2005.
(f) In granting a special permit under this Section 17.82.5 the Planning Board shall
determine that the proposed nonresidential use will not unreasonably negatively
impact the use of adjacent property for permitted residential uses.
17.82.6 Additional FAR and Uses to Secure Near-Term Housing Construction
17.82.61 The Planning Board may issue a special permit to permit a mixed-use development
containing residential dwelling units and nonresidential uses, subject to the following
provisions, limitations and restrictions.
(a) The application for the special permit is accepted by the Planning Board on or
before January 1, 2005.
(b) The subject lot contains nonresidential GFA at the time of application for a special
permit, in a building in existence as of June 1, 2001.
(c) The total FAR for the authorized development does not exceed 1.50.
(d) The development may contain a any use permitted in Special District 8.
(e) At least one third of the authorized GFA is devoted to residential use with fifty (50)
percent of the housing units (representing 50% of the residential GFA) affordable.
Affordable units in excess of the number required under the inclusionary zoning
provisions of the Cambridge Zoning Ordinance may be devoted to middle income
housing using up to one hundred and twenty (120) percent of HUD median area
incomes as a guideline for eligibility.
(f) All dimensional requirements of the Special District 8A are met unless the
Planning Board, as part of the special permit, waives those provisions. In no case,
however, may the height limits applicable in the SD-8A be waived.
(g) No Final Certificate of Occupancy may be granted for any nonresidential GFA
unless construction of the authorized residential portion of the development is
complete.
(h) In approving the development plan, the Planning Board shall determine that the
housing uses are appropriately located to reinforce existing housing development
and buffer that existing housing from nonresidential use on the subject lot and
from other nonresidential development elsewhere within the SD-8A.
17.90 SPECIAL DISTRICT 9
17.91 Scope. This Section 17.90 regulates development within the Special District 9 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.90, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Residence C District shall apply equally to the Special District 9.
17.92 Purpose. This section 17.90 is intended to:
17-28
(a) promote in this portion of Cambridgeport significant housing development that
becomes integrated with the existing neighborhood physically, architecturally, and
socially;
(b) address current housing needs in Cambridge, especially the need for units
affordable for households with children; and
(c) provide significant incentives for developing housing affordable by persons of low
and moderate income, in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General
Laws, while balancing the goals of affordability and low density.
17.93 Use Regulations. The uses allowed in the Residence C district shall be allowed except
as may otherwise be permitted in Section 17.97 below. Use variances are hereby
expressly prohibited, Section 10.31 notwithstanding.
17.94 Dimensional Requirements
The dimensional requirements of the Residence C district, as set forth in Section 5.31
shall apply in the Special District 9.
17.95 Additional Use and Gross Floor Area Provisions for Existing Nonresidential Uses
and Structures.
(A) It is the intent of this Section 17.97 to encourage a gradual evolution of
nonresidential uses in this Special District 9 now heavily nonresidential in
character, from those least in harmony with the adjacent residential neighborhood
and the residential uses ultimately desired in the district, to those nonresidential
uses most compatible with residential uses and ultimately to residential uses
exclusively. Therefore, in the Special District 9 the following additional uses not
otherwise permitted in a Residence C District shall be permitted as of right,
provided the conditions set forth below are met. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 10.31, no variance for use shall be permitted in this Special District 9. For
the purposes of Article 8.000 this Special District 9 shall continue to be considered
a residential district and therefore Section 8.22, Paragraphs a and b shall not
apply.
(1) All uses in Section 4.34, Office and Laboratory Uses, shall be permitted but
only if the following conditions are met:
a. The building thereon, (or that portion of the building proposed to be
reused) is vacant and not occupied by a residential use in the five years
immediately preceding the time of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed use, or if occupied, the current use is any
office and laboratory use, Section 4.34; any retail business and
consumer service establishment, Section 4.35; any light industry,
wholesale business or storage use, Section 4.37; or any heavy industry
use, Section 4.38.
(2) All uses in Section 4.35, Retail Business and Consumer Service
Establishments, Paragraphs a, c and d shall be permitted, but only if the
following conditions are met:
17-29
a. The use existing at the time of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed new use, or that first legally established
use immediately preceding the application for a proposed new use
should the premises be vacant (provided that the previous use was in
operation within the two years immediately preceding the application for
a Certificate of Occupancy), is any retail business and Consumer
Service Establishment, Section 4.35; or any light Industry, wholesale
business and storage use, Section 4.37; or any heavy industry use,
Section 4.38; and
b. The use shall occupy only that gross floor area meeting the use
limitations of Paragraph a above.
(3) All uses in Section 4.37, light industry, wholesale business, and storage,
Paragraphs a and b shall be permitted, but only if the following conditions are
met:
a. The use existing at the time of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed use, or that first legally established use
immediately preceding the application for a Certificate of Occupancy
for a proposed new use should the premises be vacant (provided that
the previous use was in operation within the two years immediately
preceding the application for a Certificate of Occupancy), is light
industry, wholesale business or storage use, Section 4.37; or any
heavy industry use, Section 4.38; and
b. The use shall occupy only that gross floor area meeting the Use
Limitations of Paragraph a above.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above, in any structure
containing a residential use which is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross
floor area of the building within which it is located, that residential use may be
replaced by any one of the permitted uses in Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above, which
use shall thereafter be subject to all of the provisions of this Section 17.97.
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of (A) (1) - (3) above, in any structure containing a
use which is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross floor area of the building
within which it is located, that use may be replaced by any one of the permitted
uses in Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above, which use shall thereafter be subject to all
of the provisions of this Section 17.97.
(D) For structures satisfying the requirements of (B) above, in existence as of January
1, 1991 the maximum gross floor area on a lot devoted to nonresidential uses shall
be limited by an FAR of .9.
17.96 Nonconforming Structures
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.23, that portion of a legal, nonconforming
structure lying within this Special District 9 which is destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion, or other catastrophe may be rebuilt or restored and used again, in the same
way as it had been legally used immediately before the damage, without limit as to cost
of such rebuilding or restoring provided the following conditions are met:
17-30
(a) Any restoration or rebuilding shall commence within twelve (12) months after the
catastrophe;
(b) The structure shall be restored or rebuilt to the same design, including materials
and design details as existed previously; or should the restoration not be feasible
necessitating that the structure be rebuilt to a different design, said design shall be
at least equal to the original design of the structure in quality of materials used, the
quantity and quality of design details employed, and the compatibility of the site
design with abutting properties;
(c) The Community Development Department shall certify to the Superintendent of
Buildings that the above conditions have been met.
With respect to the comparability of newly designed buildings, the Community
Development Department shall consult the Cambridge Historical Commission for
structures greater than fifty (50) years old. Should the Community Development
Department find that said conditions have not been met the restoring or rebuilding
shall require a special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeal.
The restored or rebuilt structure shall in no aspect increase the nonconforming
nature of the original structure; nothing in this Section 17.98, however, shall
prohibit a rebuilding or restoring which reduces the nonconforming nature of the
original structure.
17.97 Standards for Issuance of Special Permit. In addition to the general standards for the
issuance of a special permit found in Section 10.40 of the Zoning Ordinance, the
special permit granting authority shall in addition make the following findings:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the following goals and objectives:
- To encourage mixed use development compatible with the Cambridgeport
residential neighborhood with housing uses strongly encouraged along
Brookline Street and over to Sidney Street;
- To promote street and sidewalk improvements to create a unified image and
improve the physical and visual environment and tie the existing nonresidential
district to the existing residential neighborhood; and
- To promote strong visual and pedestrian connections between the residential
neighborhood and the MIT campus and the Charles River.
2. The development is consistent with the provisions of the South Cambridgeport
Development Guidelines;
3. No National Register or contributing building is demolished or so altered as to
terminate or preclude its designation as a National Register or contributing
building; and
4. No National Register or contributing building has been demolished or altered so as
to terminate or preclude its designation within the five (5) years preceding the
application.
17-31
17.98 Transfer of Development Rights and/or Additional Height to Secure Publicly Accessible
Open Space
Transfer of permitted Gross Floor Area between two or more lots that may not be
continuous or held in common ownership shall be permitted in Special Districts 8, 8A, 9,
and 10 pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.30 of the Zoning Ordinance.
17.100 SPECIAL DISTRICT 10
17.101 Scope. This Section 17.100 regulates development within the Special District 10 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.100, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Residence C District shall apply equally to the Special District 10. The provisions of this
Section 17.100 are not severable and if a court declares any such provision invalid
then this Section 17.100 shall cease to operate in its entirety.
17.102 Purpose . This Section 17.100 is intended to:
(a) promote in this portion of Cambridgeport significant housing development that
becomes integrated with the existing neighborhood physically, architecturally, and
socially;
(b) address current housing needs in Cambridge, especially the need for units
affordable for households with children; and
(c) provide significant incentives for developing housing affordable by persons of low
and moderate income, in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General
Laws, while balancing the goals of affordability and low density.
17.103 Use Regulations. The uses allowed in the Residence C district shall be allowed except
as may otherwise be permitted in Section 17.107 below. Use variances are hereby
expressly prohibited, Section 10.31 notwithstanding.
17.104 Dimensional Requirements
The dimensional requirements of the Residence C District as set forth in Section 5.31
shall apply in the Special District 10.
17.105 Additional Use and Gross Floor Area Provisions for Existing Nonresidential Uses
and Structures.
(A) It is the intent of this Section 17.107 to encourage a gradual evolution of
nonresidential uses in this Special District 10 now heavily nonresidential in
character, from those least in harmony with the adjacent residential neighborhood
and the residential uses ultimately desired in the district, to those nonresidential
uses most compatible with residential uses and ultimately to residential uses
exclusively. Therefore, in the Special District 10 the following additional uses not
otherwise permitted in the Residence C District shall be permitted as of right,
provided the conditions set forth below are met. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Section 10.31, no variance for use shall be permitted in the Special District 10. For
the purposes of Article 8.000 the Special District shall continue to be considered a
residential district and therefore Section 8.22, Paragraphs a and b shall not apply.
17-32
(1) All uses in Section 4.34, Office and Laboratory Uses, shall be permitted but
only if the following conditions are met:
a. The building thereon, (or that portion of the building proposed to be
reused) is vacant and not occupied by a residential use in the five years
immediately preceding the time of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed use, or if occupied, the current use is any
office and laboratory use, Section 4.34; any retail business and
consumer service establishment, Section 4.35; any light industry,
wholesale business or storage use, Section 4.37; or any heavy industry
use, Section 4.38.
(2) All uses in Section 4.35, Retail Business and Consumer Service
Establishments, Paragraphs a, c and d shall be permitted, but only if the
following conditions are met:
a. The use existing at the time of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed new use, or that first legally established
use immediately preceding the application for a proposed new use
should the premises be vacant (provided that the previous use was in
operation within the two years immediately preceding the application for
a Certificate of Occupancy), is any retail business and Consumer
Service Establishment, Section 4.35; or any light Industry, wholesale
business and storage use, Section 4.37; or any heavy industry use,
Section 4.38; and
b. The use shall occupy only that gross floor area meeting the use
limitations of Paragraph a above.
(3) All uses in Section 4.37, light industry, wholesale business, and storage,
Paragraphs a and b shall be permitted, but only if the following conditions are
met:
a. The use existing at the time of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy for the proposed use, or that first legally established use
immediately preceding the application for a Certificate of Occupancy for
a proposed new use should the premises be vacant (provided that the
previous use was in operation within the two years immediately
preceding the application for a Certificate of Occupancy), is light
industry, wholesale business or storage use, Section 4.37; or any
heavy industry use, Section 4.38; and
b. The use shall occupy only that gross floor area meeting the Use
Limitations of Paragraph a above.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above, in any structure
containing a residential use which is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross
floor area of the building within which it is located, that residential use may be
replaced by any one of the permitted uses in Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above,
which use shall thereafter be subject to all of the provisions of this Section
17.107.
17-33
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above, in any structure
containing a use which is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross floor area
of the building within which it is located, that use may be replaced by any one of
the permitted uses in Paragraphs (A) (1) - (3) above, which use shall thereafter
be subject to all of the provisions of this Section 17.107.
(D) For structures satisfying the requirements of (B) above and in existence as of
January 1, 1991, the maximum gross floor area on a lot may be increased by an
amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area present on the lot
on January 1, 1991.
17.106 Nonconforming structures.
The provisions of Section 17.98, Special District 9, shall apply equally to this Section
17.108, Special District 10.
17.107 Standards for Issuance of Special Permits. In addition to the general standards for
the issuance of a special permit found in Section 10.40 of the Zoning Ordinance, the
special permit granting authority shall in addition make the following findings:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the following goals and objectives:
- To encourage mixed use development compatible with the Cambridgeport
residential neighborhood with housing uses strongly encouraged along
Brookline Street and over to Sidney Street;
- To promote street and sidewalk improvements to create a unified image and
improve the physical and visual environment and tie the existing nonresidential
district to the existing residential neighborhood; and
- To promote strong visual and pedestrian connections between the residential
neighborhood and the MIT campus and the Charles River.
2. The development is consistent with the provisions of the South Cambridgeport
Development Guidelines;
3. No National Register or contributing building is demolished or so altered as to
terminate or preclude its designation as a National Register or contributing
building; and
4. No National Register or contributing building has been demolished or altered so as
to terminate or preclude its designation within the five (5) years preceding the
application.
17.108 Transfer of Development Rights and/or Additional Height to Secure Publicly Accessible
Open Space.
Transfer of permitted Gross Floor Area between two or more lots that may not be
contiguous or held in common ownership shall be permitted in Special Districts 8, 8A, 9,
and 10 pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.30 of the Zoning Ordinance.
17-34
17.200 SPECIAL DISTRICT 11
17.201 Scope. This Section 17.200 regulates development within the Special District 11 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as herein
provided in this Section 17.200, all requirements of and regulations applicable to the
Office 2 District shall apply equally to the Special District 11.
17.202 Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the Office 2 District shall be equally allowed in the
Special District 11 with the exception of the following:
a. The following additional uses shall be permitted:
(1) Manufacturing, processing, assembly and/or packaging of articles and
products listed in Section 4.37 a, and Section 4.37 b 4,5,9 provided the fully
assembled product regularly produced shall not exceed two hundred (200)
pounds in weight.
(2) Retail, Business and Consumer Service Establishments, Section 4.35 a and b
as would otherwise be permitted in a Business B District, provided such uses
are in a building containing uses permitted in an Office 2 District and do not
exceed in area an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of
the building in which they are located, or twenty five thousand (25,000) square
feet, whichever is less.
(3) Residential Uses Section 4.31 a-h shall be permitted as of right.
b. The following uses shall be prohibited:
Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b.
17.203 Dimensional Regulations. The following Dimensional Regulations shall apply to all
development proposals within the district.
17.203.1 Maximum FAR
a. The FAR applicable on any lot in the district shall not exceed 1.25 for all permitted
uses. However, the applicable FAR may be increased by an additional 0.75 to a
maximum of 2.0, by special permit from the Planning Board, for permitted
residential uses, excluding hotels and motels, and for dormitory uses, Section 4.33
b(7).
b. In that part of Special District 11 lying southeast of Vassar Street, the maximum
FAR for all uses shall be increased to 1.7.
17.203.2 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height for permitted uses shall be eightyfive
(85) feet and may be increased to one hundred (100) feet for all permitted uses
excluding hotels and motels after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning
Board.
17.203.3 Front Yard Requirements.
a. The minimum front yard setback from Memorial Drive for the principal front wall
plane for any structure shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the street line.
17-35
The required front yard setback shall apply to any portion of a structure below
ground as well as those portions of a structure above ground.
b. The required Memorial Drive front yard shall consist entirely of Green Area Open
Space as defined in Article 2.000 with the exception of paving necessary for
vehicular access. Such paved access area shall be limited to one twenty-four (24)
foot driveway for each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof,
located so as to provide the most direct access to parking facilities located
elsewhere on the site. It is preferred that all vehicular access be provided from
other than Memorial Drive.
c. The Memorial Drive front yard shall contain at least one three and one-half (3 1/2)
to four (4) inch caliper tree for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of street frontage.
17.204 Off Street Parking and Loading Requirements
17.204.1 Off street parking and loading requirements shall be as specified in Article 6.000 for
uses in the Office 2 District except as provided below.
17.204.2 Minimum Parking Requirement. The minimum parking requirement shall be one
space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area for any use in the
District, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, one parking space shall be
required for each dwelling unit, and for dormitory uses, Section 4.33 b(7), one parking
space for each twelve (12) beds.
17.204.3 Maximum Parking. The maximum accessory parking permitted for all uses in the
district shall be one parking space for each six hundred and fifty (650) square feet of
gross floor area, except that for residential uses, Section 4.31 a-h, there shall be no
maximum accessory parking. No parking shall be provided which exceeds the maximum
parking permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.31.3.
17.300 SPECIAL DISTRICT 12
17.301 Scope. This Section 17.300 regulates development in Special District 12 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as
herein provided in this Section 17.300, all requirements of and regulations
applicable to the Residence C-2B District shall apply equally in Special District 12.
17.302 Dimensional Modifications Permitted. The following dimensional modifications to
the Residence C-2B district shall be permitted or further required in Special
District 12.
a. The maximum FAR shall be 1.0.
b. The Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit shall be 800 square feet.
c. The maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet in that portion of the district
located south of Hingham Street and that portion of the district north of
Hingham Street located within one hundred (100) feet of the westerly
sideline of Banks Street.
17-36
d. The Minimum Ratio of Private open space shall be thirty (30) percent.
17.303 Dimensional and Use Modifications. The following further modifications to the
regulations applicable to the Residence C-2B district, as modified in Section
17.302 above, shall be permitted, subject to compliance with the provisions of
Section 17.305 below.
17.303.1 Permitted Uses. All uses permitted in the Residence C-2B district shall be
allowed in Special District 12 including but not limited to residential housing for
faculty, staff, employees, and students of educational, religious and charitable
institutions in single-family, two-family and multi-family structures and accessory
uses thereto. Dormitory uses shall be permitted; however, no other uses serving
educational, religious and charitable institutions as set forth in Section 4.33 shall
be allowed, except as otherwise allowed in this Section 17.300.
17.303.2 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height permitted shall be sixty-five
(65) feet except as further regulated below:
a. No building may be higher than thirty-five (35) feet on land shown as
Lots #103, 104, 105 and 106 on Assessors Plat #130, and
b. No building may be higher than thirty-five (35) feet within forty-five (45)
feet of the westerly sideline of Banks Street.
17.303.3 Yard Requirements. In lieu of the provisions of Table 5-1 – Table of Dimensional
Requirements – Residential Districts, the following Minimum Yard requirements shall
apply. Any formulas set forth in Table 5-1 to determine minimum yard requirements
shall not apply.
(a) The minimum yard on Memorial Drive shall be ten (10) feet.
(b) The minimum yard on Western Avenue shall be ten (10) feet.
(c) The minimum yard along that portion of the easterly boundary of Special
District 12 determined by the easterly sidelines of Lots # 103 and 106 on
Assessors Plat 130 shall be fifteen (15) feet.
(d) No minimum yard shall be required along Akron Street.
(e) The minimum yard on Banks Street shall be ten (10) feet.
(f) The minimum yard on the southerly side of Hingham Street shall be ten
(10) feet.
(g) The minimum yard on the northerly side of Hingham Street shall be thirty
(30) feet within one hundred (100) feet of the westerly sideline of Banks
Street, and thereafter 10 feet.
(h) The requirements of Table 5-1, Footnote (k) shall not apply in the Special
District 12.
17.303.4 Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
shall be 300 square feet. Permitted dwelling units may be located anywhere
17-37
within the District and shall not be otherwise restricted as to lot area per dwelling
unit requirements.
17.303.5 Total Development Permitted. The aggregate of all development in Special
District 12 shall not exceed 172,950 square feet of Gross Floor Area. If the
property owner is in compliance with the provisions of a letter of commitment
dated October 27, 2003, given by the property owner of land in Special Districts
12, 13 and 14 to the City of Cambridge pertaining to the development of the
property owner’s land in Special Districts 12, 13 and 14 (“Letter of Commitment”),
the aggregate of all development in Special District 12 shall not exceed 224,835
square feet of Gross Floor Area. Such development may be located anywhere in
the district without reference to FAR or any other Gross Floor Area limitation.
17.303.6 Minimum Ratio of Private open space to Lot Area. The required Private open
space in the district may be any combination of Useable, Green Area, Permeable
or Public Open Space and shall be required for all uses permitted in the district.
17.303.7 Parking. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 17.303.7, all requirements
of Article 6.000 shall apply in Special District 12, except that with regard to the
provisions of Section 6.22 – Location of accessory off street parking facilities, any
accessory parking required by Article 6.000 to serve development constructed
within Special District 12 shall be located within Special District 12. Provided it is
located within Special District 12, said parking may be located on any lot without
reference to the locational limitations of Section 6.22. All such parking shall be
deemed institutional; provided, however, that one parking space shall be provided
for each affordable housing unit constructed within Special District 12. In
addition, all parking existing on October 27, 2003 on property in Special District
12 owned by any educational, religious or charitable institution shall be deemed
institutional parking and shall be an allowed use. Off street loading facilities are
not permitted for development in Special District 12. Up to four access drives
may be provided to underground parking facilities.
For any development subject to the special permit provisions of Section 19.20 or
19.50, any provision of Sections 6.31.3, 6.35.2 and 6.40 – Design and
Maintenance of Off Street Parking Facilities may be waived within the scope of
those special permits in order to facilitate the location of significant portions of
parking within the district in below grade facilities or to provide surface parking for
residents in dwelling not conveniently served by an underground parking facility.
17.303.8 Multiple Buildings. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.13, where multiple
buildings are built on any Lot in Special District 12, the minimum distance
required between buildings shall be 15 feet. Buildings that are connected below
grade by tunnels or by underground parking structures shall be considered
multiple, freestanding and unattached buildings for the purposes of Section 5.13
and this Section 17.303.8.
No building may be built on the land shown as Lots # 103, 104, 105, and 106 of
Assessors Plat 130, that has a horizontal dimension (length or width) at grade
17-38
greater than 75 feet, and each building shall be physically separated from
adjoining buildings on such land by at least 15 feet. Project Review pursuant to
the provisions of Article 19.000 shall not limit the number or location of buildings
on such land if such buildings comply with the foregoing provisions of Section
17.303.
The formula set forth in Section 5.13 to determine minimum distance between
buildings shall not apply.
17.304 Mechanical Equipment. The HVAC equipment and exhaust or intake vents
located in and serving buildings or underground garages serving buildings in
Special District 12 constructed after October 27, 2003 shall be designed or
screened so that they are not visible to a pedestrian standing in the public way,
and so that they comply with governmental laws regulating noise.
17.305 Procedural Requirements. A Building Permit for any structure complying with the
dimensional and other provisions of Section 17.303 above shall be issued if the
conditions in this Section 17.305 have been met.
17.305.1 Prior to the issuance of the first Building Permit within the Special District 12, a
site plan (“Site Plan”) shall be submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings
indicating the location of any required open space and the location of proposed
buildings and accessory parking. The Site Plan shall, in both graphic form and
text, indicate how the requirements of this Section 17.300 and the provisions of
the “Letter of Commitment” shall be met including all dimensional and use
requirements. After review by the Community Development Department, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall certify that the Site Plan as submitted conforms
to these provisions and will permit the fulfillment of all requirements of Section
17.300.
17.305.2 The Site Plan may be modified by the owner from time to time, provided,
however, that any change shall require a recertification from the Superintendent
of Buildings. In all instances that the Site Plan is modified, the development shall
continue to conform to all requirements of this Section 17.300 and the “Letter of
Commitment”.
17.305.3 “Letter of Commitment”. Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit or Certificate
of Occupancy in Special District 12 and after review by the Community
Development Department, the Superintendent of Buildings shall certify that
construction is proceeding in accordance with all provisions of the “Letter of
Commitment”.
17.305.4 In the event that the development rights and uses in Special District 12 as set
forth in the Site Plan required in Section 17.305.1 above are reduced before they
can be fully utilized, through an amendment or other change to the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, the easement to the City of Cambridge for a
Public Open Space in conformance with the provisions of the “Letter of
17-39
Commitment” shall not be granted, or if granted previously, shall terminate
automatically upon the effective date of such amendment or change to the Zoning
Ordinance. Thereafter the requirement for the provision of an open space shall
be voided and the site may be developed subsequent to and in accordance with
the provisions of the change or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance.
17.306 Other Provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply.
(a) Special District 12 shall be considered an Area of Special Planning
Concern, subject to the Development Consultation Procedure specified in
Section 19.40.
(b) Development in Special District 12 utilizing the use and dimensional
provisions of Section 17.303 above shall not be subject to the provisions
of Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Nothing in Article 19.000 shall prohibit the submission of a request for
a single Project Review Special Permit containing construction in both
this Special District 12 and Special District 14.
17.307 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations. Where this Section 17.300 specifies
some standard or makes some other requirements contrary to a requirement
elsewhere in this Ordinance, the provisions of this Section 17.300 shall control.
17.400 SPECIAL DISTRICT 13
17.401 Scope. This Section 17.400 regulates development in Special District 13 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as
herein provided in this Section 17.400, all requirements of and regulations
applicable to the Residence C-2 District shall apply equally in Special District 13.
17.402 Permitted Uses. All uses permitted in the Residence C-2 District shall be allowed
in Special District 13, and in addition Power Plant use for the non-nuclear
production, generation and distribution of electricity or steam, Section 4.32 g shall
be permitted. The Power Plant use shall be permitted as of right provided such
use occurs within structures in existence as of October 27, 2003. Location of the
Power Plant use in a new structure shall be permitted only after the issuance of a
Special Permit from the Planning Board.
17.402.1 Parking. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 17.400, all requirements of
Article 6.000 shall apply in Special District 13, except that with regard to the
provisions of Section 6.22 – Location of accessory off street parking facilities, any
accessory parking required by Article 6.000 to serve development constructed
within Special District 13 shall be located within Special District 13. Provided it is
located within Special District 13, said parking may be located on any lot without
reference to the locational limitations of Section 6.22. All such parking shall be
deemed institutional. In addition, all parking existing on October 27, 2003 on
17-40
property in Special District 13 owned by any educational, religious or charitable
institution shall be deemed institutional parking and shall be an allowed use.
17.403 Dimensional Limitations. All dimensional requirements of the Residence C-2
District shall apply in Special Districts 13 except as provided in this Section
17.403:
17.403.1 Maximum FAR. The maximum FAR shall be 1.5 but shall be increased by
special permit from the Planning Board to 2.0 for residential uses and dormitories.
17.403.2 Maximum Height. The maximum height shall be limited to sixty-five (65) feet,
except that within ninety (90) feet of the westerly sideline of Blackstone Street and
within two hundred and forty-five (245) feet of the southerly line of Western
Avenue the height shall be limited to forty-five (45) feet. The height of structures
in existence in Special District 13 as of October 27, 2003 shall be deemed
conforming.
17.403.3 Yard Requirements. The minimum requirement for all yards shall be five (5) feet.
The required yards for structures in existence as of October 27, 2003 shall be the
yards existing at that time. Any new construction shall be subject to the yard
requirements of the Residence C-2 district; the yards for new construction,
however, may be reduced to not less than five (5) feet after the issuance of a
Special Permit from the Planning Board. In addition, the minimum distance
between multiple buildings on a lot, as set forth in Section 5.13, may be reduced
to not less ten (10) feet by special permit from the Planning Board.
17.403.4 Mechanical Equipment. The HVAC equipment and exhaust or intake vents
located in and serving buildings or underground garages serving buildings in
Special District 13 constructed after October 27, 2003 shall be designed or
screened so that they are not visible to a pedestrian standing in the public way,
and so that they comply with governmental laws regulating noise.
17.404 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations. Where this Section 17.400 specifies
some standard or makes some other requirements contrary to a requirement
elsewhere in this Ordinance, the provisions of this Section 17.400 shall control.
17.500 SPECIAL DISTRICT 14
17.501 Scope. This Section 17.500 regulates development in Special District 14 as
shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as
herein provided in this Section 17.500, all requirements of and regulations
applicable to the Residence C-1 District shall apply equally in Special District 14.
17.502 Subdistricts. Special District 14 shall consist of three subdistricts as described
below. Except as noted, all provisions of Special District 14 shall apply equally to
all subdistricts.
a. The Athens Terrace Subdistrict shall be that portion of Special District 14
located north of Grant Street.
17-41
b. The Grant Street Subdistrict shall be that portion of Special District 14 that lies
within ninety (90) feet of the southerly sideline of Grant Street.
c. The Cowperthwaite Subdistrict shall be that portion of Special District 14 that
lies between the Grant Street Subdistrict and Cowperthwaite Street.
17.503 Permitted Uses. All uses permitted in the Residence C-1 District shall be allowed
in Special District 14 including but not limited to residential housing for faculty,
staff, employees, and students of educational, religious and charitable institutions
in single-family, two-family, three-family and multi-family structures and accessory
uses thereto. No other uses serving educational, religious and charitable
institutions as set forth in Section 4.33 shall be allowed, notwithstanding the
provisions of Section 4.50, except as otherwise allowed in this Section 17.500.
The special permit provisions of Sections 4.26 and 11.10 for Multifamily and
Townhouse Development shall not apply.
17.504 Use and Dimensional Modifications Permitted. The following modifications to the
regulations applicable to the Residence C-1 district shall be permitted in Special
District 14.
a. In the Cowperthwaite Subdistrict, Dormitories, Section 4.33 (b) (7) shall be
permitted; Section 4.50 limitations shall not apply.
b. In the Cowperthwaite Subdistrict the following dimensional limitations shall
apply:
(i) The maximum FAR shall be 1.0.
(ii) The maximum height shall be forty-five (45) feet.
(iii) The minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit shall be 800 square feet.
(iv) The minimum Private open space shall be fifteen (15) percent.
c. In the Grant Street Subdistrict the following dimensional limitations shall apply:
(i) The maximum FAR shall be 1.0.
(ii) The minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit shall be 1200 square feet.
(iv) The minimum Private open space shall be fifteen (15) percent.
d. In the Athens Terrace Subdistrict the following dimensional limitations shall
apply:
(i) The minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit shall be 1200 square feet.
(ii) The minimum Private open space shall be fifteen (15) percent.
17.505 Other Use and Dimensional Modifications. The following modifications to the
regulations applicable to the Residence C-1 district, as modified by Section
17.504 above, shall be permitted, subject to compliance with the provisions of
Section 17.506 below.
17.505.1 Maximum FAR. The maximum FAR shall be 3.0 within the Cowperthwaite
Subdistrict provided the FAR in the Grant Street Subdistrict does not exceed 0.75
on land under the same ownership. If the property owner is in compliance with
the provisions of the “Letter of Commitment” referenced in Section 17.303.5
above, in the Cowperthwaite Subdistrict additional FAR at the rate of 0.9 shall be
17-42
permitted, and in the Athens Terrace and Grant Street Subdistricts additional
FAR at the rate of 0.225 shall be permitted.
17.505.2 Building Height Limitations.
a. The maximum height permitted shall be fifty-five (55) feet in the Cowperthwaite
Subdistrict subject to the further restrictions set forth in Paragraph b below;
however no building or portion of a building within 40 feet of the westerly sideline
of Banks Street shall be higher than thirty-five (35) feet.
b. Any portion of a building in the Cowperthwaite Subdistrict in excess of forty-five
(45) feet shall be set back behind a forty-five degree bulk control plane beginning
at a height of forty-five (45) feet above the Cowperthwaite/Grant Street Sudistricts
boundary line and rising thereafter toward Cowperthwaite Street.
17.505.3 Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. In the Cowperthwaite Subdistrict, each
1,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area shall be considered equivalent to one
dwelling unit for purposes of calculating Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit.
17.505.4 Minimum Ratio of Private open space to Lot Area. The required Private open
space in Special District 14 may be any combination of Useable, Green Area,
Permeable or Public Open Space and shall be required for all uses permitted in
the district. In the Cowperthwaite and Athens Terrace Subdistricts, the minimum
Private open space requirements of Table 5-1 as modified in Section 17.504
above shall not apply.
17.505.5 Cowperthwaite Minimum Side Yard. The minimum side yard of Cowperthwaite
Subdistrict shall be 15 feet, and the minimum front yard shall be 10 feet.
17.505.6 Building Size. Except within the Cowperthwaite Subdistrict, each building in
Special District 14 shall be freestanding and unattached to any other building,
may contain no more than 5,000 square feet of GFA, and may contain no more
than six dwelling units.
17.505.7 Multiple Buildings. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.13, multiple
buildings may be built on any Lot in Special District 14, and the minimum distance
between buildings shall be 10 feet. Buildings that are connected below grade by
tunnels or by underground parking structures shall be considered multiple,
freestanding and unattached buildings for purposes of between-building
setbacks. The formula set forth in Section 5.13 shall not apply.
17.505.8 Parking Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 17.505.8, all
requirements of Article 6.000 shall apply in Special District 14.
(a) With regard to the provisions of Section 6.22 – Location of accessory
off street parking facilities, at least eighty (80) percent of the minimum
required accessory parking required by Article 6.000 to serve
17-43
development constructed in the Athens Terrace Subdistrict shall be
located in that Subdistrict.
(b) For any development subject to the special permit provisions of
Section 19.20 or 19.50, any provision of Section 6.22, 6.22.1, 6.22.2
(Location of Parking), 6.31.3, 6.35.2 and Section 6.40 – Design and
Maintenance of Off Street Parking Facilities may be waived within the
scope of those special permits in order to facilitate the location of
significant portions of parking within the district in below grade facilities or
to provide surface parking for residents in dwellings not conveniently
served by an underground parking facility. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Article 6.000, requirements for loading facilities within the
Cowperthwaite Subdistrict may be satisfied by providing one loading
facility on Cowperthwaite Street, which may be located on abutting private
or public ways. All parking provided on property in Special District 14
owned by any educational, religious or charitable institution shall be
deemed institutional parking. In addition, all parking existing on October
27, 2003 on property in Special District 14 owned by any educational,
religious or charitable institution shall be deemed institutional parking and
shall be an allowed use.
17.505.9 Mechanical Equipment. The HVAC equipment and exhaust or intake vents
located in and serving buildings or underground garages serving buildings in
Special District 14 constructed after October 27, 2003 shall be designed or
screened so that they are not visible to a pedestrian standing in the public way,
and so that they comply with governmental laws regulating noise.
17.506 Procedural Requirements. A Building Permit for any structure employing the use,
dimensional, or parking flexibility provided in Sections 17.505 above shall be
issued if the following conditions have been met.
17.506.1 Prior to the issuance of the first Building Permit within the Special District 14, a
site plan (“Site Plan”) shall be submitted to the Superintendent of Buildings
indicating the location of the required open space and the general location of
proposed buildings and accessory parking. The Site Plan shall, in both graphic
form and text, indicate how the requirements of this Section 17.500 shall be met.
The Site Plan may be modified from time to time by the owner; provided,
however, that any change shall require a re-certification from the Superintendent
of Buildings. In all instances that the Site Plan is modified, the development shall
continue to conform to all requirements of this Section 17.500.
17.506.2 “Letter of Commitment”. Prior to the issuance of any Building Permit or Certificate
of Occupancy in Special District 14, after review by the Community Development
Department, the Superintendent of Buildings shall certify that construction is
proceeding in accordance with all provisions of the “Letter of Commitment”.
17.506.3 In the event that the development rights and uses in Special District 14 as set
forth in the Site Plan required in Section 17.506.1 above are reduced before they
17-44
can be fully utilized, through an amendment or other change to the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, the easement to the City of Cambridge for a
Public Open Space in conformance with the provisions of the “Letter of
Commitment” shall not be granted, or if granted previously, shall terminate
automatically upon the effective date of such amendment or change to the Zoning
Ordinance. Thereafter the requirement for the provision of an open space shall
be voided and the site may be developed subsequent to and in accordance with
the provisions of the change or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance.
17.507 Other Provisions. The following additional provisions shall apply.
(a) Special District 14 shall be considered an Area of Special Planning
Concern, subject to the Development Consultation Procedure specified in
Section 19.40.
(b) Development in Special District 14 utilizing the use and dimensional
provisions of Section 17.505 above shall not be subject to provisions of
Section 11.200 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Nothing in Article 19.000 shall prohibit the submission of a request for
a single Project Review Special Permit containing construction in both
this Special District 14 and Special District 12.
17.508 Inapplicability of Certain Other Regulations. Where this Section 17.500 specifies
some standard or makes some other requirements contrary to a requirement
elsewhere in this Ordinance, the provisions of this Section 17.500 shall control.
17.600 SPECIAL DISTRICT 15
17.601 Scope. This Section 17.600 regulates development within the Special District 15
as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. Except as
herein provided in this Section 17.600, all requirements of and regulations
applicable to the Industrial B District shall apply equally to the Special District 15.
17.602 Purpose. It is the intent of Special District 15 to provide for the creation of a high
quality general and technical office environment which enhances the
Massachusetts Avenue street front in this area by promoting active uses at the
street level, encouraging building heights and massing that are appropriately
scaled within the context of surrounding structures, and creating an improved
pedestrian environment through the introduction of open space, the creation of
pedestrian connections that enhance links between Kendall and Central Squares
and the nearby residential neighborhood, and the elimination of surface parking
lots.
17.603 Permitted Uses. Uses permitted in the Industry B District shall be equally allowed
in Special District 15.
17-45
17.604 Dimensional Regulations
17.604.1 Maximum FAR. The maximum FAR for any lot in the district shall be 3.5.
17.604.2 Additional Height. The maximum height permitted in the district may be
increased to one hundred forty (140) feet by special permit from the Planning
Board.
17.605 Criteria for Granting Special Permit. In granting a Special Permit for additional
height above one hundred twenty (120) feet, the Planning Board shall give
consideration to the following:
1. Only a portion of the building, not to exceed more than thirty percent
(30%) of the district, will extend to one hundred forty (140) feet.
2. Portions of the building along Massachusetts Avenue will not exceed 85
feet in height.
3. The additional height will allow for greater opportunities for open space
on the site, including plazas, landscaped areas, and pedestrian
pathways.
17.606 Parking. Notwithstanding the requirements of Article 6.000, the maximum ratio of
off-street parking for all non-residential uses shall be 0.90 spaces per 1,000
square feet of Gross Floor Area. Parking that exceeds this ratio shall require a
waiver under the general provisions of Article 6.000.
For any project seeking a special permit from the Planning Board,
the Planning Board in its discretion, after review and analysis of
Transportation Impact Studies and other relevant information on
parking demand provided in application documents, and with the
guidance of City agencies, may approve a request for reduction in
off-street parking that it deems appropriate without requiring a waiver
under Article 6.000.
17.607 Design Guidelines. In accordance with the provisions of Section 19.22, any new
building construction in this Special District that exceeds the Land Use
Thresholds set forth in Section 19.23 is required to obtain a Project Review
Special Permit. In addition to the Citywide Urban Design Objectives enumerated
in Section 19.30, the Planning Board shall, when making a determination on an
application for a Project Review Special Permit in Special District 15, consider the
following Design Guidelines:
1. Parking should be located below grade where possible.
2. Vehicular access/egress should not be located on
Massachusetts Avenue or Albany Street.
3. Public pedestrian connections are encouraged through the site.
17-46
4. Open space in the form of plazas, landscaped areas and
pedestrian pathways should be integrated into the site plan so as
to benefit building users and the general public.
5. To the extent possible, active uses and transparency is
encouraged on the ground floor of new buildings. The ground
floor building frontage along Massachusetts Avenue shall create
an active street presence with a particular emphasis on retail
uses and shall be generally 50% transparent.
6. The applicant should indicate how a proposed building would
relate physically to the most current design plans developed by
the MBTA for implementation of the Urban Ring transportation
project.
7. Attention should be given to walkability, with appropriate sidewalk
widths, maintenance of street trees, and other pedestrian friendly
amenities.
8. The site massing should include a variety of heights to provide
visual interest and break-up building mass.
17.608 Consistency with Letter of Commitment. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit or Certificate of Occupancy for any construction authorized by special
permit under the provision of this Section 17.600, the Community Development
Department shall certify to the Inspectional Services Department that all
provisions of the Letter of Commitment dated June 20, 2011 by Novartis are
continuing to be met.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
18-1
ARTICLE 18.000
18.10 TRAFFIC MITIGATION REQUIREMENTS
18.20 CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
18.10 Traffic Mitigation Requirements Where a Traffic Mitigation Plan is required as a
condition of approval of any special permit the plan shall be submitted to the special
permit granting authority for review and approval, at a time and in a manner set forth
by the special permit granting authority in its Decision. Upon approval of the plan the
permittee shall be obligated to thereafter implement the provisions of the plan for as
long as the special permit is in force and effect. In developing the plan the permittee
shall consider and adopt as appropriate but shall not be limited to the following traffic
mitigation techniques:
(1) Join and participate in a Landowners' Transportation Management Association if
in operation, and ensure that the following traffic mitigation measures are
implemented, maintained and monitored. If such an operation is not in effect, then
reasonable efforts shall be undertaken to form such an organization.
(2) Promote the use of public transportation by providing up to date maps, schedules
and transit information, establishing an MBTA Pass sales office, educating and
strongly encouraging or requiring all tenants to subsidize employee “T” Passes,
and making reference to transit facilities and proximity in marketing and
advertising materials.
(3) Operate the computer based ride sharing program RideSource from CARAVAN
for Commuters, Inc., collect and disseminate ride sharing information, and share
information with other tenants, organizations and companies where applicable.
(4) Encourage staggered or flexible work hours for employees of all tenants through
the provisions of utilities and open parking facilities during off peak hours and
other appropriate means.
(5) Establish parking management techniques such as providing preferential parking
spaces and reduced rates for van pools and car pools, and encouraging short
term parking when possible.
(6) Consider joint use of parking facilities to maximize effectiveness of parking
management programs.
(7) Operate a shuttle system or join with and expanding an existing system, e.g.
CambridgeSide Galleria, to serve tenants and make public transit more
accessible.
(8) Provide sufficient covered and secure bicycle racks.
(9) Consider cooperating to provide innovative tenant services, such as day care,
courier and copy services, shower and locker room facilities, and shuttles to
airports.
(10) Work with the Commuter Mobility Manager of the City of Cambridge to facilitate
implementation of this traffic mitigation program.
18-2
(11) Require that all conditions of an approved plan be made a condition of tenant
leases as applicable or appropriate.
18.20 Construction Management Program. Where a construction management program is
required as a condition of approval of any special permit the applicant shall submit
such a program, detailing the construction period impacts anticipated and a program
for mitigation of those impacts. The permittee shall be obligated to thereafter
implement the provisions of the Plan until a certificate of occupancy has been issued
for all development authorized by the Permit. This program will include but not be
limited to the following:
Restricting contractor and supplier site access to designated roadways;
Identify construction worker parking areas at sufficient capacity to prevent on street
parking. Include a shuttle bus system if needed;
Designating locations for storing construction equipment and materials;
Developing a construction plan which will ensure minimum disruption to street and
pedestrian flow and safety; and
Posting of a bond or other surety to ensure the repair of all damage to public property
resulting from construction of the project.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
19-1
ARTICLE 19.000 PROJECT REVIEW
19.10 Intent and Purpose
19.20 Project Review Special Permit
19.30 Urban Design Objectives
19.40 Advisory Development Consultation Procedures
19.50 Building and Site Plan Requirements
19.10 Intent and Purpose of Article 19.000
The intent of this Article 19.000 is to establish traffic and urban design standards for
development projects likely to have significant impact on abutting properties and the
surrounding urban environment.
To realize this intent, Article 19.000 (1) codifies the city’s urban design objectives and
establishes detailed building and site development standards to regulate new building
construction in the city’s commercial and high density residential areas, (2) establishes
standards by which significant adverse traffic impacts can be measured, and (3)
establishes procedures by which individual proposals can be reviewed by the Planning
Board, city staff and the general public before a building permit is issued.
The Building and Site Plan Requirements describe the minimally acceptable arrangement
of buildings on a lot and as they face the public environment. The Urban Design
Objectives establish more general guidelines which, along with the Traffic Impact
Indicators, can assist property owners as they consider alternate uses for their property.
Where a special permit is required from the Planning Board, the Urban Design
Objectives and Traffic Impact Indicators serve as considerations through which the
merits of a proposal are judged.
To apply the Building Requirements and Objectives effectively, procedures are
established by which public review of new construction can be undertaken. The
procedures provide an opportunity for the general public to review and comment on
significant new development projects and, where appropriate, they allow the Planning
Board, through a special permit process, to establish conditions by which new
development can be shaped to serve city urban design objectives more effectively. It is
the intent of these procedures to provide a method by which new development proposals
can be assessed at an early stage. Such assessment offers the opportunity to explore
potential modifications and refinements that would better serve the interests of both the
city and the project proponent. Similarly, potential negative impacts can be identified and
modifications explored that would reduce or eliminate them.
It is understood that nonprofit educational and religious uses and activities have special
use, building and site development requirements and characteristics. Therefore the
procedures and standards established in this Article 19.000 are designed to reflect those
special circumstances. In reviewing any development proposal of a nonprofit educational
or religious organization, the reviewing body shall apply the standards herein contained
19-2
in a reasonable manner in light of the special circumstances applicable to nonprofit
religious and educational activities.
This Article 19.000 shall apply to any new construction of a building or structure, addition
to a building or structure, or a change of use in an existing building undertaken on or after
September 15, 2000.
19.20 PROJECT REVIEW SPECIAL PERMIT
19.21 Purpose. It is the intent of this Section 19.20 to ensure that new construction or changes
of use in existing buildings (1) are consistent with the urban design objectives of the City
and (2) do not impose substantial adverse impacts on city traffic. A special permit
process is established by which the Planning Board may make such findings.
19.21.1 Purpose of Traffic Impact Review. The Planning Board shall assess the impact of the
vehicular service and passenger car traffic and pedestrian and bicycle circulation and
expected to be generated by a proposed development project. The procedures and
requirements of this Section 19.20 are intended to encourage applicants to adopt a
development program that reduces the number of single occupancy vehicles coming to
the site. Such a program would encourage pedestrian and bicycle access to the site and
throughout the neighboring district and reduce potential negative impacts on abutting
properties of the vehicles coming to the site. While the review will focus especially on
the impacts affecting abutting properties and the immediate environment, the impacts on
streets and locations more distant from the site and on transit and bus facilities serving
the site will also be assessed.
19.21.21 Purpose of Urban Design Review. The Board shall review the specific design
details of buildings and their site layout to ensure that the design of the building and its
location on the lot minimize any potential negative impact on abutting properties and on
the environment along public streets and sidewalks. Particular attention will be paid to
the design of the ground floor; the layout of service facilities including driveways, and
parking and loading facilities; the location and screening of mechanical service
equipment and waste disposal facilities; landscape amenities; and similar building and
site layout details.
19.22 Applicable Zoning Districts. The Project Review Special Permit shall apply to construction
and changes of use located in the following zoning districts.
(1) All Office, Business, and Industrial Districts, any PUD district, and NP districts, and
any Special District for which an office, business or industrial district serves as the
underlying base regulation (SD-1, SD-3, SD-5, SD-7, SD-8 and SD-11), but
excluding the MXD district.
(2) Residence C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B districts, and any Special
District for which any one of these residence districts serves as the underlying base
regulation (SD-2, SD-6, SD-12 and SD-13) and SD-14. A Project Review Special
Permit in these districts shall be required only where the construction or portion of
19-3
the construction is located within one hundred (100) feet of a public way unless the
uses proposed in the building are subject to the thresholds established in Table 1.
19.23 Special Permit Threshold. A Project Review Special Permit shall be required for new
building construction of fifty thousand (50,000) gross square feet or more, in all
applicable zoning districts [except that in a Business A, Business A-1, and Business A-2
districts a Project Review Special Permit shall be required for new building construction
of twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet or more], or for building construction of
less than fifty thousand square feet [or twenty thousand square feet in the BA, BA-1, and
BA-2 Districts] where a Table I threshold has been met, on a lot or combination of
contiguous lots held in common ownership at any time after September 15, 2000. Where
a mix of uses is proposed the threshold shall be determined by the application of the
Mixed Use Formula set forth in Table 1.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section 19.23 set forth above, the Project Review
Special Permit requirement shall not apply to existing gross floor area on a lot built and
occupied prior to the effective date of this Article 19. 000 that is demolished and
subsequently rebuilt as part of a building project, provided (1) there is no change of use,
(2) the reconstruction commences within two years of the start of demolition of the
building, and (3) the standards of Section 19.50 are met.
Where reference is made in this Section 19.23 to Gross Floor Area thresholds as set
forth in Table 1, the term shall also encompass any other measure of quantity
enumerated in the Table (e.g. dwelling units, beds, acres, parking spaces).
Table 1
Thresholds for Required Traffic Study by Land Use Type
Land Use Category Threshold
Standard Threshold: All Land Uses Set forth in Tables 4.30 and 4.56 except as 50,000 sf**
enumerated below.
Transportation Communication & Utility Uses: Section 4.32
a. Bus or railroad passenger station Required
b. Automobile parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars 150 parking
spaces
c. Railroad freight terminal, railroad yards and shops 50 acres
d. Truck or bus terminal, yard or building for storage or servicing of trucks, Required
trailers, or buses; parking lot for trucks
19-4
Institutional Uses: Section 4.56 (See also Section 4.33)
a. Religious purposes
4. Social or recreation center
5. Other use with religious purpose
c. Educational purposes
1. Preschool, day care center, kindergarten
2. Primary school
3. Secondary school
4.College or university athletic facility, auditorium, theatre, library,
museum or similar facility, any of which is customarily accessible to the
general public on a paid admission fee or other basis
5. College or university laboratory or research facility customarily
involving radioactive materials and other controlled substances, high
intensity electromagnetic radiation or chemical or biological processes
which could entail a high level of danger to the public health
6. Other college or university facility
Dining halls, canteens and similar eating areas
Administrative faculty and staff offices, teaching facilities, service
facilities, and facilities not specified above
1.The addition to or relocation of parking spaces in the inventory of institutional
parking in existence as of September 15, 2000 (see Section 6.32.2) in association
with the construction of a new building.
2. Relocation shall mean the construction of parking spaces at a new location,
where the distance between that entrance at the new location most proximate to
the closest entrance at the old location is 1,000 feet or more.
7. Vocational or other schools
e. Health Care Facilities
1. Hospital
2. Infirmary
3. Nursing home, convalescent home
4. Clinic not affiliated with any other institution
40,000 sf
40,000 sf
25,000 sf
40,000 sf
40,000 sf
Creation of 150
new parking
spaces or the
relocation of
250 existing
parking spaces
or any
combination
thereof. 1,2
40,000 sf
35,000 sf
25,000 sf
250 beds
25,000 sf
19-5
5. Clinic affiliated with a hospital or accredited university medical school 25,000 sf
6. Clinic connected to a community center 25,000 sf
7. Other health care facilities 25,000 sf
f. Social Service Facilities
1. Social service center 40,000 sf
2. Community Center 40,000 sf
g. Local Government
Fire or police station Not Required
Public parks, playgrounds or public recreation buildings 400 acres
i. Other Institutional Uses
3. Cemetery 100 acres
4. Other institutional use 40,000 sf
Office and Laboratory Uses: Section 4.34
a. Office of a physician, dentist or other medical practitioner not located in a 25,000 sf
clinic listed under Subsection 4.33(d)
e. Bank, trust company or similar financial institution 25,000 sf
Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments: Section 4.35 25,000 sf
Open Air or Drive in Retail and Service: Section 4.36
a. Sales place for flowers, garden supplies, agricultural produce conducted 25,000 sf
partly or wholly outdoors, commercial greenhouse or garden
b. Automobile oriented fast order food service establishments Required
c. Drive in bank and other retail or consumer service establishment where Required
motorist does not have to leave his car
d. Outdoor amusement park, outdoors sports facility conducted for profit 300 seats
e. Open air or drive in theatre or other open air place of entertainment 300 seats
f. Sale of new or used cars conducted partly or wholly on open lots, or rental 25,000 sf
agency for automobile, trailers, motorcycles, conducted partly or wholly
outdoors.
g. Automobile service station where no major repairs are made 5 fueling
positions
19-6
h. Car washing establishment using mechanical equipment for the purpose of Required
cleaning automobiles and other vehicles
Light Industry, Wholesale Business and Storage: Section 4.37
g. Auto body or paint shop 25,000 sf
h. Automotive repair garage not including g above 25,000 sf
** Gross Floor Area exclusive of GFA in parking facilities, except as noted.
Mixed Use Formula
Where it is proposed to include a mix of uses in a new development, or substitute a mix
of uses for an existing use in an existing building, a special permit shall not be required
under the provisions of Section 19.20 if:
(GFA ? Thresholda ) + (GFA ? Thresholdb ) + (GFA ? Thresholdc ) ? 1
Where “GFA” is the proposed Gross Floor Area (or other indicated quantity measure) for
a use denoted by a subscript and where “Threshold” is the Threshold for that use in
Table 1.
19.23.1 Change of Use in an Existing Building Threshold
19.23.11 In an existing building, the Project Review Special Permit shall be required where
the total Gross Floor Area of a new use or uses on a lot exceeds the Gross Floor Area
threshold limits set forth in Table 1 for that new use. Where the change is to a mix of
uses the threshold shall be determined by the application of the Mixed Use Formula set
forth in Table 1.
19.23.2 Incremental Changes on a Lot. Any amount of Gross Floor Area on a lot, subject to this
Article 19.000, that is less than those threshold amounts set forth in Table 1 shall be
subject to this Section 19.20 only when the sum of the following equals or exceeds the
Gross Floor Area thresholds set forth in Sections 19.23 and 19.23.1 above:
(1) The current proposal for new Gross Floor Area on the lot, plus
(2) The Gross Floor Area on the lot developed or changed in use within the
preceding five years so as to be subject to this Section 19.20 but for which a
Special Permit under this Section 19.20 was not required, plus
(3) Any Gross Floor Area on the lot for which a building permit has been issued
but which has yet to be built and occupied and for which a Special Permit
authorized by this Section 19.20 has not been issued within the preceding five
years.
After the granting of the first special permit under this Section 19.20, a subsequent
special permit shall only be required when the total of additional Gross Floor Area or new
19-7
uses exceeds the Gross Floor Area thresholds set forth in Sections 19.23 and 19.23.1
above.
19.23.3 Phased Project. Nothing in this Section 19.20 shall prohibit the Planning Board from
granting a special permit for a phased project to be built over an extended period of time,
which period shall be defined in the permit, provided sufficient information is available in
the application to permit the Board to make the findings required.
19.23.4 Special Permit Thresholds Exemptions. Construction of a new building or a change of
use that has been granted a Planning Overlay Special Permit (IPOP), under the
provisions of Section 11.500 of this Ordinance in effect from July 1, 1998 through
October 2, 2000 (Ordinance # 1209 and subsequent amendments), shall not be subject
to this Section 19.20. However, any change of use in the authorized building subsequent
to occupancy as authorized under the provisions of a Section 11.500 special permit, shall
require the issuance of a Project Review Special Permit under this Section 19.20 where
the proposed new use exceeds the relevant threshold established in Table 1.
19.24 Application Procedures. An application for the Project Review Special Permit shall be
made to the Planning Board. The Application shall consist of the following materials:
(1) Planning Board Special Permit Application Form. The application shall
include all required plans and narrative statements. The site plan and other
plans, elevations and drawings shall clearly show: (1) the access and egress
points for all forms of travel to the site, (2) the location of adjacent bus and transit
stops, (3) the schematic design of proposed mechanical equipment, and (4) the
architectural screening treatment proposed for that mechanical equipment. The
proponent shall provide perspectives of the proposed development, including
mechanical equipment, from all critical viewpoints.
(2) Traffic Study. Where the use thresholds established in Table 1 are met or
exceeded, the application shall include a traffic study with a geographic and
functional scope determined by the Traffic, Parking and Transportation
Department (TPTD) to be appropriate to the location of the project. In general,
the study shall review intersections where the project will have significant and
measurable impact. The TPTD shall issue a certification to the applicant within
twenty-one (21) days of its submission that the traffic study has been done in a
complete and reliable manner. Where that certification is denied, the applicant
may revise the information in the traffic study and resubmit it; a certification of the
revised study shall be issued or denied by the TPTD within fourteen (14) days of
the resubmission of material.
Based on guidelines established by TPTD, the traffic study shall include a
narrative discussion of (a) the nature and quantity of vehicles traveling to the site
including, in addition to passenger cars, service, delivery and other commercial
vehicles, (b) the likely impact of such vehicular traffic on abutters, abutting
streets and nearby residential streets, including on-street parking behavior, (c)
the physical nature of pedestrian and bicycle access to the site and the quantity
19-8
of movements anticipated for each, and (d) an analysis of the crash history at
intersections within the study area. The study shall identify parking and
transportation demand management measures and other mitigation measures
proposed to ameliorate any adverse traffic impacts identified in the study.
(3) Tree Study. A Tree Study, certified complete by the City Arborist, as required
by the Tree Protection Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, Chapter 8.66.
(4) Urban Design Objectives Narrative. The application shall include a narrative
description of how the proposal addresses each of the seven Urban Design
Objectives set forth in Section 19.30. In addition the applicant shall comment
specifically on the following: (a) the design and location of proposed mechanical
equipment, including HVAC equipment, as well as a strategy for possible future
expansion, if relevant, (b) location and operation of trash storage and removal
systems, (c) location and operation of loading facilities, (d) measures taken to
minimize the negative visual and noise impacts of such facilities on abutters, and
(e) the provision in the building and site design to accommodate pedestrian,
bicycle and transit access.
(5) Sewer Service Infrastructure Narrative. The application shall include a report
by the applicant detailing the anticipated impact of the project on the city’s
sanitary, stormwater, and combined sewer infrastructure. It shall indicate the
adequacy of the preliminary site plan in meeting city, state, and federal
requirements or established standards for implementation of best management
practices for stormwater management and the likely improvements to
infrastructure necessary to accommodate the impacts of the proposed project.
Where such determinations cannot be made at the time of application, the report
shall indicate what investigations must be undertaken by the applicant to make
such determination, their anticipated costs, and the schedule for their completion.
The applicant shall provide certification that this report has been submitted to the
Department of Public Works.
(6) Water Service Infrastructure Narrative. The application shall include a report
by the applicant detailing the anticipated impact of the project on the city’s water
delivery infrastructure and supply. It shall indicate the likely improvements to
infrastructure necessary to accommodate the identified impacts. Where such
determinations cannot be made at the time of application, the report shall
indicate what investigations must be undertaken by the applicant to make such
determination, their anticipated costs, and the schedule for their completion. The
applicant shall provide certification that this report has been submitted to the
Water Department.
(7) Noise Mitigation Narrative. The application shall include a report detailing
how the project shall conform to the requirements of the Cambridge Noise
Ordinance. The report shall indicate the approaches to be adopted by the
applicant in minimizing the impact of noise from the project on neighbors. When
a project consists entirely or in part of residential uses located in a mixed-use or
19-9
commercial or industrial area, the narrative shall describe how building materials,
building design, building orientation, and site layout are being used to reduce the
transmission of noise to the residences from the surrounding environment.
19.25 Review Criteria. In granting a special permit under this Section 19.20 the Planning Board
shall make the following findings.
19.25.1 Traffic Impact Findings. Where a Traffic Study is required as set forth in Section 19.24 (3)
above the Planning Board shall grant the special permit only if it finds that the project will
have no substantial adverse impact on city traffic within the study area as analyzed in the
Traffic Study. Substantial adverse impact on city traffic shall be measured by reference to
the traffic impact indicators set forth in Section 19.25.11 below.
In areas where the Planning Board determines that area-specific traffic guidelines have
been established in the Ordinance, the Board recognizes written agreements between
project proponents and the City dealing with transportation mitigation strategies.
19.25.11 Traffic Impact Indicators. In determining whether a proposal has substantial adverse
impacts on city traffic the Planning Board shall apply the following indicators. When one
or more of the indicators is exceeded, it will be indicative of potentially substantial
adverse impact on city traffic. In making its findings, however, the Planning Board shall
consider the mitigation efforts proposed, their anticipated effectiveness, and other
supplemental information that identifies circumstances or actions that will result in a
reduction in adverse traffic impacts. Such efforts and actions may include, but are not
limited to, transportation demand management plans; roadway, bicycle and pedestrian
facilities improvements; measures to reduce traffic on residential streets; and measures
undertaken to improve safety for pedestrians and vehicles, particularly at intersections
identified in the Traffic Study as having a history of high crash rates.
The indicators are: (1) Project vehicle trip generation weekdays and weekends for a
twenty-four hour period and A. M. and P.M. peak vehicle trips generated; (2) Change in
level of service at identified signalized intersections; (3) Increased volume of trips on
residential streets; (4) Increase of length of vehicle queues at identified signalized
intersections; and (5) Lack of sufficient pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The precise
numerical values that will be deemed to indicate potentially substantial adverse impact
for each of these indicators shall be adopted from time to time by the Planning Board in
consultation with the TPTD, published and made available to all applicants.
19.25.2 Urban Design Findings. The Planning Board shall grant the special permit only if it finds
that the project is consistent with the urban design objectives of the city as set forth in
Section 19.30. In making that determination the Board may be guided by or make
reference to urban design guidelines or planning reports that may have been developed
for specific areas of the city and shall apply the standards herein contained in a
reasonable manner to nonprofit religious and educational organizations in light of the
special circumstances applicable to nonprofit religious and educational activities.
19.30 Citywide Urban Design Objectives
19-10
The following urban design objectives are intended to provide guidance to property
owners and the general public as to the city’s policies with regard to the form and
character desirable for new development in the city. It is understood that application of
these principles can vary with the context of specific building proposals in ways that,
nevertheless, fully respect the policies’ intent. It is intended that proponents of projects,
and city staff, the Planning Board and the general public, where public review or approval
is required, should be open to creative variations from the detailed provisions presented
in this Section as long as the core values expressed are being served. A project need
not meet all the objectives of this Section 19.30 where this Section serves as the basis
for issuance of a special permit. Rather the permit granting authority shall find that on
balance the objectives of the city are being served. Nor shall a project subject to special
permit review be required to conform to the Required Building and Site Plan
Requirements set forth in Section 19.50.
Further indicators of conformance with these policy objectives shall be found in planning
documents and plans developed for specific areas of the city or the city as a whole, to the
extent that they are not inconsistent with the objectives set forth in this Section 19.30.
These documents include the Harvard Square Development Guidelines, the Central
Square Action Plan, the Central Square Development Guidelines, the North
Massachusetts Avenue Urban Design Guidelines Handbook, the University Park at MIT
Urban Design Guidelines, the North Point Policy Plan and Design Guidelines, the
Cambridge Institutional Growth Management Plan, the East Cambridge Riverfront Plan,
the Eastern Cambridge Plan, the Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines, the Alewife
Revitalization, Alewife Urban Design Study Phase II and its Draft update of 1991, and
Toward a Sustainable Future: Cambridge Growth Policy Document.
19.31 New projects should be responsive to the existing or anticipated pattern of development.
Indicators include:
(1) Heights and setbacks provide suitable transition to abutting or nearby residential
zoning districts that are generally developed to low scale residential uses.
(2) New buildings are designed and oriented on the lot so as to be consistent with the
established streetscape on those streets on which the project lot abuts. Streetscape is
meant to refer to the pattern of building setbacks and heights in relationship to public
streets.
(3) In mixed-use projects, uses are to be located carefully to respect the context, e.g.
retail should front onto a street, new housing should relate to any adjacent existing
residential use, etc.
(4) Where relevant, historical context are respected, e.g. special consideration should be
given to buildings on the site or neighboring buildings that are preferably preserved.
19.32 Development should be pedestrian and bicycle-friendly, with a positive relationship to its
surroundings. Indicators include:
(1) Ground floors, particularly where they face public streets, public parks, and
publicly accessible pathways, consist of spaces that are actively inhabited by
19-11
people, such as retail stores, consumer service businesses and restaurants
where they are allowed, or general office, educational or residential uses and
building lobbies. Windows and doors that normally serve such inhabited spaces
are encouraged to be a prominent aspect of the relevant building facades. Where
a mix of activities are accommodated in a building, the more active uses are
encouraged facing public streets, parks and pathways.
In commercial districts, such active space consists of retail and consumer service
stores and building lobbies that are oriented toward the street and encourage
pedestrian activity on the sidewalk. However, in all cases such ground floor
spaces should be occupied by uses (a) permitted in the zoning district within
which the building is located, (b) consistent with the general character of the
environment within which the structure is located, and (c) compatible with the
principal use for which the building is designed.
(2) Covered parking on the lower floors of a building and on-grade open parking,
particularly where located in front of a building, is discouraged where a building
faces a public street or public park, and publicly accessible pathways.
(3) Ground floors should be generally 25-50% transparent. The greatest amounts
of glass would be expected for retail uses with lesser amounts for office,
institutional or residential use.
(4) Entries to buildings are located so as to ensure safe pedestrian movement
across streets, encourage walking as a preferred mode of travel within the city
and to encourage the use of public transit for employment and other trips.
Relating building entries as directly as possible to crosswalks and to pathways
that lead to bus stops and transit stations is encouraged; siting buildings on a lot
and developing site plans that reinforce expected pedestrian pathways over the
lot and through the district is also encouraged.
(5) Pedestrians and bicyclists are able to access the site safely and conveniently;
bicyclists should have, secure storage facilities conveniently located on-site and
out of the weather. If bicycle parking is provided in a garage, special attention
must be aid to providing safe access to the facilities from the outside.
(6) Alternate means of serving this policy objective 19.32 through special building
design, siting, or site design can be anticipated where the building form or use is
distinctive such as freestanding parking structures, large institutional buildings
such as churches and auditoriums, freestanding service buildings, power plants,
athletic facilities, manufacturing plants, etc.
19.33 The building and site design should mitigate adverse environmental impacts of a
development upon its neighbors. Indicators include:
19-12
(1) Mechanical equipment that is carefully designed, well organized or visually
screened from its surroundings and is acoustically buffered from neighbors.
Consideration is given to the size, complexity and appearance of the equipment,
its proximity to residential areas, and its impact on the existing streetscape and
skyline. The extent to which screening can bring order, lessen negative visual
impacts, and enhance the overall appearance of the equipment should be taken
into account. More specifically:
(a) Reasonable attempts have been made to avoid exposing rooftop
mechanical equipment to public view from city streets. Among the
techniques that might be considered are the inclusion of screens or a
parapet around the roof of the building to shield low ducts and other
equipment on the roof from view.
(b) Treatment of the mechanical equipment (including design and massing
of screening devices as well as exposed mechanical elements) that
relates well to the overall design, massing, scale and character of the
building.
(c) Placement of mechanical equipment at locations on the site other than
on the rooftop (such as in the basement), which reduces the bulk of
elements located on the roof; however, at-grade locations external to the
building should not be viewed as desirable alternatives.
(d) Tall elements, such as chimneys and air exhaust stacks, which are
typically carried above screening devices for functioning reasons, are
carefully designed as features of the building, thus creating interest on
the skyline.
(e) All aspects of the mechanical equipment have been designed with
attention to their visual impact on adjacent areas, particularly with regard
to residential neighborhoods and views and vistas.
(2) Trash that is handled to avoid impacts (noise, odor, and visual quality) on
neighbors, e.g. the use of trash compactors or containment of all trash storage
and handling within a building is encouraged.
(3) Loading docks that are located and designed to minimize impacts (visual and
operational) on neighbors.
(4) Stormwater Best Management Practices and other measures to minimize
runoff and improve water quality are implemented.
(5) Landscaped areas and required Green Area Open Space, in addition to
serving as visual amenities, are employed to reduce the rate and volume of
stormwater runoff compared to pre-development conditions.
(6) The structure is designed and sited to minimize shadow impacts on
neighboring lots, especially shadows that would have a significant impact on the
use and enjoyment of adjacent open space and shadows that might impact the
19-13
operation of a Registered Solar Energy System as defined in Section 22.60 of
this Zoning Ordinance.
(7) Changes in grade across the lot are designed in ways that minimize the need
for structural retaining walls close to property lines.
(8) Building scale and wall treatment, including the provision of windows, are
sensitive to existing residential uses on adjacent lots.
(9) Outdoor lighting is designed to provide minimum lighting and necessary to
ensure adequate safety, night vision, and comfort, while minimizing light
pollution.
(10) The creation of a Tree Protection Plan that identifies important trees on the
site, encourages their protection, or provides for adequate replacement of trees
lost to development on the site.
19.34 Projects should not overburden the City infrastructure services, including neighborhood
roads, city water supply system, and sewer system. Indicators include:
(1) The building and site design are designed to make use of water-conserving
plumbing and minimize the amount of stormwater run-off through the use of best
management practices for stormwater management.
(2) The capacity and condition of drinking water and wastewater infrastructure
systems are shown to be adequate, or the steps necessary to bring them up to
an acceptable level are identified.
(3) Buildings are designed to use natural resources and energy resources
efficiently in construction, maintenance, and long-term operation of the building,
including supporting mechanical systems that reduce the need for mechanical
equipment generally and its location on the roof of a building specifically. The
buildings are sited on the lot to allow construction on adjacent lots to do the
same. Compliance with Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
certification standards and other evolving environmental efficiency standards is
encouraged.
19.35 New construction should reinforce and enhance the complex urban aspects of
Cambridge as it has developed historically. Indictors include:
(1) New educational institutional construction that is focused within the existing
campuses.
(2) Where institutional construction occurs in commercial areas, retail, consumer
service enterprises, and other uses that are accessible to the general public are
provided at the ground (or lower) floors of buildings. Where such uses are not
suitable for programmatic reasons, institutional uses that encourage active
pedestrian traffic to and from the site.
19-14
(3) In large, multiple-building non-institutional developments, a mix of uses,
including publicly accessible retail activity, is provided where such uses are
permitted and where the mix of uses extends the period of time the area remains
active throughout the day.
(4) Historic structures and environments are preserved.
(5) Preservation or provision of facilities for start-up companies and appropriately
scaled manufacturing activities that provide a wide diversity of employment paths
for Cambridge residents as a component of the development; however, activities
heavily dependent on trucking for supply and distribution are not encouraged.
19.36 Expansion of the inventory of housing in the city is encouraged. Indicators include:
(1) Housing is a component of any large, multiple building commercial
development. Where such development abuts residential zoning districts
substantially developed to low-scale residential uses, placement of housing
within the development such that it acts as a transition/buffer between uses
within and without the development.
(2) Where housing is constructed, providing affordable units exceeding that
mandated by the Ordinance. Targeting larger family-sized middle income units is
encouraged.
19.37 Enhancement and expansion of open space amenities in the city should be incorporated
into new development in the city. Indicators include:
(1) On large-parcel commercial developments, publicly beneficial open space is
provided.
(2) Open space facilities are designed to enhance or expand existing facilities or
to expand networks of pedestrian and bicycle movement within the vicinity of the
development.
(3) A wider range of open space activities than presently found in the abutting
area is provided.
19.40 Citywide Advisory Development Consultation Procedures
19.41 General Purpose
This Section 19.40 provides the opportunity for City staff and the general public (1) to
review and comment on development proposals prior to the formulation of final plans and
before the issuance of a building permit and (2) to determine compliance with the zoning
requirements applicable to the development. Each application for a building permit for
one of the categories of development specified in Sections 19.42 and 19.43 shall be
accompanied by a written certification from the Cambridge Community Development
Department indicating that the applicant has participated in the Development
Consultation Procedure specified in this Section 19.40, for the proposal for which the
19-15
permit is being sought. In each instance where the application for a building permit
occurs more than six (6) months after the consultation session, the Community
Development Department shall additionally certify to the Superintendent of Buildings
whether the plans submitted for a building permit are consistent with those reviewed at
the consultation session, and if not how they differ. Unless otherwise indicated elsewhere
in the Zoning Ordinance, the Community Development Department shall conduct the
consultation session. No certification pursuant to provisions of this Section 19.40 shall
be deemed to be in lieu of the responsibility of the Superintendent of Buildings to enforce
all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance - each Certificate of Compliance is advisory to the
applicant and the Superintendent of Buildings.
19.41.1 Purpose of the Small Project Review Procedure. In zoning districts designated as Areas
of Special Planning Concern, the advisory Small Project Review is intended to provide an
informal forum within which the small details of a proposal can be reviewed by city staff.
Small, incremental changes to a building, a streetscape, or a neighborhood can over time
significantly alter the character and quality of the urban environment. This procedure
provides an opportunity for city staff to influence the design of such small details in order
to encourage that the changes are consistent with city urban design objectives,
individually and as they accumulate overtime.
19.41.2 Purpose of the Large Project Review Procedure. In zoning districts designated as Areas
of Special Planning Concern, the advisory Large Project Review serves the same
purpose as the Small Project Review for somewhat larger changes in the environment
with somewhat greater impacts on the public realm. The Large Project Procedure
provides the opportunity for abutters and the general public, as well as city staff, to
review and make comment on the proposal at the consultation session.
19.42 Small Project Review Procedure
19.42.1 Applicability of Small Project Review Procedure. For those zoning districts identified in
Section 19.46 as Areas of Special Planning Concern, the following types of development
proposals shall be subject to the Small Project Development Consultation Procedure
(unless the regulations for an individual Area of Special Planning Concern provide for
specific exceptions or additional types):
(1) construction of any new building having a gross floor area of less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet;
(2) construction of any other new structure having a floor area of less than two
thousand (2,000) square feet;
(3) any exterior building alteration increasing gross floor area by one hundred
(100) square feet or more
(4) construction of five or more parking spaces, whether on grade or in a
structure;
(5) erection of a sign;
19-16
(6) any other exterior building alteration facing a street but not including painting,
brick repointing or masonry repairs, building cleaning, gutter replacement or
similar routine repair, replacement, or maintenance.
19.42.2 Application for a Small Project Review. Prior to application for a building permit, the
applicant shall contact the Community Development Department and request a
development consultation session. Upon making such a request, the applicant shall
present for review such written or graphic materials necessary to give a reasonably
complete, though not necessarily detailed, indication of the nature and scope of the
development proposal. The consultation session shall occur no later than five working
days after the request for such a consultation.
19.42.3 Conduct of the Small Project Review Consultation. In most cases the Community
Development Department staff person will complete the review and issue the certification
of the compliance with this Section 19.42 at the end of the consultation session.
However, if questions arise during the session suggesting the need for advice and
assistance of other city departments or others, the development proposal materials may
be kept for further review. However, the final staff comments and the issuance of the
Certificate of compliance shall be made within five (5) business days of the consultation
session.
The failure of the Community Development Department to hold the consultation session
or to issue the Certificate of Compliance within the review time periods specified in this
Section 19.42.3 shall not prevent an applicant for a building permit from receiving such
permit after such time period has expired. The specified review period may be extended
by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Community Development Department.
19.43 Large Project Review Procedure
19.43.1 Applicability of Large Project Review Procedure. For those zoning districts identified in
Section 19.46 as Areas of Special Planning Concern, any development proposal
involving the construction of a new building or new structure or an alteration of an
existing building or structure that increase the gross floor by two thousand (2,000) square
feet but less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet.
19.43.2 Application for a Large Project Review. Prior to application for a building permit, the
applicant shall submit the following materials to the Community Development Department
for its review. The written and graphic materials listed below shall give a reasonably
complete indication of the nature and scope of the development proposal. Each of the
following shall be submitted as appropriate to the proposal:
(1) A site plan indicating the general location and boundaries of the lot, major
anticipated changes in natural features, existing and proposed buildings, publicly
beneficial open space and/or useable beneficial open space and/or private open
space, existing and proposed curb cuts, off street parking areas, loading and
service facilities, and generalized landscaping scheme or other anticipated
treatment of open spaces.
19-17
(2) Cross section(s), generalized floor plans and other diagram(s) indicating the
anticipated locations of various land uses within the building and on the site and
major pedestrian pathways.
(3) Architectural elevations or sketches indicating anticipated facade treatment
along public ways including the proposed entrances, fenestration, and signage.
(4) A summary indicating compliance with applicable zoning requirements.
19.43.3 Conduct of the Large Project Review Consultation. Abutters and representatives of
various agencies and interest groups shall be invited to participate in a consultation
session for Large Project proposals submitted for review in accordance with Section
19.43.2. The Community Development Department shall give notification of any
scheduled development consultation to each abutting property owner and to any
individual or organization who each year files with the Community Development
Department a written request for such notification, or to any other individual or
organization the Department may wish to notify.
Within ten (10) business days of submittal of the application documents, the Department
will schedule and hold a consultation session with the applicant or his designee and any
parties listed in this Section 19.43.3. Within ten (10) days of the consultation session, the
Community Development Department shall issue to the applicant written comments on
the development proposal as expressed by City staff and others in attendance, which
shall constitute the Certificate of Compliance.
The Community Development Department may seek the advice and assistance of other
City departments and of the organizations given notice of the consultation procedure in
reviewing a development proposal.
The failure of the Community Development Department to hold the consultation session
or to issue the Certificate of Compliance within the review time period specified in this
Section 19.43.3 shall not prevent an applicant for a building permit from receiving such
permit after such time period has expired. The specified review period may be extended
by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Community Development Department.
19.43.4 Review Criteria and Required Findings of the Large Project Review Procedure. In
reviewing each application, the Community Development Department shall:
(1) Evaluate the proposal for general compliance with zoning requirements, for
consistency with City development guidelines prepared for the proposal area, for
appropriateness in terms of other planned or programmed public or private
development activities in the vicinity and for consistency with the Citywide Urban
Design Objectives set forth in Section 19.30. The Department shall consider the
proposal in terms of the specific and general impact of the use and/or
dimensions proposed therein on the area of special planning concern and on
adjacent neighborhoods and shall further take account of the following
considerations: scale, bulk, density, aesthetic qualities, land use, traffic impacts
and other functional characteristics; parking and loading; and impact on public
services and facilities.
19-18
(a) Additional Criteria in Business A-4 District Ground Floor Retail uses of
less than 2,000 square feet which will serve as an amenity for the
surrounding residential neighborhood should be included in any building
greater than 20,000 square feet.
(2) Make recommendations in a written report to the applicant including general
approval or disapproval of the proposal and in connection therewith may suggest
specific project adjustments and alterations to further the purposes of this
Ordinance.
19.44 The Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”) dated October 5, 2015, signed by Eric
Hoagland on behalf of Observatory Hill Apartments, LLC (the “LLC”), acting on behalf of
the LLC as developer of the proposed development at 253 Walden Street, identified as
Map 272, Lot 17 in the records of the City of Cambridge (the “Project”), and the
Neighborhood Review Committee (“NRC”), consisting of residents of the surrounding
community , is incorporated by reference hereto and shall be binding upon the Project as
set forth in the MOU. The issues of any building permit or certificate of occupancy for the
Project shall be conditioned upon certification by the Commissioner of Inspectional
Services that the Project is in compliance with all provisions of the aforementioned MOU.
19.45 Waiver of Procedures. Where a special permit issued by the Planning Board is required
for a proposed development, no separate Small or Large Project Review Procedure shall
be required under the provisions of this Section 19.40.
19.46 Areas of Special Planning Concern. The following zoning districts shall be considered
Areas of Special Planning Concern: Business A-1 and Business A-2 and Business A-4
Districts, the Parkway Overlay District, the Kirkland Place Overlay District, the Harvard
Square Overlay District, the Central Square Overlay District, The Cambridgeport
Revitalization Development District, the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District, Special
District 12, Special District 13, Special District 14 and the Memorial Drive Overlay District,
Prospect Street Overlay District and the Alewife Overlay Districts.
19.50 Building and Site Plan Requirements
19.51 Applicability
19.51.1 Applicable Zoning Districts. This Section 19.50 shall apply in the following zoning
districts:
(1) All Office, Business, and Industrial Districts and NP districts, and any Special
District for which an office, business or industrial district serves as the underlying
base regulation (SD-1, SD-3, SD-5, SD-7, SD-8, and SD-11).
2) Residence C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B districts, and any
Special District for which any one of these residence districts serves as the
underlying base regulation (SD-2, and SD-6) for a building or portion of a building
within one hundred (100) feet of a public street.
19-19
19.51.2 Applicable Construction. The building design and site development requirements set
forth in this Section 19.50 shall be required for the following construction projects:
(1) Any new building or structure of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gross square
feet or more.
(2) Any addition of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gross square feet or more to an
existing building or structure.
(3) Any alteration to the elements of a building of twenty-five thousand (25,000)
gross square feet or more, or any alteration of its site, that is regulated by this
Section 19.50, where the change is undertaken to accommodate a new use or
uses or where the change is to a building constructed pursuant to a building
permit certified to be in compliance with this Section 19.50 and where (a) the
alterations to accommodate the new use are proposed to the exterior of the
building, or on the lot outside the building and (b) those alterations would
increase the extent to which the building or lot’s physical configuration would
violate the requirements set forth in Section 19.50 to a greater extent than the
existing configuration.
Where applicable zoning district regulations differ from the requirements of this Section
19.50, the stricter provisions shall apply.
A project that does not comply with the requirements of this Section 19.50 shall not
receive a building permit until a Special Permit is granted by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall grant such special permit only upon finding that the project is
consistent with the Urban Design Objectives set forth in Section 19.30. Nothing in this
Section 19.50 shall prevent an applicant, not wishing to conform to the requirements of
this Section 19.50, from directly seeking a special permit from the Planning Board subject
to consistency with Section 19.30.
Any application for a Building Permit for development subject to this Section 19.50 shall
be accompanied by a Tree Study, certified complete by the City Arborist, as required by
the Tree Protection Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, Chapter 8.66.
19.52 Heights and Setbacks. The provisions of this Section 19.52 shall not apply to Special
District 8.
(1) For development on a lot abutting a lot in a residential zoning district having a
more restrictive height limit, the cornice line of the principal wall plane facing the
residential zoning district line shall not exceed by more than twenty (20) feet at
any point the maximum height permitted in the residential zoning district. Any
portion of the building rising above the cornice line shall be located below a fortyfive
(45) degree bulk control plane starting at ground level at the zoning district
line, subject to the following provisions.
(a) Where the zoning district line lies within a lot, the bulk control plane
shall begin at the lot line in the residential zoning district that divides the
19-20
subject lot (including any intervening lots held in identical ownership but
not part of the development lot and such lots located across the street)
from another lot in different ownership.
(b) Where the zoning district line occurs within a public street, the
provisions of this Section 19.52 shall apply but the bulk control plane
shall be measured from the centerline of the street regardless of the
location of the zoning district line.
(2) For development on a lot abutting a residential zoning district having more
restrictive yard requirements, the yard requirements of the residential district
shall apply to any portion of the development rising above the bulk control plane
set forth in Paragraph (1) above. As in (1) above, where the zoning district line
lies within a lot, the bulk control plane shall begin at the lot line in the residential
zoning district that divides the subject lot (including any intervening lots held in
identical ownership but not part of the development lot) from another lot in
different ownership. This Paragraph (2) shall not apply where the zoning district
line lies within or across a street.
19.53 Location of Uses
(1) In mixed-use developments containing a residential component (Section 4.31
– Residential uses, excluding Hotel and Motel use), the housing shall be located
on the lot adjacent to existing residential uses located on abutting lots or across
a street or shall be located adjacent to an existing abutting residential zoning
district, including a district located across a street.
(2) In mixed-use developments containing a retail component (Section 4.35 –
Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments), at least fifty (50)
percent of the area devoted to retail uses shall be located fronting onto at least
one of the public streets abutting the development. However, in multiple building
developments where internal private streets open to the general public are
created, retail uses may located on those private streets shall be deemed to
meet the requirements of this Paragraph (2).
19.54 Historic Resources. No building permit pursuant to a Certificate of Compliance issued for
a project subject to this Section 19.50 shall be issued until at least one of the following
events has occurred:
(1) The project has received, where applicable, a Certificate of Appropriateness,
Hardship, or non-applicability from the Cambridge Historical Commission under
the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40C and/or Chapter 2.78, Articles I or III,
Cambridge city Ordinances, or from a Neighborhood Conservation District
Commission under Chapter 2.78, Article III.
19-21
(2) Where a building on the site has been determined by the Cambridge
Historical Commission to be a Preferably Preserved Significant Building under
the provisions of Chapter 2.78, Article II, Cambridge City Ordinances, or the six
month demolition delay period has expired.
19.55 Landscaping
(1) The area between the principal wall plane of a building and a public street or
public park, whether required or provided, shall be devoted to Green Area (as
defined in Article 2.000), expansion of the adjacent public sidewalk, park area, or
other landscaped area or paved pedestrian area and extending along the entire
length of the lot facing the street or park. Areas devoted to motor vehicular use
are prohibited from this area with the exception of access drives providing direct
access to parking and service facilities located elsewhere on the site and which
shall be limited to a total of thirty (30) feet of width for any individual driveway for
each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage.
Where the front lot width is greater than three hundred (300) feet the provisions
of this Paragraph shall only apply to that portion of the front yard extending
beyond the side facades of the building, parallel to the front lot line or parallel to
the adjacent park lot line, equal in length to the side yard setback(s) that would
otherwise be required for the building in the district within which it is located.
(2) The green area required in Paragraph (1) above shall initially be located at
the mean grade of the relevant public street or open space at the property line.
Beyond that point, a change in grade that can be maintained permanently
without structural support shall be permitted.
19.56 Pedestrian Environment. The portion of the ground floor of a building (defined as the first
floor of a building located either at mean grade or no more than four feet above the mean
grade of the building) and the floors above that face and are within one hundred (100)
feet of a public street or directly abuts and is within one hundred (100) feet of a public
park shall consist of space routinely occupied by people throughout normal business
hours engaged in those activities for which the building is principally intended to
accommodate, including, but not limited to, retail stores sales areas; consumer service
businesses; general, professional and agency offices; institutional offices, classrooms
and dormitories; building lobbies, residential units, manufacturing and research and
development activities, etc. (but excluding specifically parking and loading facilities),
subject to the following requirements.
(1) The actively used area shall have a depth of at least 20 feet, or the depth of
the building if less.
(2) The facades shall consist of a minimum twenty-five (25) percent clear glass in
total for the façade and at the ground floor subject to the following further
provisions.
19-22
(a) At the ground floor; the minimum amount of clear glass shall be
increased to fifty (50) percent of the area of the façade of the ground
floor where retail and office uses are established (Section 4.34 – Office
and Laboratory Uses, Paragraphs a-e, and Section 4.35 – Retail
Business and Consumer Service Establishments). For purposes of this
Section 19.56, the area of the façade of any given floor shall be
measured vertically from the finished interior floor to the underside of the
structural joists of the floor above.
(b) Where residential and dormitory uses are established, the minimum
area of clear glass shall be reduced to twenty (20) percent of the entire
façade, with no minimum requirement on the first floor.
(c) No minimum requirement shall be imposed for Theaters (Section 4.35
h), Place of worship [Section 4.56 a (1)], College or university athletic
facility, auditorium, and theater facility [Section 4.56 c (4)], Fire and
police stations [Section 4.56 g (2)], Municipal service facility [4.56 g (4)],
Museum [4.56 g (3)], and Transformer station, substation [Section 4.32 g
(2)].
(3) Where retail uses are established, each separately leased space shall have
an individual public entrance onto the abutting street where any portion of the
space fronts towards the street;
(4) At least one building entrance shall front on a street where the building abuts
a street.
Where a freestanding parking garage is established, the requirements of this
Section19.55 shall apply only to the ground floor of the structure. Exempt from this
requirement shall be one two-way access drive to accessory parking located elsewhere
on the lot and the area necessary to meet the minimum zoning required for loading
facilities provided that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total length of any one
façade is occupied by all such facilities.
19.57 Parking. On-grade surface parking shall not be placed in front of the principal front wall
plane of a building, extended across the entire width of a lot, unless the parking is
screened from view from the public street by other buildings. Where the lot width at the
Principal Front Wall Plane of the building is greater than 300 feet, the provisions of this
paragraph shall only apply to that portion of the front yard extending beyond the side
facades of the building, parallel to the front lot line, equal in length to the side yard
setback(s) that would otherwise be required for the building in the district within which it
is located.
Where a lot abuts more than two streets, the provisions of this Section 19.57 shall apply
to no more than two streets.
19.58 Mechanical Equipment, Refuse Storage, and Loading Areas. All mechanical equipment,
refuse storage, or loading areas serving the building or its occupants that are (1) carried
19-23
above the roof, (2) located at the exterior building wall or (3) located outside the building,
shall meet the requirements listed below. Mechanical equipment includes, but is not
limited to, ventilation equipment including exhaust fans and ducts, air conditioning
equipment, elevator bulkheads, heat exchangers, transformers and any other equipment
that, when in operation, potentially creates a noise detectable off the lot. The equipment
and other facilities:
(1) Shall not be located within any required setback. Where no setback is
required, it shall not be located closer than 10 feet to any property line or it shall
be entirely contained within the building. This Paragraph (1) shall not apply to
electrical equipment whose location is mandated by a recognized public utility.
(2) When on the ground, shall be permanently screened from view from adjacent
public streets that are within 100 feet of the building, or from the view from
abutting property in separate ownership at the property line. The screening shall
consist of densely planted shrubs or trees equal or greater in height at the time of
installation than the equipment or facilities to be screened, or a fence of equal or
greater height that is comparable in quality to the materials used on the principal
facades of the building, with no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the face of
the fence open.
When carried above the roof, shall be permanently screened from view, from the
ground, from adjacent public streets and any abutting residentially used lot or lots
in a residential zoning district. The screening shall be at least 50% opaque,
uniformly distributed across the screening surface.
(3) Shall be designed to meet all city, state and federal noise regulations, as
applicable, as certified by a professional acoustical engineer if the Department of
Inspectional Services deems such certification necessary.
(4) That handle trash and other waste, shall be contained within the building or
screened as required in this Section 19.58 until properly disposed of.
19.59 Open Space. At least 15% of the lot shall consist of any combination of Green Area or
Permeable Open Space as defined in Article 2.000. This requirement may be met on a
lot held in the same ownership, provided the Open Space is located within 300 feet of the
development lot and does not serve to meet the requirement of this Section 19.59 for any
other development.
19.510 Green Building Requirements. The requirements of Section 22.20 of this Zoning
Ordinance shall be met.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
20-1
ARTICLE 20.000 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
20.10 TRANSITION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
20.11 HAMMOND AND GORHAM STREETS TRANSITION
OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.12 KIRKLAND PLACE TRANSITION OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.20 MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT (MXR)
20.30 moved to Article 21.20
20.40 EASTERN CAMBRIDGE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
(ECHO)
20.50 HARVARD SQUARE OVERLAY DISTRICT and
HARVARD SQUARE HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.60 PARKWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.70 FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.80 MEMORIAL DRIVE OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.90 ALEWIFE OVERLAY DISTRICTS 1-6
20.100 NORTH MASSACHUSETTS AVENUE OVERLAY
DISTRICT
20.200 PROSPECT STREET OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.300 CENTRAL SQUARE OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.400 PATHWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.500 PORTER SQUARE OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.600 BASEMENT HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.700 deleted (see Section 11.800)
20.800 CAMBRIDGE HIGHLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT
[Note: Institutional Overlay Districts are located in Section 4.50 of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Eastern Cambridge Development Rights Transfer Districts are located in Article 21.000]
20.10 TRANSITION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
These overlay districts are intended to apply special dimensional, use, and other
standards to development in areas where abutting zoning districts have significantly
different character in one or more use or dimensional aspects. It is intended that the
provisions of the overlay district will modify the form, location, and use of buildings
such that the use of land in each district will not be unreasonably negatively impacted
by the use of land in the adjoining district. The requirements of each overlay district
shall apply in addition to the requirements of the pertinent base zoning district; where
the base zoning regulations differ from the requirements of the overlay district, the
requirements of the overlay district shall apply.
20.11 Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District
20.11.1 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Hammond and Gorham
Streets Transition Overlay District, which shall be governed by the regulations and
20-2
procedures specified in this Section 20.11. These regulations are intended to provide
a transition between the character and scale of development existing and permitted in
the abutting Residence C-1 district and the institutional development existing and
permitted in the base Residence C-3 district. It is the intent of this Section that these
regulations shall apply to a single area located at the southerly edge of Hammond
Street and Gorham Street, which shall be designated as the “Hammond and Gorham
Streets Transition Overlay District” on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge
established in Section 3.20, and shall be an area as bounded and described in
Section 20.11.2 below.
20.11.2 Boundaries of the District.
The boundaries of the district shall be as described below.
a. Southerly, southwesterly, and southeasterly, by a line that is 100 feet distant from
and parallel to the southerly and southwesterly centerlines of Hammond, Gorham,
and Museum Streets, said line making an arc with a radius of 100 feet as it follows
the intersection of Gorham and Museum Streets;
b. Easterly, by the existing boundary lines between the Residence C-3 zoning district
and the Residence A-2 zoning district;
c. Northerly, by the centerlines of Hammond, Gorham, and Museum Streets; and
d. Westerly, by the easterly sideline of Oxford Street and its extension northerly to
the centerline of Hammond Street.
Affecting lots or portions of lots numbered 2 and 44, as shown on Assessors Plat
#148, and lot 41 on Assessors Plat #147.
20.11.3 Applicability. Divergence from the standards established in this Section 20.11 shall be
allowed only by issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board as specified in
Section 10.45. The Planning Board shall grant such permit upon its determination that
the development proposed will better serve the objectives of this Section 20.11 and
that the criteria specified in Section 10.43 will be satisfied. The Planning Board may
not waive the requirements of the base Residence C-3 district.
20.11.4 Review Process. The Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District shall
be considered an area of special planning concern. Development proposals listed in
Sections 19.42 and 19.43 shall be subject to the Development Consultation Procedure
specified in those Sections.
20.11.5 Dimensional Standards
20.11.51 Maximum Height. The maximum height of a building shall be thirty-five feet. However,
a building may exceed thirty-five feet in height provided all portions of the building
above thirty-five feet in height are located beneath one or more roofs that are visible
from Hammond, Gorham, Museum or Oxford Streets, that meet the following
requirements:
(a) The slope of the roof or roofs shall be at least 30 degrees, as measured from
the vertical plane.
20-3
(b) The centerline of the sloped roof, being the average distance between the
thirty-five foot height and the top of the sloped roof, shall not exceed forty-five
feet.
(c) Notwithstanding the above provisions (a) and (b), portions of a building in the
Overlay District that are not visible at pedestrian height from Hammond, Gorham,
or Museum Streets may exceed thirty-five (35) feet (whether or not they are
located under a sloped roof) if they meet the following requirements:
(i) The portions of the building above thirty-five (35) feet are located between
one or more sloping roofs that meet the requirements of Paragraphs (a) and
(b) above.
(ii) The building height does not exceed the height of the top of any abutting
sloped roof.
20.11.52 Minimum Yard Requirement. The minimum front yard at Hammond, Museum, and
Gorham Streets shall be fifteen feet, as measured from the street line.
20.11.53 Relocated Buildings. Existing structures may be relocated into the Hammond and
Gorham Streets Transitional Overlay District. Such structures shall comply with all
provisions of this Section 20.11. However, as set forth below, variations from the
requirements of this Section 20.11 shall be permitted for those relocated buildings
meeting the following standards.
(a) The structure is at least fifty years old and consists of wood framed
construction;
(b) The height above grade of the structure does not exceed by more than ten
percent the maximum height specified in Section 20.11.51;
(c) The structure is not wider than fifty feet (measured along a line parallel to the
street line on whichever of Hammond Street, Gorham Street, or Museum Street
that the structure faces) ; and
(d) The structure does not exceed by more than 10% any of the other
dimensional regulations specified in Section 20.11.6.
20.11.6 Special Provisions
20.11.61 Special Dimensional Limitations. A number of special dimensional requirements shall
be imposed on buildings in the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay
District to ensure compatibility of future institutional building and site design with the
residential scale of development across these streets. These requirements are subject
to the following definitions.
Overlay Design Building Width. A width above grade no greater than forty-five feet
measured at the widest point through the building along a line that (i) is parallel to the
sideline of the street and that (ii) extends from the two most extreme points on
opposite sides of the relevant portion of the building (excluding from that measurement
any Permitted Projections).
20-4
Overlay Design Front Yard. A front yard that is a minimum of fifty feet measured from
the streetline and required of all buildings in the Transition Overlay District except as
may otherwise be provided in this Section 20.11.61.
Permitted Projections. (i) Trellises, pergolas, arbors, unenclosed steps, and unroofed
porches that do not extend more than ten feet beyond the foundation wall, and (ii) bay
windows that do not extend beyond 3.5 feet, cornices, projecting eaves, patios,
chimneys, balconies, open fire escapes, and like projections with dimensions that do
not exceed four feet beyond the line of the foundation wall.
The following requirements and limitations apply to all buildings in the Transition
Overlay District.
(a) A single building or a portion of a building located in the Hammond and
Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District facing Hammond, Gorham, or
Museum Streets, that is proposed to have a width above grade no greater than
the Overlay Design Building Width, may extend into the Overlay Design Front
Yard but may not extend into the minimum front yard; however Permitted
Projections (other than open fire escapes) may extend into the minimum front
yard.
(b) Where more than one portion (excluding any Permitted Projections) of a
building, each of which portions (i) is proposed to have a width above grade no
greater than the Overlay Design Building Width, and (ii) is proposed to be located
in the Overlay Design Front Yard, there shall be at least a minimum of thirty feet
distance, measured parallel to the street, between any two said portions
(excluding Permitted Projections) of such building that are located in the Overlay
Design Front Yard. Permitted Projections are allowed in the courtyard area
existing between the portions of the building.
(c) The minimum distance between buildings (excluding Permitted Projections)
above grade shall be as set forth in Section 5.13 but not less than twenty-five
feet, except that where such area is to be used as a pedestrian access in
conformity with Section 20.11.62 (c) below, the minimum distance shall be thirty
feet. There shall be at least three strips of land no less than twenty-five feet in
width that extend uninterrupted by any building or portion of a building from
Hammond, Gorham, or Museum Streets to the southern boundary of the
Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District. Such land may be
used for permitted driveways, pedestrian walkways, green area, or landscaped
area. In each instance where a building permit for construction of a new building
or construction beyond the existing footprint of a building is sought from the
Inspectional Services Department for a building within the Transition Overlay
District, a map at a minimum scale of 1” = 50’ shall be included in the set of
building plans showing any existing, proposed, or potential locations for the open
areas required in this Paragraph (c) and the pedestrian access required in
Section 20.11.62 (c) below.
20-5
(d) The portions of the buildings located below ground are ignored when
applying the dimensional limitations in this Section 20.11.61. Underground
parking in the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District is
permitted. Buildings in the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay
District that are not connected at and above ground shall be deemed separate
buildings, even if an underground garage connects one or more of them below
ground. If permitted by governmental regulations and codes, the air exhaust and
intake vents shall be oriented so as not to be pointed toward the area north of
Hammond Street.
(e) The HVAC equipment and exhaust or intake vents that are located in and
are serving the buildings or underground garages in the Hammond and Gorham
Streets Transitional Overlay District shall be designed or screened so that they
are not visible to a pedestrian standing in the public way of Hammond or Gorham
Streets, and so that they comply with governmental laws regulating noise. Such
equipment not serving a building within the Overlay District shall not be located
within the district.
(f) The buildings built in the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay
District shall have at least one entrance facing Gorham or Hammond Streets.
Nevertheless, the building may also have one or more additional entrances
facing elsewhere that are actually the principal or functioning entrances serving
the building.
20.11.62 Pedestrian and Vehicle Access and Accessory Parking.
(a) Vehicular Access. Within the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay
District, no curb cut shall be permitted that provides access to accessory or nonaccessory
parking and loading facilities within the Hammond Street Transition Overlay
District or to such facilities lying outside the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition
Overlay District. However, such curb cuts shall be permitted to provide access for
emergency vehicles and to satisfy the requirements of the Americans with Disability
Act (“ADA”) or the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (“MAAB”), including the
provision of parking facilities needed to meet accessibility requirements.
(b) Permitted Parking and Loading. Within the Hammond and Gorham Streets
Transition Overlay District, any on-grade accessory loading facilities shall serve only
the buildings within the District, and only parking spaces for emergency vehicles and
to meet ADA and MAAB requirements shall be permitted. Underground parking
garages and underground loading facilities that are accessory to an institutional use
are permitted in the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District if the
vehicular access to the garage is from south of the Hammond and Gorham Streets
Transition Overlay District.
(c) Pedestrian Access. At least two pedestrian walkways not obstructed by buildings
shall be maintained within the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay
District that connect Hammond or Gorham Streets with portions of the Residence C-3
district located south of and outside of the Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition
20-6
Overlay District. Such walkways may traverse the strips of land identified in Section
20.11.61 (c), or may be separate pathways.
20.11.7 Applicability of Section 19.50 – Building and Site Plan Requirements.
The requirements of Section 19.50 shall not apply to any construction within the
Hammond and Gorham Streets Transition Overlay District.
20.12 Kirkland Place Transition Overlay District
20.12.1 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Kirkland Place Transition
Overlay District which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified
in this Section 11.400. These regulations are intended to provide a transition between
the character and scale of the abutting A-2 residential district and the development
options possible in the base Residence C-3 zone. It is the intent of this Section that
these regulations will apply to a single area located at the westerly edge of Kirkland
Place, north of Kirkland Street and bounded and described as follows:
Amend the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge by designating on the map as
the Kirkland Place Overlay District that area bounded and described below:
Beginning at a point, said point being the intersection of the westerly side line of
Kirkland Place and a line 135 feet distant from and parallel to the northerly street
line of Kirkland Street. Thence running westerly 90 feet to a point, said point
being the intersection of a line 135 feet distant from and parallel to the northerly
street line of Kirkland Place 402 feet to a point, said point being the intersection
of a line 90 feet distant from and parallel to the westerly street line of Kirkland
Place and the northerly lot line of lot numbered 45 as shown on Assessor's Plat
numbered 145. Thence turning and proceeding easterly along said northerly lot
line to the northeasterly corner of said lot numbered 45. Thence turning and
running southerly along the easterly lot line of lot numbered 45 to the intersection
of the lot line and the circular part of Kirkland Place. Thence turning and
proceeding southwesterly along the circular part of the westerly street line of
Kirkland Place approximately 62.69 feet. Thence turning and running southerly
along the western street line of Kirkland Place for a distance of approximately
327 feet, to the point of origin.
The affected premises: odd numbers 3-13 Kirkland Place, all or portions of lots
numbered 21, 37, 38, 39, and 45 as shown on Assessor's Plat numbered 145.
20.12.2 General Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.12 to augment the existing
zoning regulations to respond to the unique problems and pressures for change
particular to the Kirkland Place area. These regulations are intended to encourage
retention of buildings of historic value and enhance the established streetscape; to
maintain the visual character and open space patterns; and to provide sufficient
regulatory flexibility to advance the general purposes of this Section 20.12.2.
20.12.3 Applicability. The Kirkland Place Transition Overlay District shall be an overlay district
on the zoning map established by Section 3.20.
20-7
The buildings and land uses within said district shall be controlled by the pertinent
regulations within the base zoning district, except as modified by the requirements of
Section 20.12 which shall apply in addition to regulations imposed by the base zoning
map designation. Where the base zoning regulations differ from requirements of this
Section 20.12, the requirements of this Section shall apply. Divergence from the
standards established in this Section may be allowed only by issuance for a Special
Permit by the Planning Board as specified in Section 10.45. The Board may grant
such a permit upon its determination that the development proposed will better serve
the objectives of this Section 20.12 and that the criteria specified in Section 10.43 will
be satisfied.
20.12.4 The Kirkland Place Transition Overlay District shall be considered an area of special
planning concern.
Development proposals listed in Subsection 19.42 and 19.43, Development
Consultation Procedures, shall be subject to the Development Consultation Procedure
specified in Section 19.40.
20.12.5 Use Regulations. Use regulations of the Residence C-3 zoning designation shall
apply in the Kirkland Place Transition Overlay District.
20.12.6 Dimensional Standards in the Kirkland Place Transition Overlay District
20.12.61 Floor Area Ratio. The above ground floor area ratio shall be the same as in the A-2
zoning district. The overall floor area ratio in the Transition Overlay District shall be
3.0. Any floor area created in excess of .5 must be completely below grade.
20.12.62 Maximum Height. The maximum height in the Transition Overlay District shall be 35
feet.
20.12.63 Setbacks. Building setbacks in the Transition Overlay District shall be the same as in
the Residence A-2 zoning district.
20.12.64 Private open space. Open space requirements in the Transition Overlay District shall
be the same as in the Residence A-2 zoning district.
20.12.65 Nonconforming structures. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.23, that
portion of a legal nonconforming structure lying within the Kirkland Place Transition
Overlay District which is destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion or other catastrophe
may be rebuilt or restored and used again in the same way as it had been legally used
immediately before the damage, without limit as to cost of such rebuilding or restoring
provided the following conditions are met:
(a) any restoration or rebuilding shall commence within twelve (12) months after
the catastrophe; and
(b) the structure shall be restored or rebuilt to the same design, Including
materials and design details as existed previously; or should the restoration not
be feasible necessitating that the structure be rebuilt to a different design, said
design shall be at least equal to the origin design of the structure in quality of
20-8
materials used, the quantity and quality of design details employed, and the
compatibility of the site design with abutting properties;
(c) the Community Development Department shall certify to the Superintendent
of Buildings that the above conditions have been met.
Should the Community Development Department find that said conditions have
not been met, the restoring or rebuilding shall require a special permit from the
Board of Zoning Appeal.
The restored or rebuilt structure shall in no respect increase the nonconforming
nature of the original structure; nothing in this Section, however, shall prohibit a
rebuilding or restoring which reduces the nonconforming nature of the original
structure.
20.20 MIXED USE RESIDENTIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT (MXR)
20.21 Establishment and Purpose. There is hereby established the Mixed Use Residential
Overlay District as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge, as amended. It
is the intent of this Overlay District to modify base residential district regulations,
where a substantial inventory of non-residential uses already exists, such that: (1)
existing non residential activities, compatible with existing and future residential
construction, may continue, (2) retail and consumer service uses that might serve as
support for existing or future residential construction are permitted, and (3) future
residential construction on suitable sites is not inhibited. The Overlay District is
intended to facilitate a mixed use environment supportive of housing construction
within the district in the future while permitting existing non residential activities to
operate and adjust to changing circumstances through limited expansion in built area
in ways that will not negatively impact residential activities.
20.22 Permitted Non-Residential Uses and New Construction. A use not otherwise
permitted in the base residential district may be permitted in the Mixed Use Residential
Overlay District where such use is allowed or conditionally allowed in the Industry A-1
district, subject to the following conditions and limitations and the procedures
established in Section 20.24 below.
a. The use does not replace an existing residential use or, if the lot or area of a
building proposed to be the location a non-residential use is vacant, no residential
use had been established at any time in the previous five years.
b. Retail uses, Sections 4.35 and 4.36, shall only be permitted on the first floor
and basement of a building, shall be located in a building containing other uses,
and may not exceed more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of
the building in which they are located, or alternately no more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the total area of a development proposal or any combination of existing
and proposed buildings if so permitted by the Planning Board. No individual retail
establishment may exceed 2500 gross square feet in area unless specifically
permitted by the Planning Board.
20-9
c. Transportation, communication and utility uses, Section 4.32; Office and
Laboratory Uses, Section 4.34; Light industry, wholesale business or storage
uses, Section 4.37; or Heavy industry uses, Section 4.38 may be permitted in an
existing building, or as an addition to an existing building or as new construction
on a vacant lot provided the additional gross floor area is to serve uses or
operations already in existence in the district.
d. Parking lot or parking garage for private passenger cars, Section 4.32 b shall
be prohibited.
20.23 Dimensional Limitations. The Gross Floor Area for any non-residential use or
combination of non-residential uses on a lot shall be limited by the FAR set forth below
for the applicable residential base district.
a. Residence C: 0.6
b. Residence C-1: 0.75
c. Residence C-1A: 1.0
d. Residence C-2: 1.25
e. Residence C-2B: 1.25
f. Residence C-2A: 1.5
g. Residence C-3: 2.0
h. Residence C-3B: 2.0
All other dimensional requirements of the residential district shall continue to apply.
20.24 Procedures.
20.24.1 Changes Permitted As-of-Right.
Any structure existing or authorized by permit as of September 15, 2000, which
contains a non-residential use not permitted in the residential base district, may be
expanded in area to accommodate the existing use in an amount not to exceed, in
total for all additions, 15% of the existing Gross Floor Area of the building. In no case,
however, may the FAR on the lot after said addition or additions exceed that set forth
in Section 20.23 above.
20.24.2 Changes Permitted by Special Permit
All other changes of use, additions to existing buildings, or construction of new
buildings permitted in Section 20.22 above, and otherwise not permitted to proceed
as-of-right as set forth in Section 20.24.1 above, shall require the granting of a special
permit from the Planning Board
20.25 Criteria for Issuance of a Special Permit. Designation of the base residential zoning
district expresses the policy objective of the City of Cambridge that new construction in
the district should principally be for residential use, or for other uses permitted in the
residential base district. However, recognizing the present land use character of the
area, this Mixed Use Residential Overlay District provides flexibility such that existing
non-residential uses may continue to operate without unreasonable regulatory
20-10
impediment provided they do not now or will not in the future hinder the expansion or
introduction of residential uses to the district. Therefore, in granting a special permit
under this Section 20.20, the Planning Board shall take into consideration the following
and make appropriate findings related thereto:
1. The proposed new use or expansion of an existing use will contribute to a physical
and use environment that is supportive of residential uses, as for example the
introduction of ancillary retail and consumer services;
2. In its operations, scale, building design and location on the lot, the proposed use
or new constriction will not significantly impair the health, safety and welfare of
current residential occupants of the district or impair the prospects for construction
of new residential uses on adjacent lots or within the district, or alternately will
positively contribute to the health, safety and welfare of residents in the district;
3. In its design, the new construction could be reasonably converted to residential
use in the future;
4. Where it is proposed to construct a building on a vacant lot or where it is proposed
to expand an existing facility not used for residential purposes by more than fifteen
(15) percent of its existing gross floor area, the lot is not suitable for residential
use as indicated by its location and surrounding uses. Where the lot may be
suitable for residential use, the proposed construction is to serve an existing
operation or enterprise now in the district. That operation or enterprise shall be
found to be an important contributor to the Cambridge economy, through the
provision of employment, the generation of new ideas, products or processes, and
through the potential to expand and grow elsewhere in the city in areas intended
for non-residential development;
5. Special attention is paid in the design and layout of the new construction to
mitigate or prevent negative impacts on present and future residential uses,
including among other measures screening of mechanical equipment for visual or
acoustical reasons, location of refuse management systems within the structure,
and the location of loading and service delivery systems in the least obtrusive
areas of the lot.
20.30 Deleted
20.40 EASTERN CAMBRIDGE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.41 Purpose. It is the intent of this Section 20.40 to provide an incentive for residential
development within the designated ECHO district as an extension of the existing
residential neighborhood and to permit housing to be developed in combination with
other uses permitted on a lot where a mix of uses is desirable. It is the intent of this
Section 20.40 to provide an incentive through additional development potential to
convert a lot devoted to non-residential uses to residential use.
20-11
20.42 Applicability. The ECHO District shall be an overlay district on the zoning map
established in Section 3.20. Buildings and land uses shall be controlled by the
pertinent regulations within the applicable base zoning districts and any other
regulations that may apply in the City of Cambridge Zoning Ordinance, including
Section 5.30.12, except as modified by the provisions of this Section 20.40. Except as
modified by the provisions of this Section 20.40, the base district regulations shall
apply. Where reference is made in this Section 20.40 to residential uses, it shall mean
residential uses as set forth in Section 4.31 a-h.
20.43 Residential Development Density. The maximum permitted FAR for all residential
uses shall be twice the non-residential FAR permitted in the underlying base zoning
district, except that for those areas whose underlying base zoning district is Residence
C-1 the FAR shall be 0.75. For all areas within the ECHO District, the permitted
number of dwelling units on a lot shall be that permitted in the base zoning district.
However, where the proposed development has a residential FAR of at least 2.0 the
permitted number of dwelling units may be increased but shall not exceed one
dwelling unit for every 300 square feet of total lot area.
20.44 Maximum Height of Buildings and Maximum Permitted Non-Residential FAR. The
following limitations as to height of buildings shall only apply to new buildings or
additions to existing buildings. The permitted heights are set forth on the Eastern
Cambridge Housing Overlay District Height Limitation Map, Map 20.41. The permitted
heights are further described below. Where the maximum height permitted in this
Section 20.44 is thirty-five feet, it shall apply to all uses permitted in the applicable
base-zoning district. Where the height permitted is greater than forty-five feet, it shall
apply only to permitted residential uses. For any location not appearing on Map 20.41
or described below, the permitted heights shall be those permitted in the base zoning
district. The FAR set forth below shall apply to non-residential uses. Where no FAR is
indicated the non-residential FAR shall be that permitted in the applicable base zoning
district.
20.44.1 Maximum Height and Non-Residential FAR in that area between the centerline of
Fulkerson Street and the centerline of Third Street.
1. Height of thirty-five (35) feet: from the centerline of Charles Street to a line one
hundred (100) feet distant from and parallel to the southerly sideline of Charles
Street, which is approximately the mid block between Charles and Bent Street.
2. Height of forty-five (45) feet: from the mid block between Charles and Bent Streets
described in (1) above to a line one hundred (100) feet distant from and parallel to
the southerly sideline of Bent Street, which is approximately the mid block
between Bent Street and Rogers Street. Non-residential FAR of 1.50.
3. Height of fifty-five (55) feet: from the mid block between Bent Street and Rogers
Street described in (2) above to a line one hundred (100) feet distant from and
parallel to the southerly sideline of Rogers Street, which is approximately the mid
block between Rogers Street and Binney Street. Non-residential FAR of 1.75.
20-12
4. Height of sixty-five (65) feet: from the mid block of Rogers Street and Binney
Street described in (3) above to the centerline of Binney Street. Non-residential
FAR of 2.0.
20.44.11 Maximum Height in that area between the centerline of Third Street and the centerline
of Second Street.
1. Thirty-five (35) feet: from the centerline of Charles Street to a line one hundred
(100) feet distant from and parallel to the southerly sideline of Charles Street,
which is approximately the mid block between Charles and Bent Street.
2. Forty-five (45) feet: from the mid block between Charles and Bent Streets
described in (1) above to a line one hundred (100) feet distant from and parallel to
the southerly sideline of Bent Street, which is approximately the mid block
between Bent Street and Rogers Street.
3. Fifty-five (55) feet: from the mid block between Bent Street and Rogers Street
described in (2) above to a line one hundred (100) feet distant from and parallel to
the southerly sideline of Rogers Street, which is approximately the mid block
between Rogers Street and Binney Street.
4. Sixty-five (65) feet: from the mid block of Rogers Street and Binney Street
described in (3) above to the centerline of Binney Street.
20.44.2 Maximum Height in that area between the centerline of Fulkerson Street and the
centerline of the of the railroad right-of-way.
1. Thirty-five (35) feet: extension of the area described in Section 20.43.1, Paragraph
(1) above westerly from the centerline of Fulkerson Street to the centerline of the
railroad right of way.
2. Sixty-five (65) feet: from the centerline of Binney Street and the centerline of the
railroad right-of-way to a line 100 feet distant from the northerly sideline of Binney
Street and 100 feet from the northwesterly sideline of Fulkerson Street to the
areas intersection with the area described in Paragraph (1) above.
3. Forty-five (45) feet: extension of the area described in 20.43.1, paragraph (2),
above to its intersection with the northeasterly sideline of the area described in
Paragraph (2) of this Section 20.43.2
4. Fifty-five(55) feet: extension of the area described in 20.43.1, paragraph (3),
above to its intersection with the northeasterly sideline of the area described in
Paragraph (2) of this Section 20.43.2
20.44.3 Maximum Height in that area between the centerline of the railroad right-of way and
the centerline of Cardinal Medeiros Way.
1. Eighty-five (85) feet except as described in Paragraph (2) below.
2. Thirty-five (35) feet in that area bounded by the centerline of Binney Street, then
the centerline of Medeiros Avenue; then the Residence C-1 zoning district line;
then the centerline of the railroad right of way; then a line one hundred (100) feet
distant from, parallel to, and southerly or easterly of the Residence C-2 zoning
district line and the easterly sideline of Medeiros Avenue, to the point of origin.
20-13
20.44.4 Maximum Height in all areas having a base Residence C-1 zoning district.
1. Thirty-five (35) feet.
20.44.5 Maximum Height at All Other Locations. At all other locations the maximum height
permitted shall be the maximum height permitted in the base zoning district for
residential uses
20.45 Eastern Cambridge Design Guidelines. In reviewing any special permit that may be
required for development in the ECHO District, the permit granting authority shall find
that the development is generally consistent with the policy objectives set forth in the
Eastern Cambridge Plan and the guidance provided in the Eastern Cambridge Design
Guidelines. Any development permitted as-of-right is encouraged to be consistent with
the Guidelines.
20.46 Transfer of Development Rights. Development capacity may be transferred from the
areas designated within the ECHO District consistent with the regulations set forth in
Section 20.30 of this Ordinance.
20.47 Non-Conforming Uses. Notwithstanding any provision of Article 8.000, in the Eastern
Cambridge Housing Overlay District, any structure containing a non-conforming use
may be altered or enlarged without limit as to percent of enlargement in order to
accommodate expansion of that non-conforming use provided the structure or portion
of the structure to be altered or enlarged is located within a non-residential base
district and further provided that the structure will not be in further violation of the
dimensional requirements of this Section 20.40 or any applicable base district.
20.50 HARVARD SQUARE OVERLAY DISTRICT AND HARVARD SQUARE
HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.51 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Harvard Square Overlay
District and the Harvard Square Historic Overlay District which shall be governed by
the regulations and procedures specified in this Section 20.50. It is the intent of this
section that these regulations will apply to an area described generally as the Harvard
Square business district and certain abutting portions of the neighborhoods around it.
20.51.1 The Harvard Square Overlay District shall be that overlay district established on the
Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge by Section 3.20. The Harvard Square Historic
Overlay District shall be that portion of the Harvard Square Overlay district that is
encompassed by any historic district duly established by the City Council under the
authority granted by the City of Cambridge by Chapter 40C of the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any Neighborhood Conservation District
established by the City Council under the provisions of chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge
Municipal Code. All provisions of the Harvard Square Overlay District and all
references to it in this Ordinance shall apply equally to the Harvard Square Historic
Overlay District except as set forth below.
20-14
20.52 General Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.50 to augment existing zoning
regulations to respond to the unique problems and pressures for change particular to
the Harvard Square area. The regulations contained in said section provide for more
careful public scrutiny of development proposals that may alter the established urban
form of the Harvard Square area. These regulations are intended to channel the
extreme development pressures in ways which will preserve and enhance the unique
functional environment and visual character of Harvard Square; to mitigate the
functional impacts of new development on adjacent residential neighborhoods; to
maintain the present diversity of development and open space patterns and building
scales and ages; and to provide sufficient regulatory flexibility to advance the general
purposes of this Section 20.52. The additional flexibility granted to development within
the Harvard Square Historic Overlay District is intended to facilitate the protection and
enhancement of the historic resources and character of Harvard Square while not
unreasonably limiting the opportunities for appropriate contemporary changes to the
built environment in the Harvard Square area.
20.53 General Provisions
20.53.1 The Harvard Square Overlay District shall be considered an area of special planning
concern.
Development proposals listed in Subsection 19.42 and 19.43, Development
Consultation Procedures, shall be subject to the Development Consultation Procedure
specified in Article 19.40 except that any Large Project Review (new buildings of 2,000
square feet or more) shall be conducted by the Harvard Square Advisory Committee
using procedures specified in Subsection 20.54.1 of this Section 20.50.
20.53.2 Criteria for Development Consultation Review and Review of Applications for Special
Permits and Variances.
In reviewing applications for variances, special permits or development consultation
reviews the permit or special permit granting authority or the Harvard Square Advisory
Committee shall be guided by the objectives and criteria contained in the publication
Harvard Square Development Guidelines [Document complied from the Guidelines for
Development and Historic Preservation as contained in the Final Report of the
Harvard Square Neighborhood Conservation District Study Committee, dated
November 29, 2000 and the Harvard Square Development Guidelines, 1986], in
addition to the requirements of Sections 10.30 (Variances) and 10.40 (Special
Permits) and this Section 20.50. These guidelines are also intended to assist in
shaping any contemplated physical change within the Harvard Square Overlay District
20.53.3 National Register and Contributing Buildings
For the purposes of this Section 20.50 the following definitions shall apply:
1. National Register Building shall be a building individually listed or determined
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places as determined by the Secretary
of the Department of the Interior.
20-15
2. A contributing building shall be:
a. Identified as a contributing building in a listed or eligible National Register
District as determined by the Secretary of the Department of Interior; or
b. A building located outside a National Register District but identified as a
contributing building in the Harvard Square Development Guidelines,
Community Development Department, July 1, 1986.
However, a building shall no longer be considered a contributing building as
defined in this Subsection 20.53.3(b) for the purposes of this Section 20.50 if,
upon application for a demolition permit, the Cambridge Historical
Commission shall determine the building not to be a preferably preserved
significant building as defined in the City of Cambridge Demolition Ordinance
#965.
20.54 Detailed Provisions
20.54.1 Harvard Square Advisory Committee
There shall be established a Harvard Square Advisory Committee, with members
appointed by the City Manager, which shall have the following duties, responsibilities,
and membership.
1. Purpose. It is the intent of this Subsection 20.54.1 that the Committee shall in its
official actions fulfill the following purposes.
a. To establish a formal, ongoing body that will review all major development
actions in the Harvard Square Overlay District.
b. To provide a forum within which a wide range of perspectives on development
actions can be heard.
c. To establish a citizen/professional body which can advise both public agencies
and private interests as to the development and urban design issues raised by a
development or planning proposal and suggest avenues of research which might
be pursued to resolve identified conflicts or make the project better fulfill both
public and private objectives for the Harvard Square Overlay District.
2. Responsibilities. The Committee shall undertake all Large Project Reviews and
shall receive all applications for variances and special permits for activities within the
Harvard Square Overlay District for review and comment. In addition, the Committee
may comment on any preliminary proposal for which any public agency or private
interest may wish to receive advice and recommendations.
3. Procedures.
a. Within six (6) months preceding any application for (1) a building permit for any
project subject to Large Project Development Consultation Review or (2) a special
permit or variance for any project within the Harvard Square Overlay District, the
graphic and other material required in Section 19.43.2 – Application for a Large
Project Review shall be submitted to the Harvard Square Advisory Committee for
their review and comment.
20-16
b. Within thirty (30) days of that submittal, [or within up to sixty (60) days with the
written consent of the applicant] the Committee shall prepare a written report of
findings and recommendations with respect to the applicant's proposed project.
c. The Committee's written report shall outline the urban design and development
issues raised by the proposal. It shall suggest those areas within which additional
exploration of alternatives might be sought or factual information gathered which
might help to resolve potential conflicts between the public and private objectives
or which help to shape the project to better serve these objectives.
d. The report shall be forwarded to the applicant and shall be included in any
application for a building permit, special permit or variance.
e. It is expected that, in making decisions regarding special permits and variances
within the Overlay District, the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Appeal will
give due consideration to the report and recommendations of the Advisory
Committee. Where the Committee makes recommendations with respect to the
granting of special permits and/or variances, and the Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board of Appeal does not follow said recommendations, then the Board(s)
shall make written reply to the Committee, detailing why the Board(s)'s decisions
were different from the Committee recommendations.
f. The Community Development staff shall serve as staff to the Committee.
4. Membership and Terms
a. Membership.
(1) At least one member having recognized qualification as an architect or
landscape architect.
(2) One member having recognized qualifications as real estate or
development or financial expert.
(3) One member who operates a business within the Harvard Square
Overlay District.
(4) Two members owning commercial property within the Harvard Square
Overlay District.
(5) Five members representing residents of the five abutting Cambridge
residential neighborhoods.
(6) One additional resident to be appointed with should serve at large.
(7) One member representing an institution owning institutional property in
the Harvard Square Overlay District.
(8) One member representing the Cambridge Historical Commission.
b. Terms. Committee members shall be appointed for terms of three years each.
Initial appointment shall, however, be staggered such that four members shall
have terms of one year, five members shall have terms of two years, and four
members shall have terms of three years each.
20.54.2 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height of buildings in the Harvard Square
Overlay District shall be governed by the requirements of this Section 20.54.2;
20-17
however, at locations where the base zoning district establishes a more restrictive
height limitation, the more restrictive shall apply.
1. As of Right Height Limitations. The maximum height of any building shall be sixty
(60) feet.
2. Special Permit for Additional Height. The maximum allowable height in the
Harvard Square Overlay District may be increased up to eighty (80) feet upon
issuance of a Special Permit by the Planning Board. If a Special Permit is issued
portions of the building may extend to eighty (80) feet in height provided that those
portions in excess of sixty (60) feet are set back from the street line at least ten
(10) feet, and that those portions are also set back from one or more forty-five
(45) degree sky exposure planes, unless otherwise permitted by the Planning
Board. A forty-five (45) degree sky exposure plane shall be an imaginary inclined
plane beginning fifty-five (55) feet above any streetline in the districts and rising
over one or more lots at a forty-five (45 ) degree angle.
3. deleted.
20.54.3 Retail, Business, and Consumer Service Establishments (Section 4.35) in Office and
Residential Districts.
1. The Planning Board may allow by special permit the retail use of a lot or structure
all or partially within the Harvard Square Overlay District and in a base residential or
office district where retail uses are not permitted under the provisions of Section 4.30 -
Table of Use Regulations; provided, however, that the following conditions are met or
findings made:
a. The general purposes of this Section 20.50 are met.
b. The use will be located in a structure in existence as of June 1, 1985 and will
not involve significant new construction.
c. The addition of such use(s) will assist in the preservation, rehabilitation and/or
restoration of a National Register or contributing building or important open space
by increasing the economic feasibility of maintaining such features.
d. The preservation of the buildings and open space identified in (c) above is
assured through an approved mechanism for the full period that the special permit
is in force and effect.
e. The proposed use will preserve, rehabilitate or restore the outward appearance
of the structure or open space.
f. In its operation the use will not, in impact, be significantly different from the uses
permitted in the base district.
g. The use is completely contained within the structure.
h. The use will be patronized substantially by pedestrians and will, if required by
the Planning Board, function adequately without additional off street parking or
loading facilities and will in any case not generate vehicular traffic in quantity and
type substantially different from that generated by permitted uses.
20-18
i. The applicant can demonstrate a need for the use(s) as a service to adjacent
residential communities or to the academic community and can demonstrate that
for economic or other reasons the use cannot easily be located in existing
business or office districts where the use is permitted. In addition the applicant
must demonstrate that either the use has been displaced as result of
redevelopment elsewhere in the Harvard Square Overlay District, or that the use is
important in its contribution to the variety, continuity, or uniqueness of the Harvard
Square Overlay District.
j. The retail use does not take the place of a residential or dormitory use.
k. The following uses listed in Section 4.35 are however specifically prohibited:
4.35e (Lunchroom, restaurant, cafeteria);
4.35f (Establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed
and where no dancing or entertainment is provided);
4.35g (Bar or other establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold and
where dancing is provided);
4.35j (Mortuary, undertaking or funeral establishment);
4.35l (Veterinary establishment, kennel, pet shop);
4.35m (sales place for new and used cars);
4.35o (Fast Order Food Establishment);
4.35p (Massage establishment).
l. The proposed use is not located in a base Residence C-2B or Office 2 District.
2. In the Office 2 base district the provisions of Section 4.40 - Footnotes to the Table
of Use Regulations, footnote 12, shall not apply in the Harvard Square Overlay
District.
3. The conditions and required findings mentioned in this Section 20.54.3 are not
severable, and if a court declares any such condition or required finding invalid, then
this Section 20.54.3 shall cease to operate in its entirety, and no additional special
permits shall be issued under its authority.
20.54.4 Parking and Loading Requirements. Uses in the Harvard Square Overlay District
which meet the following requirements shall be exempt from the parking and loading
requirements as specified in Section 6.36 - Schedule of Parking and Loading
Requirements.
1. The use is contained within a structure or portion of a structure in existence on or
before June 1, 1940 or if constructed later is identified as a National Register or
contributing building; or
2. The use is contained in a new structure or new addition to a structure identified in
(1.) above, after the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board provided:
a. The total development authorized on the site is reduced to eighty (80) percent of
the maximum permitted on the lot; or a cash contribution is made to the Harvard
20-19
Square Improvement Fund to be established by the City of Cambridge in an
amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the cost of construction of the spaces not
provided, said contribution to be used by the City of Cambridge for one or more of
the following capital improvements in the Harvard Square Overlay District:
(1) Provision of public parking, preferably for short term users;
(2) Improvements to public parks, or restoration of historic structures,
monuments and other features owned by the City of Cambridge or other
public agency or a nonprofit organization;
(3) Extension throughout the Harvard Square Overlay District of the surface
improvements installed by the MBTA as part of the Red Line subway
extension(brick sidewalks, light post, street furniture, etc.)
The Harvard Square Advisory Committee shall receive and make comments on
any proposal for the expenditure of such cash contributions. To the extent
practicable the provision of public parking facilities shall be the first priority of any
expenditure. The funds shall not be used for ordinary maintenance activities
normally undertaken by the City of Cambridge.
The value of the cash contribution shall be determined by the Community
Development Department assuming equivalent structured parking spaces and
using generally accepted cost estimation methods customarily used by architects
and engineers or using actual construction costs for comparable contemporary
parking construction in Cambridge.
b. The subject lot is sufficiently small in size as to contribute to a development
pattern of diverse, small scale, new structures and the retention of existing
structures (for lots exceeding 10,000 square feet a specific finding shall be made
that this objective has been met).
c. The Planning Board shall specifically find that an exemption from parking and
loading requirements will result in a building design that is more appropriate to its
location and the fabric of its neighborhood and that it is in conformance with the
objectives and criteria contained in Harvard Square Development Guidelines.
d. No National Register or contributing building is demolished or so altered as to
terminate or preclude its designation as a National Register or contributing
building; and
e. No National Register or contributing building has been demolished or altered
so as to terminate or preclude its designation within the five (5) years preceding
the application.
20.54.5 Building Setbacks. Maintenance of the Harvard Square Overlay District's positive
diversity of building form and scale and its variety of open spaces, yards and
courtyards is encouraged throughout the District. It is therefore desirable to permit
design flexibility to allow any physical change in the District to reflect the character of
the area within which it is located. To this end any building in the Harvard Square
Overlay District shall be exempt from the yard requirements as specified in Section
20-20
5.30, (except where such yard abuts a lot, but not a public way, outside the Overlay
District) if the following conditions are met:
1. The building existed as of December 15, 1985 or a building permit had been
issued by that date, or
2. For any new building in any Business, Office or Residence C-3 base-zoning
district, for which a building permit is issued after December 15, 1985, the
Planning Board issues a Special Permit exempting the building from yard
requirements provided:
a. The design of the new structure shall be in conformance with the objectives
and criteria contained in Harvard Square Development Guidelines.
b. No National Register or contributing building is demolished or so altered as to
terminate or preclude its designation as a National Register or contributing
building; and
c. No National Register or contributing building previously existed on the site in
the preceding five (5) years and which has been so altered as to terminate or
preclude its designation or demolished prior to the application.
20.54.6 Maximum Ratio of Floor Area to Lot Area (FAR) in the Harvard Square Historic
Overlay District.
Notwithstanding the FAR limits set forth in Article 5.000 or elsewhere in this
Ordinance, the maximum FAR applicable in the Harvard Square Historic Overlay
District shall be as follows: Business B district: 4.0 for all uses except dwellings, 3.0 for
dwellings; Office 3 district: 3.0 for all uses; Office 2 district: 2.0 for all uses; Residence
C-3 district: 3.0 for all uses; Residence C-2B district: 1.75 for all uses; Residence C-1
district: 0.75 for all uses; Business A district: 1.0 for all uses except dwellings, 1.75 for
dwellings.
20.55 Sign Regulations in the Harvard Square Historic Overlay District
20.55.1 All provisions of Article 7.000 shall apply in the Harvard Square Historic District,
except as modified below. It is the intent of these modifications to allow greater
flexibility in the size, location and illumination of signs in order to encourage more
thoughtful design of individual signs, to encourage greater respect for the building and
visual context within which new signs are erected, and thereby add interest and
character to the shopping environment in Harvard Square.
1. In Section 7.16.22 – Signs in all Business, Office and Industrial Districts,
Paragraphs A, B, and C shall not apply in office and business base districts.
However, no sign on the outside of a building may extend higher than 20 feet
above grade.
2. In Section 7.16.3 – Application of the Sign Frontage Formula shall not apply.
3. In the Residence C-2B base district the provisions of Section 7.16.22 shall apply
to permitted or legally established nonconforming office and retail uses.
20-21
20.60 PARKWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.61 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established a Parkway Overlay District
which shall be governed by the regulations specified in this Section 20.60. Within this
parkway district is also a subdistrict to be referred to as the Concord Avenue Parkway
Subdistrict. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to areas of
the city where development is likely to occur near major public open space
connectors, especially arterial roadways that could provide such connections.
20.62 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 11.60 to augment base zoning regulations in
designated areas in order to create unified identifiable images of designated areas, to
enhance public safety by reducing visual confusion and haphazard development, to
encourage development which will protect and enhance the use and enjoyment of
public open space resources. The Parkway Overlay District has been designated
specifically for the areas adjacent to arterial roadways located in parklike settings such
as the Fresh Pond Reservation. To more fully implement these objectives for a
portion of the Parkway Overlay District that includes the Fresh Pond Reservation, this
article includes special provisions for the “Concord Avenue Parkway Subdistrict,”
which is defined in section 20.69 and is subject to the provisions of that section, as
well as the provisions generally governing the Parkway Overlay District. The terms
“the district” or “said district” or “the Parkway Overlay District” shall mean both the
Parkway Overlay District and the Concord Avenue Subdistrict, unless specifically
noted otherwise.
20.63 Applicability. The Parkway Overlay District shall be an overlay district on the zoning
map established by Section 3.20. The Concord Avenue Parkway Subdistrict shall also
be shown on the map established by Section 3.20.
20.63.1 The buildings and land uses within said district shall be controlled by the pertinent
regulations within the base zoning districts, except as modified by the requirements of
this Section 20.60 which shall apply in addition to regulations imposed by the base
zoning map designations. Where the base zoning regulations differ from requirements
of this Section 20.60, the stricter provisions shall apply.
20.63.2 The requirements of this Section 20.60 shall not apply to Planned Unit Development
proposals filed, reviewed and regulated by Articles 12.000 and 13.000; however, said
requirements shall apply to other development proposals in a PUD district.
20.63.3 The requirements of this Section 20.60 shall not apply to lots containing one family,
two family or three family residences as principal uses.
20.63.4 The requirements of this Section 20.60 shall not apply to construction activities
incidental to emergency repairs of public utility facilities.
20.63.5 In reviewing applications for any special permit in the Parkway Overlay District, the
Planning Board shall consider compliance with the requirements specified in this
Section 20.60, the recommendations made in the Cambridge Community
Development Department's 1979 report entitled Alewife Revitalization, and the criteria
specified in Section 10.43.
20-22
20.63.6 Developments that must obtain a special permit under any section of the Zoning
Ordinance shall be exempt from the Development Consultation Procedures mandated
by Subsection 20.69. Compliance with the regulations and guidelines for the Parkway
Overlay District shall be considered in the context of the special permit review.
20.63.7 The development standards specified in this Section 20.60 shall apply to all
development within the Parkway Overlay District not exempted by subsections
20.63.2, 20.63.3, and 20.63.4. Divergence from these standards may be allowed only
by issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board as specified in Subsection
10.45. The Board may grant such a permit upon its determination that the
development proposed will better serve the objectives of this Section 20.60 than if the
standards were followed and that the criteria specified in Section 10.43 will be
satisfied.
20.64 Dimensional Standards in the Parkway Overlay District
20.64.1 Front Yards. Front yards should be of sufficient size and appropriately landscaped so
as to increase public safety and to positively contribute to the visual and environmental
quality of the district. Therefore the following standards shall apply:
1. The minimum front yard setback for the principal front wall plane for any
structure shall be twenty-five (25) feet measured from the street line. For corner
lots, only the front yard oriented toward Concord Turnpike, Alewife Brook
Parkway, Concord Avenue, or Fresh Pond Parkway shall be required to provide
this setback. The other front yard shall satisfy the minimum setback specified in
Section 5.30 for the base zoning district.
2. Required front yards shall consist entirely of Green Area Open Space as
defined in Article 2.000 with the exception of paving necessary for vehicular
access. Such paved access area shall be limited to one 24-foot driveway for each
one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage or fraction thereof.
3. Front yards shall contain at least one three (3) inch caliper tree for every
twenty-five (25) linear feet of street frontage.
4. Front yards may contain fences along front and side lot lines in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection 20.65.
20.64.2 Maximum Building Height. The transition from public open spaces to private
development should not be abrupt. Therefore, the maximum height of the principal
front wall plane of buildings in the Parkway Overlay District shall be fifty-five (55) feet.
Portions of buildings may be allowed to extend to eighty-five (85) feet in height
provided that those portions in excess of fifty-five (55) feet are set back from the
principal front wall plane at least ten (10) feet and that those portions also set back
from one or more sixty (60) degree building bulk control planes.
20.64.3 Building Facades. Building facades should be designed so as to enhance the visual
quality of the district. The following standards shall apply:
1. Principal building entrances shall face the parkways and boulevards which serve to
define the district.
20-23
2. Building facades and rooflines shall be articulated and expanses of unbroken wall
planes shall be limited to thirty-five (35) linear feet for those facades facing public open
space and/or public roadways.
3. Ground floor levels shall include a minimum of thirty (30) percent transparency to
enliven and enrich the public environment.
20.65 Fences. In order to maintain a feeling of openness, to facilitate pedestrian enjoyment
and use, and to maximize scenic views, fences along the front and side lot lines shall
comply with the following standards:
1. No fence along a front or side lot line and within twenty-five (25) feet of a
public right of way shall be more than four (4) feet in height from the curb level of
the street or more than thirty (30) percent opaque.
2. Chainlink and wire fences are prohibited.
20.66 Parking Standards. Development in the Parkway Overlay District shall conform to the
Off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article 6.000, except as
modified by this Section 20.66.
20.66.1 Curb Cuts. Only one curb cut of a maximum of forty (40) feet shall be permitted per
one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage in the Parkway Overlay District.
Wherever possible, curb cuts should be on local streets rather than arterial roadways
and in no case shall a curb cut be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of an
intersection unless the lot contains less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet of
street frontage.
20.66.2 Siting of Parking Areas. Parking areas, whether accessory or nonaccessory, shall not
be located in the front yard required for any lot in the district. Enclosed parking
facilities are encouraged. On grade, open area parking areas shall be located behind
the building or buildings served or arranged in such a way as to minimize their visibility
from public ways.
20.66.3 General Landscaping of On Grade, Open Parking. Landscaping of parking areas in
the district should help to ensure public safety, moderate the microclimate and
minimize noise, glare and the unsightly intrusion of automobiles and unbuffered hard
surfaces in the area of public open space. Therefore, any on grade open parking area
for ten (10) or more cars shall be required to meet the following landscaping
standards:
1. On grade, open parking areas shall be arranged and landscaped to properly
screen cars from public rights of way and pedestrian ways. Such screening shall
consist of a fence or wall not less than fifty (50) percent opaque and not less than
four (4) feet in height.
2. At least ten (10) percent of the area devoted to on grade open parking shall be
landscaped. The area devoted to on grade open parking shall be that portion of
the lot containing parking spaces, driveways and landscaped area located
between or adjacent to parking spaces and drives. No portion of the lot required
20-24
as a setback between parking spaces and a building or lot line shall be counted
in computing the ten (10) percent landscape requirement.
3. Each landscape area shall have minimum dimensions of three (3) feet.
4. Landscaped areas at least six (6) feet in width shall be used to divide parking
areas into bays of not more than twenty (20) spaces. Such landscaped areas
may be counted as part of the ten (10) percent required landscaped area.
20.66.4 Trees for Landscaping On grade, Open Parking Areas. The landscaping necessary to
meet the standards specified in Subsection 20.66.3 shall include trees as follows:
1. For every ten (10) on grade, open parking spaces or fraction thereof, there
shall be a minimum of one 3-inch caliper tree located within the area devoted to
on grade parking.
2. The trees required for the landscaping of on grade, open parking areas -
whether such trees are coniferous or deciduous, flowering or nonflowering -
should be tolerant to urban environmental conditions, able to screen parking
areas by virtue of their size, form, density of foliage and spread, and easy to
maintain. A suggested list of trees which meet these criteria is listed in
Subsection 11.16.4 of this Ordinance.
3. Standards of Tree Protection
a. Each tree planted in a paved area shall have minimum of fifty (50) square
feet of porous surface area surrounding the tree.
b. Trees which are planted along roadways or in parking lots shall be
protected by a curbed planter strip or by precast concrete curbs or railroad
ties or by suitably designed concrete, steel or wood bollards placed at least
four feet (4’) from the tree.
20.67 Mechanical Equipment and Refuse Storage Areas.
1. No refuse storage areas nor mechanical equipment areas shall be located in a
front yard within the district. Such areas shall be screened from view from street
and parking areas, residential districts, open space areas, and designated
parkways by a six (6) foot high durable nonliving barrier (or earth berm) planted
with at least one shrub or vine for each ten (10) feet of barrier towards the abutting
property.
2. Mechanical equipment on the roof of any building shall be permanently
screened from view from the ground or other buildings in the area.
20.68 Development Consultation Procedure. The Parkway Overlay District shall be
considered an area of special planning concern. Except as modified by Subsection
20.68.1, development proposals listed in Subsection 19.42 shall be subject to the
development consultation procedure.
20.68.1 Development proposals requiring a special permit or exempted under Subsections
20.63.2, 20.63.3, or 20.63.4 shall not be subjected to the development consultation
procedure.
20-25
20.68.2 Subsection 19.43.1 notwithstanding, only exterior building alterations increasing gross
floor area by one thousand (1000) square feet or more shall be subject to the
development consultation procedure.
20.68.3 Subsection 19.42.1(4) notwithstanding, only construction of ten (10) or more parking
spaces shall be subject to the development consultation procedure.
20.69 Concord Avenue Parkway Subdistrict
For the purposes of providing additional protection to a portion of Concord Avenue that
abuts the Fresh Pond Reservation and which serves as a gateway to Cambridge, this
section hereby creates a “Concord Avenue Parkway Subdistrict” within the Parkway
Overlay District. The subdistrict is that portion of the Parkway Overlay District along
Concord Avenue that is bounded on the west by the dividing line between the
Residence B district and the Office 2 district, and is bounded on the east by the
dividing line between the Business C district and the Office 2 district. This subdistrict
includes the following parcels as shown on The City of Cambridge GIS Maps: map
267D, parcel numbers 323, 282, 327, 328, 289, 259, 304, 284, 300, 316, 307, 285,
287, 286, 291, 310, and 311; Map 267E, parcel numbers 234, 277, 261, 283, 270,
269, 288, 289, 17, and 242; and Map 267F, parcels 293, 274, and 301, and includes,
but is not necessarily limited to, the following street address on Concord Avenue: 795,
777, 775, 773, 769, 763, 745, 737, 729, 725, 711, 701, 689, 681, 675, 665, 655, 653,
651, 650, 647, 645, 641, 625, 617, 603, and 591.
20.69.1 Notwithstanding any other provisions in either the Parkway Overlay District and/or the
base zoning district, the maximum height for any building or structure within Concord
Avenue Parkway Subdistrict shall not exceed fifty (50) feet.
20.69.2 Notwithstanding any other provisions in either the Parkway Overlay District and/or the
base zoning district, any building within the Concord Avenue Parkway Subdistrict greater
than twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in floor area shall require a special permit
under this paragraph. When determining whether to grant a special permit under this
paragraph, the Planning Board shall require compliance with the following criteria, in
addition to the general special permit criteria set forth in section 10.43:
1. New buildings shall be related sensitively to the existing built environment.
The location, orientation and massing of structures in the development should
avoid overwhelming the existing buildings in the vicinity of the development.
Visual and functional disruptions should be avoided.
2. New buildings should be in harmony with the purposes of the Parkway Overlay
District as specified in Section 20.62, which are to create unified identifiable
images of designated areas, to enhance public safety by reducing visual
confusion and haphazard development, and to encourage development which
will protect and enhance the use and enjoyment of public open space resources.
20-26
20.70 FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.71 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.70 to protect the health, safety, and
general welfare, to protect human life and property from the hazards of periodic
flooding, to preserve the natural flood control characteristics, and the flood storage
capacity of the flood plain, to preserve and maintain the ground water recharge areas
within the flood plain, and to provide a mechanism for a comprehensive review of
development in the Flood Plain Overlay District and the design and location of flood
water retention systems and their relationship to other surrounding development.
20.72 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established a Flood Plain Overlay District
which shall be governed by the regulations specified in this Section 20.70. The Flood
Plain Overlay District includes all special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A
and AE on the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRMs
that are wholly or partially within the City of Cambridge are panel numbers
25017C0418E, 25017C0419E, 25017C0438E, 25017C0557E, 25017C0576E,
25017C0577E dated June 4, 2010. The exact boundaries of the District are defined
by the special flood hazard area, which is the area subject to flooding by the 1%
annual chance flood, also known as the “100-year flood” or “base flood, (Special Flood
Hazard area) shown on the FIRMs and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) report dated June 4, 2010. The FIRM and FIS reports are
incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the City Clerk, Inspectional
Services Department, Department of Public Works, Community Development
Department and Conservation Commission.
20.73 Applicability. No structure or building shall be erected, constructed, expanded,
substantially improved, or moved and no earth or other materials shall be dumped,
filled, excavated, transferred or otherwise altered in the Flood Plain Overlay District
unless a special permit is granted by the Planning Board.
20.73.1 A special permit shall not be required for any activity detailed in 20.73 above on
individual lots containing one, two, or three family dwellings in existence as of July 5,
1982 or for the demolition of an existing structure. Nevertheless all other requirements
of this Section 20.70 (and especially those criterion detailed in Subsection 20.75) shall
be met as applicable.
20.74 Procedure. Application for a special permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the
Board. In addition to the information required for the submittal, the applicant shall also
present the following:
1. A detailed landscape plan drawn to a scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet
showing the elevation and design of flood water retention systems as required by
applicable law;
2. Base flood elevation data, where the base flood elevation is not provided on
the FIRM;
20-27
3. Certification and supporting documentation by a Massachusetts registered
professional engineer demonstrating that such encroachment of the floodway as
specified above in Subsection 20.73 shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood;
4. Such other technical information as necessary to permit the Planning Board to
make the findings required in Section 20.75 below;
5. Description of the status of the proposal, pursuant to the requirements of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, before the Cambridge Conservation
Commission, including any Order of Conditions or Determination of Applicability
issued; and
6. Four (4) copies of all application materials.
20.74.1 Upon receipt of the application and development plans, the Planning Board shall
transmit copies of the plans to the Conservation Commission and the City Engineer.
Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the plans, the Conservation Commission and
the City Engineer shall review said plans and submit their respective reports and
recommendations to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall not render any
decision on an application for a special permit for development in the Flood Plain
Overlay District until said reports have been received and considered or until the fortyfive
(45) day period has expired without the receipt of such report, whichever is earlier.
20.74.2 Special Notification Requirements.
Where in the application it is proposed to alter or relocate a watercourse in a riverine
situation, the Planning Board shall notify, in addition to those parties-in-interest
required to be notified by Chapter 40A, all adjacent communities to the extent not
required in Chapter 40A, the NFIP State Coordinator [Massachusetts Department of
Conservation and Recreation, 251 Causeway Street, Suite, 600-700, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114-2104 (or any successor office)] and the NFIP Program
Specialist [Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region 1, 99 High Street, 6th
floor, Boston, Massachusetts 02110 (or any successor office)].
20.75 Criteria. The Planning Board shall grant a Special Permit for development in the Flood
Plain Overlay District if the Board finds that such development has met all of the
following criteria in addition to other criteria specified in Section 10.43:
1. No filling or other encroachment shall be allowed in Zone A areas or in the
floodway which would impair the ability of these Special Flood Hazard Areas to
carry and discharge flood waters, except where such activity is fully offset by
stream improvements such as, but not limited to, flood water retention systems
as allowed by applicable law.
2. Displacement of water retention capacity at one location shall be replaced in
equal volume at another location on the same lot, on an abutting lot in the same
ownership, on a noncontiguous lot in the same ownership, or in accordance with
the following requirements.
20-28
3. All flood water retention systems shall be suitably designed and located so as
not to cause any nuisance, hazard, or detriment to the occupants of the site or
abutters. The Planning Board may require screening, or landscaping of flood
water retention systems to create a safe, healthful, and pleasing environment.
4. The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provision of the
underlying zoning district, provisions of the State Building Code, Wetlands
Protection Act, and any other applicable laws.
5. Applicants for development in the Alewife area shall be familiar with areaspecific
and general city-wide land use plans and policy objectives (e.g. Concord-
Alewife Plan, A Report of the Concord Alewife Planning Study, November 2005;
Toward a Sustainable Future, Cambridge Growth Policy, 1993, Update, 2007;
Section 19.30 - Urban Design Objectives of this Zoning Ordinance) and shall
demonstrate how their plan meets the spirit and intent of such documents in
conjunction with the requirements of this Section 20.70 - Flood Plain Overlay
District and Section 20.90 – Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6.
6. The requirement of Section 20.74(3) has been met.
20.705.1 Additional Special Permit Criteria for MMD-3: In granting a special permit for a
Registered Marijuana Dispensary in the MMD-3 the Planning Board shall find that the
criteria in 20.705 are met as well as the criteria in 20.705.1.
(a) Use Limitations: the RMD facility shall be retail only with no cultivation activities on the
site.
(b) Siting: The RMD facility must be located either below grade or above the street level at
the second story or above and be appropriately shielded from the public view.
(c) Size: The RMD facility size shall be less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and at
least seventy percent (70%) of the square footage shall be used for patient services and
the remainder shall be devoted to administrative support, storage and security.
(d) Access to Public Transit: Areas with access to pedestrian and public transportation
would be preferred.
20.76 Development Regulations for mobile homes. The following development regulations
apply to the placement of mobile homes within Special Flood Hazard Areas
designated as Zone AE on the FIRM, in addition to other requirements of this Section
20.70. All mobile homes shall provide that:
1. Stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest
floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; and
2. Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided.
20.76.1 The placement of mobile homes, except in an existing mobile home park or mobile
home subdivision, are prohibited in the floodway.
20-29
20.77 Setback Exemptions. Any required flood water retention systems or related facilities
may be permitted to extend into required yard setbacks if deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
20.78 Emergency Repairs. The special permit required in this Section 20.70 shall not apply
to emergency repairs or projects necessary for the protection of the health, safety or
welfare of the general public which are to be performed or which are ordered to be
performed by a city agency, or the commonwealth, or a political subdivision thereof. In
no case shall any filling, dredging, excavating, or otherwise extend beyond the time
necessary to abate the emergency.
20.79 Any development activity requiring a special permit from the Planning Board under
other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall incorporate the requirements of this
Section 20.70 within the scope of that special permit and shall not require separate
application to the Planning Board.
20-30
MEMORIAL DRIVE OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.81 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Memorial Drive Overlay
District which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this
Section 20.80. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to that
area abutting Memorial Drive that lies between the Drive and the residential
neighborhoods beyond and that has a non-residential or medium to high density
residential base zoning designation.
20.82 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.80 to augment base zoning regulations in
the District in order to create a more harmonious and consistent character for the
development along Memorial Drive and where such development faces or abuts low
density neighborhood residential districts; to encourage good building design and site
development that enhances amenities available to pedestrians walking along
Memorial Drive and the Charles River waterfront; and where commercial uses and
higher density residential development abut residential neighborhoods, to ensure that
physical changes within the Overlay District are compatible with the scale and
character of the abutting neighborhoods; to encourage the retention of existing
buildings of historic value; to encourage uses that will serve needs of residents of
abutting neighborhoods or those persons enjoying the open space amenities along the
Charles River; and to discourage new development inappropriate in both scale and
design.
20.83 Applicability. The Memorial Drive Overlay District shall be an overlay district on the
zoning map established by Section 3.20.
20.83.1 The building and land uses within the Memorial Drive Overlay District shall be
regulated by the provisions of the applicable base zoning district except as modified
by the requirements of this Section 20.80, which shall apply in addition to regulations
imposed by the base zoning district designations. Where the base zoning regulations
differ from the requirements of this Section 20.80 the stricter provisions shall apply,
unless a Special Permit is issued by the Planning Board pursuant to Article 20.88.
20.84 Dimensional Standards in the Memorial Drive Overlay District
20.84.1 Maximum Height. The maximum height of any structure in the Overlay District shall
be permitted in the applicable base zoning district, except as provided below. Lots
abutting Memorial Drive may be subject to further height limitations imposed by
Chapter 91 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
20.84.2 For that portion of the Overlay District located north of the centerline of River Street
and within ninety (90) feet of Blackstone Street the maximum height shall be forty-five
(45) feet where the base district permits heights greater than thirty-five (35) feet.
20.84.3 Minimum Required Front Yard Abutting Memorial Drive. The minimum required front
yard for that portion of a lot abutting Memorial Drive shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
20.85 Restrictions in Required and/or Provided Setbacks.
20-31
20.85.1 That area between the principal wall plane of a building and a public street or public
park, whether required or provided, shall be devoted to Green Area Open Space as
defined in Article 2.000 of this Ordinance, an expansion of the adjacent public
sidewalk, a park, or other landscaped or paved area devoted exclusively to pedestrian
and bicycle use and extending along the entire length of the lot facing the street or
park. Areas devoted to vehicular use are prohibited from this area with the exception
of access drives leading directly to parking facilities located elsewhere on the site,
which drives shall be limited as follows:
1. A maximum of one two-way access drive (and curb cut) or two one-way access
drives (and curb cuts) from Memorial Drive per lot shall be permitted. The access
drive shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width in non-residential districts for a twoway
drive or fifteen (15) feet in width for a one-way drive, and twenty (20) feet in
width in residential districts for two-way drives and fifteen (15) feet in width for a
one-way drive.
2. For portions of lots abutting other streets, a maximum of one access drive (and
curb cut) shall be permitted per street, or one access drive (and curb cut) for each
four hundred (400) feet of lot frontage, whichever is greater. If only one access
drive is provided on a lot, it shall be located on the most minor street according to
the hierarchy set forth in Section 20.87.1 below. Each access drive shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet in width in non-residential districts and twenty (20) feet in
residential districts.
The required Green Area Open Space, landscaping or other paved area devoted to
pedestrian and bicycle uses shall be located at mean grade of abutting public street or
open space at the property line unless an exception is granted under the provisions of
Section 20.88 below. Nothing in this Section 20.85.1 shall prohibit customary
landscape features, elements and grading that may vary the grade of the required
setback above that of the adjacent street or park provided the setback remains
essentially at grade.
Where the lot abuts more than two streets, the provisions of this Section 20.85.1 shall
apply to no more than two streets. The two streets to which this Section shall apply
shall be determined by the street hierarchy set forth in Section 20.87.1 below.
20.85.12 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 20.85.1 above or any provision of Article
6.000, any on grade open parking facility shall be set back from front lot line by at least
ten (10) feet. Such setback shall be landscaped as required in Section 20.85.1 above.
20.86 Use Provisions.
20.86.1 Use Restrictions. The ground (first) floor of that portion of a building facing a public
street or public park, and located within seventy-five (75) feet of that public street or
park, shall consist of Gross Floor Area devoted to any one or combination of the
following uses: Residential (Section 4.31), Office (Section 4.34), Retail Business
(Section 4.35), Institutional (4.33), but specifically excluding Gross Floor Area in
structured parking counted as Gross Floor Area, meeting the following conditions:
20-32
1. At least eighty (80) percent of the floor elevation of the ground (first) floor shall be
no higher than the four (4) feet above the mean grade of the adjacent public
sidewalk or public park, at the property line, except that Retail Business uses in
new construction shall be located at mean grade;
2. The use shall have a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet;
3. One parking space for each unit in a Townhouse shall be exempt from the
limitations of this Section 20.106.
4. The use is permitted in the applicable base zoning district or otherwise permitted
in this Section 20.80.
20.86.11 The food service establishments permitted in the Office 2 district, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 4.40, Footnote 12, shall be subject to the provisions of Section
20.86.2 below. Where the provisions of the two sections differ, the more restrictive
shall apply.
20.86.2 Additional Permitted Uses. In any office the following retail uses shall be permitted by
Special Permit from the Planning Board: Store for retail sale of merchandise, Section
4.35a, Lunchroom, restaurant, cafeteria, Section 4.35e; establishments where
alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed and where no dancing or entertainment is
provided, Section 4.35f. Such uses shall be intended to provide services to the
abutting residential neighborhoods or to persons making use of the open space
recreational amenities of the Charles River waterfront and its constituent parks. Such
retail uses shall be subject to the following limitations and conditions.
a. The retail use shall be located on a lot that abuts Memorial Drive.
b. The principal entrance to the retail use shall be on Memorial Drive.
c. The total Gross Floor Area on the lot devoted to retail uses permitted in this
Section 20.86.2 shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
d. No additional accessory parking shall be provided for the retail use unless
specifically authorized by the Planning Board. The accessory parking
requirements for these uses otherwise specifically required in Article 6.000 in
herein specifically waived.
e. The use shall be located in a building principally containing uses otherwise
permitted in the office or residential district.
20.87 Design Standards
20.87.1 Building Facades shall be designed to enhance the visual quality of the Overlay
District, create an environment pleasant and inviting for the pedestrians and
compatible with the residential neighborhoods in close proximity to the District. The
following standards shall apply:
20-33
1. A principal, publicly accessible building entrance shall be located on the building
façade facing the principal street the lot abuts. Where a building abuts more than
one street, a principal, publicly accessible building entrance on each street is
encouraged but only one shall be required. That entrance shall face the most
important street as determined by the following hierarchy (most important street to
the least important street): Memorial Drive, River Street, Putnam Avenue,
Pleasant Street, Magazine Street, Blackstone Street and Riverside Road. A
principal, publicly accessible entrance serving a separate ground floor
establishment shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this paragraph.
Nothing in this Paragraph 1 requires generally public access to a building or
facility that is customarily accessible to only the inhabitants of the building, its
guests and customers.
2. Where office and/or retail uses are accommodated on the ground floor each
separately leased space shall have an individual public entrance onto the abutting
street where any portion of the space fronts the street.
3. Facades facing a public street or a public park, designated city landmark building
or a building in a local historic district or neighborhood conservation district that is
located on an abutting lot, shall consist of a minimum twenty-five (25) percent
clear glass in total for each separate façade facing a street park or building. That
clear-glass requirement shall be increased to fifty (50) percent on the ground floor
where retail and office uses are established. However, where a retail
establishment abuts more than one street, park or building, only the façade facing
the principal street (as set forth in Paragraph 1 above) shall be required to meet
the 50% requirement.
20.88 Waiver of Certain Provisions of the Overlay District or its Base Districts
20.88.1 Divergence from the standards specified in Sections 20.86 – 20.87 may be allowed by
issuance of a Special Permit from the Planning Board. The Board shall grant such a
permit upon its determination that the development proposed will still serve the
objectives of this Section 20.80 and that proposed development is consistent with the
Section 19.30 – Urban Design Objectives.
20.88.2 In recognition of the preservation, enhancement or creation of the Memorial Drive
Overlay District Objectives, the Planning Board may, by Special Permit, allow a
reduction in the required front yard setback, on any lot abutting Memorial Drive with an
existing building (as of July 1, 2004) exceeding one hundred and twenty (120) feet, to
a minimum of five (5) feet with the exception of Memorial Drive, where it may, by
Special Permit, allow the reduction in required minimum setback to fifteen (15) feet.
The Planning Board may also, or instead, waive the base zone height limit for any lot
abutting Memorial Drive with an existing building (as of July 1, 2004) exceeding one
hundred and twenty (120) feet, by Special Permit, allowing height up to one hundred
and twenty (120) feet.
20-34
20.89 The required yards, permitted Gross Floor Area (GFA) and permitted height for
structures in existences as of July 1, 2004 shall be those yards, GFA, or height
existing at that time and shall be deemed conforming for the purpose of applying the
nonconforming provisions of Article 8.000. Otherwise, for any other provision of the
Zoning Ordinance and for any new construction, the dimensional requirements of this
Section 20.80 and any applicable base zoning district shall apply.
20.810 Special Gross Floor Area Provisions in the Office 2 District. In order to facilitate the
rehabilitation of the parkway character of Memorial Drive within the Overlay District,
additional Gross Floor Area for residential uses (Section 4.31, Paragraphs a-h) shall
be permitted. That additional Gross Floor Area shall be above the Floor Area Ratio
limit otherwise set in the applicable base zoning district, subject to the issuance of a
Special Permit from the Planning Board and subject to the following conditions and
limitations. The additional floor area is intended as an incentive to encourage the
construction of additional housing to replace existing automobile-oriented retail uses
and site improvements abutting the Drive or the residential neighborhood edge, which
have produced an unsightly environment of parking lots, parking garages, driveways,
garish signs and featureless facades.
a. These provisions shall only apply to a lot, abutting Memorial Drive, in existence as
of July 1, 2004.
b. Up to a maximum of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of additional GFA shall be
permitted subject to the following limitations:
i. Where development on the lot is at, or exceeds, the maximum GFA
permitted on the lot as determined by the existing mix of uses on the
lots and the applicable base zoning district regulations (exclusive of any
bonus GFA permitted in Section 11.200) as of July 1, 2004, a total of
fifty thousand (50,000) square feet shall be permitted for additional
residential development.
ii. Where additional GFA is available on the lot under the provisions of the
applicable base zoning district (exclusive of any bonus GFA permitted in
Section 11.200) as of July 1, 2004, only that portion of the fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet that exceeds the GFA otherwise available on the
lot (exclusive of any bonus GFA permitted in Section 11.200) shall be
permitted.
c. The new residential construction shall conform to the Overlay District and any
applicable base district regulations with the exception of the GFA limitations
imposed in the applicable base zoning district. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for
purposes of computing lot area per dwelling unit, the provisions of Article 5.14
shall not apply.
d. In granting the Special Permit the Planning Board shall find that the additional
GFA proposed can be reasonably accommodated on the site without significant
negative traffic, environmental or other similar impacts while at the same time
20-35
significantly improving the impact of all development on the site, particularly along
Memorial Drive and the residential neighborhood edge.
Among the visual and urban design improvements demonstrating such
improvement are:
i. The elimination of curb cuts on Memorial Drive;
ii. The provisions of landscaping in lieu of parking, driveway and other
vehicular paving between the buildings on the site an Memorial Drive or
the abutting neighborhood edge;
iii. The elimination of visually intrusive auto-oriented uses such as gas
stations etc.
iv. The introduction of building facades that relate positively to the Drive or
the abutting neighborhood with ample amounts of glass, places of
pedestrian entry etc.
v. The screening of automobile-oriented areas, such as parking garages,
with active uses.
20.811 The Memorial Drive Overlay District shall be considered an area of special planning
concern subject to the provisions of section 19.40.
20.90 ALEWIFE OVERLAY DISTRICTS 1-6
20.91 Establishment and Scope. There are hereby established six Alewife Overlay Districts,
which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this Section
20.90. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to the area at
Alewife that has historically developed as a retail and industrial area generally at
rather low densities, but which can be expected to develop more extensively and in
greater variety of uses in the future.
20.91.1 The Alewife Overlay Districts shall be a series of Overlay Districts established on the
Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge by Section 3.20. Provisions of this Section 20.90
and all references to it in this Zoning Ordinance shall apply equally to each of the six
Overlay districts except as set forth below.
20.92 General Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.90 to augment existing base
district zoning regulations to respond to the unique problems and pressures for
change in the Alewife area. The regulations contained in this Section 20.90 provide for
more careful public scrutiny of future development proposals and provide an
opportunity to shape the form and character of that development in ways that will
benefit both individual property owners and the general interests of the larger
commercial and residential neighborhood as a whole.
These regulations are intended to harness the opportunities presented with the
redevelopment of private property in ways that will:
20-36
1. Encourage forms of development, mix of uses, and range of improvements
that will facilitate and encourage walking, biking and transit use and reduce the
growth of auto trips in an area already burdened with regional vehicular traffic
passing through to other destinations in the metropolitan region;
2. Preserve and enhance the capacity to store floodwater, recharge groundwater
and manage the collection and disposal of stormwater in ways that add to the
quality and visual appeal of the built environment as well as to the quality of the
water itself;
3. Minimize the negative impact of new development on the adjacent Cambridge
Highlands residential neighborhood while introducing new amenities and services
that will benefit the residents of that neighborhood;
4. Integrate the entire area through the creation of new pedestrian paths,
roadways, green spaces and bridges that will facilitate movement within the
several Districts and beyond to the Cambridge Highlands, North Cambridge and
Neighborhood Nine neighborhoods and the Fresh Pond Reservation;
5. Introduce a significant component of residential living and support retail
services to enhance the area’s appeal for all persons who come to work, shop as
well as live within the Districts; and
6. Create an identity and sense of place for the Alewife Districts that parallels the
development of the historic urban centers that characterize much of Cambridge.
20.93 General Provisions
20.93.1 The Alewife Overlay Districts shall be considered areas of special planning concern.
Development proposals listed in Subsection 19.42 and 19.43 - Development
Consultation Procedures, shall be subject to the Development Consultation Procedure
specified in Article 19.40.
20.93.2 Criteria for Development Consultation Review and Review of Applications for Special
Permits and Variances.
In reviewing applications for variances, special permits or development consultation
reviews the permit or special permit granting authority shall be guided by the
objectives, criteria, and guidelines contained in the publication Concord-Alewife Plan
in addition to the requirements of Sections 10.30 (Variances) and 10.40 (Special
Permits) and this Section 20.90. These guidelines are also intended to assist in
shaping any contemplated physical change within the Alewife Overlay Districts. With
respect to consistency with the Concord-Alewife Plan, special emphasis shall be
placed on preservation of key rights-of-way for infrastructure projects as indicated in
the Priority Infrastructure Plan.
20.93.3 Applicability. Buildings and uses within the Alewife Overlay Districts shall be controlled
by the pertinent regulations within the applicable base districts, except as modified by
20-37
the requirements of this Section 20.90, which shall apply in addition to the regulations
imposed by the base district map designations.
20.93.4 Districts. The Alewife Overlay Districts shall be identified in this Section 20.90 by the
following names:
1. Alewife Overlay District 1 (Quadrangle Northwest)
2. Alewife Overlay District 2 (Quadrangle Northeast)
3. Alewife Overlay District 3 (Quadrangle Southwest)
4. Alewife Overlay District 4 (Quadrangle Southeast)
5. Alewife Overlay District 5 (Shopping Center)
6. Alewife Overlay District 6 (Triangle)
20.94 Modifications to Permitted Uses
20.94.1 Additional Permitted Uses. In any base office or industrial district all uses listed in
Section 4.35 - Retail Business and Consumer Service Establishments shall be
permitted by special permit from the Planning Board (if not otherwise allowed as of
right in the district), subject to the following limitations unless the limitations are
specifically waived by the Planning Board upon its finding that the purposes set forth in
Section 20.92 above have been met:
1. No individual establishment may exceed 10,000 square feet in area.
2. The retail use shall be located on the first floor or basement of the building in
which it is located.
3. The total Gross floor Area devoted to retail uses may not exceed 10% of the
Gross Floor Area of the buildings constructed or authorized on the lot.
20.94.11 Modification to Uses Permitted in the IB-2 District. A Distribution Center, Parcel
Delivery Center, or Delivery Warehouse – Section 4.37 (d) shall be permitted in the
Industry B-2 district only after the granting of a special permit from the Planning Board.
20.94.2 Environmental Limitations. Within the Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6 the following
restrictions shall apply.
1. All dust, fumes, odors, smoke, or vapors are effectively confined to the
premises or disposed of so as to avoid air pollution.
2. Any noise, vibration, or flashing is not normally perceptible without instruments
at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the premises.
20.95 District Dimensional Regulations.
20.95.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum ratio of floor area to the lot area may be
increased as set forth below, after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning
Board.
1. Quadrangle Northwest District: 1.5 for all uses.
2. Quadrangle Northeast District: 1.5 for all uses.
3. Quadrangle Southwest and Quadrangle Southeast Districts: 1.5 for nonresidential
uses; 2.0 for residential uses.
20-38
4. Shopping Center District: 1.25 for non-residential uses; 2.0 for residential
uses. However, Gross Floor Area shall be further limited as set forth below.
(a) No individual retail establishment (Section 4.35 and 4.36) shall have
a Gross Floor Area exceeding 50,000 square feet, except in the case of
a grocery store or supermarket, which may be as large as 60,000 square
feet.
(b) Where the total amount of Gross Floor Area on a lot (which shall be
any lot or combination of lots held in common ownership as of January 1,
2006) exceeds 100,000 square feet, the square footage devoted to nonresidential
uses shall be at a minimum 20% and shall not exceed 50%.
For a lot (which shall be any lot or combination of lots held in common
ownership as of January 1, 2006) of ten acres or more, the required nonresidential
development shall consist of Retail Business and Consumer
Service Establishments, Section 4.35, exclusively until at least 225,000
square feet of retail use is located on the lot, after which any nonresidential
use shall be permitted.
Where a project subject to the provisions of this Paragraph (b) has
received a special permit from the Planning Board, the permit decision
shall establish how the requirements of this Paragraph (b) are met if a
project is constructed in phases over time.
5. Triangle District: 1.75 for non-residential uses; 2.0 for residential uses.
20.95.11 Additional FAR for Public Improvements.
In order to provide an incentive to property owners to protect important segments of
future roadways and infrastructure from permanent building construction, the Planning
Board, in its review of any Special Permit application, may grant additional FAR above
that permitted in Section 20.95.1 above in all Overlay Districts where the proposed
development incorporates or provides one or more of the following improvements or
property interests in a manner and to an extent determined to be sufficient to
significantly advance the objectives of the Concord-Alewife Plan.
1. Construction of a publicly accessible pedestrian bridge connection across the
railroad right of way between the Quadrangle Northeast District or that portion of
the Quadrangle Southeast District within 300 feet of the railroad right of way and
the Triangle District or incorporation of structural elements into a building’s
design that includes or would permit future construction of such a pedestrian
connection, as well as the conveyance (in a form acceptable to the City) of the
necessary fee or easement property interests in land that would permit access to
such a connection. In this instance the additional FAR, available for any use,
shall be 0.25 applied to the entire lot that is the subject of the special permit.
2. Conveyance of fee or easement property interests to the City of Cambridge
(in a form acceptable to the City) to permit the future construction of roadway
segments, pedestrian paths, the pedestrian bridge referenced above in
Paragraph 1, public parks and other publicly accessible open space and
recreation features consistent with the Concord-Alewife Plan, which segment,
20-39
path, park or open space is identified on the maps entitled Priority Infrastructure
Plan and Additional Infrastructure Plan or is otherwise identified by the Planning
Board at another location and determined by the Board to be of equal value and
consistent with those elements identified on the Map and the objectives set forth
in the Plan.
In this instance, the additional FAR shall be equal to the FAR otherwise permitted
on the lot as-of-right or by special permit, but shall be applied only to that portion
of the lot for which a fee or easement interest is to be conveyed.
20.95.2 Maximum Permitted Height. The maximum height for any building may be increased
as set forth below, after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board:
1. Quadrangle Northwest District: 55 feet for non-residential uses; 65 feet for
residential uses. However, buildings may be as high as 80 feet provided that only
the additional residential GFA provided for in Section 20.95.11 above may be
located in the part of the building between 65 feet and 80 feet. However, these
heights are modified further as set forth below:
(a) For any portion of a building within 100 feet of a residential or Open
Space zoning district the maximum height shall be 35 feet; for any portion of
a building more than 100 feet from a residential or Open Space zoning
district but within 200 feet of those districts, the maximum height shall be 45
feet.
2. Quadrangle Northeast District: 70 feet for all uses. However, these heights
are modified further as set forth below:
(a) For residential uses the height may be increased to 85 feet provided the
building floorplate above 70 feet is limited to 10,000 square feet or less and
those portions of buildings above 70 feet are separated by at least 50 feet.
(b) GFA transferred into this District pursuant to the TDR provisions of
Section 21.40 or the additional GFA provided for in Section 20.95.11 above,
may be located in portions of buildings used for residential purposes up to
105 feet in height provided the floorplate above 85 feet does not exceed
6,000 square feet and portions of buildings greater than 85 feet in height
are separated by at least 50 feet.
3. Quadrangle Southwest District: 55 feet for non-residential uses; 65 feet for
residential uses. However, buildings may be as high as 80 feet provided that
only the additional residential GFA provided for in Section 20.95.11 above may
be located in the part of the building between 65 feet and 80 feet. These heights
are modified further as set forth below:
(a) For any portion of a building within 100 feet of a residential or Open
Space zoning district (but not including the Fresh Pond Reservation Open
Space District) the maximum height shall be 35 feet; for any portion of a
building more than 100 feet from a residential or Open Space zoning district
(but not including the Fresh Pond Reservation Open Space District) but
within 200 feet of those districts the maximum height shall be 45 feet.
20-40
4. Quadrangle Southeast District: 70 feet for non-residential uses; 85 feet for
residential uses. However, these heights are modified further as set forth below:
(a) GFA transferred into this District pursuant to the TDR provisions of
Section 21.40, may be located in portions of buildings used for residential
purposes up to 105 feet in height provided the floorplate above 85 feet does
not exceed 10,000 square feet and portions of buildings greater than 85 feet
in height are separated by at least 50 feet.
5. Shopping Center District: 55 feet for all uses. However, these heights are
modified further as set forth below:
(a) For non-residential uses the height may be increased to 70 feet provided
the building floorplate above 55 feet is limited to 15,000 square feet or less
and those portions of buildings above 55 feet are separated by at least 50
feet; for residential uses the height may be increased to 85 feet provided
the building floorplate above 55 feet is limited to 10,000 square feet or less
and those portions of buildings above 55 feet are separated by at least 50
feet.
(b) GFA transferred into this District pursuant to the TDR provisions of
Section 21.40, may be located in portions of buildings used for residential
purposes up to 105 feet in height provided the floorplate above 85 feet does
not exceed 6,000 square feet and portions of buildings greater than 85 feet
in height are separated by at least 50 feet.
6. Triangle District: 85 feet for all uses. However, these heights are modified
further as set forth below:
(a) For residential uses the height may be increased to 105 feet provided
the building floorplate above 85 feet is limited to 10,000 square feet or less
and those portions of buildings above 85 feet are separated by at least 50
feet.
(b) Residential GFA transferred into this District pursuant to the TDR
provisions of Section 21.40, may be located in portions of buildings up to
125 feet in height provided the floorplate above 105 feet does not exceed
6,000 square feet and portions of buildings greater than 105 feet in height
are separated by at least 50 feet.
20.95.21 Permitted Height Within the Parkway Overlay District, Section 20.60.
The provision for heights in Section 20.95.2 above shall be subject to the further
height limitations of Sections 20.64.2 and 20.69.1 of the Parkway Overlay District.
20.95.3 Yard Requirements. Except as herein provided in this Section 20.95.3, all
development within the Alewife Overlay Districts shall meet the minimum yard
requirements of the applicable base zoning district; and in Southwest Quadrangle,
Southeast Quadrangle, Shopping Center and Triangle Districts the front yard
provisions of the Parkway Overlay District, Section 20.64.1, shall continue to apply.
20.95.31 Minimum Yard Requirements. The yard requirements of the applicable base zoning
district shall apply except as modified below.
20-41
1. Minimum Front Yard. The minimum front yard requirement in the Quadrangle
Northwest, Northeast, Southwest and Southeast Districts shall be fifteen (15) feet
(except for portions of lots subject to the Parkway Overlay District, which shall be
subject to the minimum front yard provisions of Section 20.60).
2. Any Yard Abutting a Residential or Open Space District. For that portion of a
yard in the Quadrangle Northwest and Southwest Districts that abuts a lot in a
Residence or Open Space district, that yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five
(25) feet and shall be subject to the use restrictions set forth in Section 20.95.32,
Paragraph 2 below.
20.95.32 Restrictions in Required or Provided Yards.
1. Required or Provided Front Yards. That area between the principal front wall
plane of a building and a street, whether required or provided, shall consist
entirely of Green Area or Permeable Open Space extending along the entire
length of the lot. Areas devoted to vehicular use are prohibited from this area
with the exception of access drives leading directly to parking facilities located
elsewhere on the site, in conformance with the requirements of Article 6.000.
The Open Space shall be located at mean grade of the abutting street but
nothing in this Section 20.95.32 shall prohibit customary landscaping features,
elements and grading that may vary the grade of the required setback above that
of the adjacent street provided the setback area remains essentially at grade.
Where a lot abuts more than two streets the provision of this Section shall apply
to no more than two streets.
2. Other Yards. Required Yards in the Quadrangle Northwest and Quadrangle
Southwest Districts, as set forth in Paragraph 2 of Section 20.95.31 above, shall
consist entirely of Green Area or Permeable Open Space. Areas devoted to
vehicular use are prohibited from this area.
20.95.33 Setbacks Applied to at-grade Open Parking Facilities. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Section 20.95.32 above or any provision of Article 6.000, any on grade open
parking facility shall be set back from the front lot line by at least ten feet. Such
setback shall be Open Space as required in Section 20.95.32, Paragraph 1 above.
20.95.34 Waiver of Yard Requirements. The yard requirements of the applicable base or Overlay
districts may be reduced or waived as set forth below.
1. Side and rear yard requirements of any applicable base zoning district may be
waived, subject to the minimum requirements of Section 20.95.31 above, and
front yards may be reduced to a minimum of fifteen (15) feet after the issuance of
a special permit from the Planning Board (and in the Parkway Overlay District
after making the findings required of the Planning Board in Section 20.63.7).
2. In the Shopping Center and Triangle Districts, the front yard requirements of
the Parkway Overlay District, Section 20.64.1, and the front yard requirements of
the applicable base district and this Section 20.95.3 may be waived entirely by
20-42
special permit from the Planning Board for any portion of a lot where the roadbed
of the abutting Alewife Brook Parkway is at least six feet above the grade of the
lot at the front property line.
3.The Planning Board shall consider the following in making its findings:
a. The objectives of the Concord-Alewife Plan continue to be met.
b. The stormwater management objectives for the area continue to be
met both on the site and as the site may be a part of a larger system
for managing stormwater runoff.
c. The reduction or waiver of yard requirements provides for more
efficient development of land; encourages or facilitates a more logical
pattern of buildings, streets, parks and open space; or enhances the
urban, pedestrian character of the area as envisioned in the Concord-
Alewife Plan.
20.95.4 Dwelling Unit Density. In any instance where the required Minimum Lot Area Per
Dwelling Unit in any base district is greater than 600 square feet the Planning Board
may issue a special permit to reduce the required Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit
to 600 square feet.
In any instance where additional Gross Floor Area is permitted on a lot as provided for
in Section 20.95.11, or Transfer of Development Rights, Section 21.40, the Planning
Board may allow additional dwelling units on the lot at the rate of one dwelling unit for
each 1,000 square feet of additional Gross floor Area.
20.96 At Grade Open Space and Permeable Area Requirements. Each lot shall be required
to provide open space located at grade in the quantities set forth below. That open
space may be any combination of Green Area, Permeable, Public, Publicly Beneficial,
or Private open space as defined in Article 2.000.
In addition, each lot shall provide Permeable Area in quantities set forth below.
Permeable Area shall be defined as that at-grade surface of a lot that is fully
permeable to the infiltration of water to the soil below and whose subsurface permits
the percolation of such surface water to the groundwater without interruption or
diversion by any building, pavement, structure, or other manmade element with the
exception of incidental utilities.
Nothing in these requirements shall prohibit the same portion of a lot from meeting
both the Open Space and the Permeable Area requirements of this Section 20.96
20.96.1 Quantity. The minimum ratio of Open Space and Permeable Area to the total area of
the lot shall be fifteen (15) percent for Open Space and twenty-five (25) percent for
Permeable Area. The Permeable Area requirement may be reduced as of right with
the certification to the Superintendent by the City Engineer that the lot and the
development upon it meet the Department of Public Works standards for water quality
management and the retention/detention of the difference between the 2-year 24-hour
pre-construction runoff hydrograph and the post-construction 25-year 24-hour runoff
hydrograph as outlined in the publication Proposed Concord – Alewife Area
Stormwater Management Guidelines, May 2006, Cambridge Department of Public
Works, and upon a finding by the Planning Board pursuant to its review of an
20-43
application under the provisions of Section 20.93.2, that such reduction advances the
relevant purposes of this Section.
20.96 .2 Pooled Open Space and Permeable Area Requirement.
In order to provide the flexibility to advance the policy objectives of the Concord-
Alewife Plan to create a system of parks and pathways throughout the Area, facilitate
the storage and management of stormwater runoff, encourage the development of
land management practices that facilitate and encourage the recharging of the area’s
groundwater, and allow multiple owners to cooperate in advancing these objectives to
their benefit as well as to the benefit of the general public, the Planning Board may
permit by special permit the pooling of Open Space and Permeable Area requirements
for one lot on other adjacent or non-contiguous lots, subject to the following
requirements:
1. There is no reduction in the total area of required Open Space or Permeable
Area unless such reduction is permitted by the Planning Board under the
provisions of Section 20.96.3 below.
2. The relocated Open Space or Permeable Area continues to serve, or better
serve, the policy objectives of the Concord-Alewife Plan.
3. More useful and better located open space and water management facilities are
created, which may, in turn, permit better designed and coordinated development
on the affected lots.
20.96 .3 Reduction in Required Open Space. The Planning Board may allow by Special Permit
the reduction of required Open Space, or permit such Open Space to be located other
than at grade if the applicant can demonstrate that the urban design and stormwater
management objectives as set forth in the Concord-Alewife Plan continue to be met,
as for example through the use of innovative stormwater management techniques like
green roofs.
20.97 Parking and Loading Requirements. Development in the Alewife Overlay Districts
shall conform to the off street Parking and Loading Requirements set forth in Article
6.000 for the applicable base zoning district, except as modified below.
20.97.1 Setbacks Applied to At-grade Open Parking Facilities. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Section 20.95.32 above or any provision of Article 6.000, any on grade open
parking facility shall be set back from the front lot line by at least ten feet. Such
setback shall be landscaped as required in Section 20.95.32, Paragraph 1 above.
20.97.2 Pooled Parking. In order to provide the flexibility to advance the policy objectives of
the Concord-Alewife Plan through the creation of more pedestrian friendly
development throughout the area, to permit greater permeable land surface to be
established, to facilitate environments with greater landscaping and green area
including parks and recreation areas, to more efficiently use the supply of parking
available in a district where greater use of non-auto forms of transportation are
encouraged and less land area devoted to parking use is desired, the Planning Board
may, by special permit, allow accessory parking serving one or more lots to be located
in whole or in part in pooled parking facilities, or a public parking facility, located
anywhere within the Alewife Overlay Districts, notwithstanding the limitations set forth
in Section 6.22.1. In granting such a special permit the Planning Board shall consider
the following:
20-44
1. The facility advances the objective of the Concord-Alewife Plan.
2. A shared facility is established that aids in implementation of effective
Transportation Demand Management measures to reduce dependence on the
single occupancy automobile.
3. The facility is appropriately located to serve the development it serves.
4. The facility is well designed, does not diminish the pedestrian–friendly quality
the area around it, and is otherwise consistent with the urban design objective of
the Concord-Alewife Plan.
20.97.3 Waiver of Gross Floor Area Provisions for Parking Facilities – Section 5.25. Because
of the unique factors related to flooding and groundwater management in Alewife, the
importance of maintaining a high level of permeability, and the difficulty of constructing
large areas of building below grade, the Planning Board may by special permit exempt
the Gross Floor Area contained in any above ground structured parking facility from
the FAR limitations established in this Section 20.90 and any applicable base zoning
(such special permit shall supercede the provisions of Section 5.25.42 for any lot
within the Alewife Overlay Districts). In granting such a special permit the Planning
Board shall consider the following:
1. The facility advances the objective of the Concord-Alewife Plan.
2. A shared facility is established that aids in implementation of effective
Transportation Demand Management measures to reduce dependence on the
single occupancy automobile.
3. The facility is well designed, does not diminish the pedestrian –friendly quality
the area around it, and is otherwise consistent with the urban design objective of
the Concord-Alewife Plan
4. The additional bulk of building above grade is well designed and does not
have an unreasonably negative impact on its abutters or the public realm.
5. The extent to which the construction of an above grade parking structure
facilitates the creation of at grade soil permeability.
20.97.4 Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements.
Any development seeking one or more special permits allowed in this Section 20.90
shall be subject to the minimum and maximum parking requirements and loading
requirements set forth in Column 3 of Section 6.36 – Schedule of Parking and Loading
Requirements.
20.98 Transfer of Development Rights. The transfer of permitted GFA from a Donating Lot
to a Receiving Lot shall be permitted in the Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6, subject to the
provisions of Section 21.40 and the dimensional and use provisions of the applicable
base zoning districts, as modified by the provisions of Alewife Overlay Districts as set
forth in the Section 20.90.
20.99 Subdivision of Lots. Where it is proposed to subdivide a lot (after approval by special
permit has been granted by the Planning Board for development on that lot) in order to
convey to the City of Cambridge an easement or fee interest in property for the
purpose of creation of a city or private street, a pedestrian pathway, a pedestrian
bridge, bicycle path, open space or park, (or otherwise provided by others as a
condition of the issuance of the special permit), such subdivision shall be permitted,
notwithstanding any definition of lot or street in this Ordinance or any limitation in
applicable base or overlay districts with regard to minimum lot size, required yards or
other dimensional, open space or other regulatory requirement or limitation. All
dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and this Section 20.90 shall be
20-45
satisfied by the lot as a whole as defined in the application for a special permit and
shall be waived with regard to any subsequent subdivided lots.
No development approved by special permit in this Section 20.90 shall be
subsequently rendered non-conforming with regard to the dimensional requirements
applicable to it as a result of a subdivision of land to create an approved public or
private street, park or pedestrian, bicycle or other pathway.
20.910 Special Provisions Related to Local Government Uses – Section 4.33 (f).
Notwithstanding any provisions of the applicable base district regulations or any
provision of this Section 20.90, all uses set forth in Section 4.33 (f) shall be permitted
as of right in Overlay Districts 1-4, subject to the following as-of-right dimensional and
other requirements.
20.910.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum FAR shall be as permitted in Section
20.95.1 for residential uses.
20.910.2 Maximum Height. The maximum height shall be as permitted in Section 20.95.2 for
residential uses, subject to the limitations imposed in the Parkway Overlay District
(Section 20.60).
20.910.3 Yard Requirements. The following yard requirements only shall apply.
1. Front Yard. A fifteen foot front yard shall be required.
2. Side and Rear Yards. A ten foot side and rear yard shall be required.
3. Any Yards Abutting a Residential or Open Space District. Any yard abutting a
residential or open space district shall be twenty-five feet and shall consist
entirely of Green Area or Permeable Open Space.
20.910.4 Required Open Space. The minimum ratio of Open Space to the total area of the lot
shall be fifteen (15) percent and shall consist of any combination of Green Area,
Permeable, Public, Publicly beneficial or Private open space. The Open Space shall
be located at grade.
20.910.5 Permeable Area Requirement. There shall be no Permeable Area requirement
provided the City Engineer certifies to the Superintendent of Buildings that the
development meets the Department of Public Works standards for water quality
management and the retention/detention of the difference between the 2-year 24-hour
pre-construction runoff hydrograph and the post-construction 25-year 24-hour runoff
hydrograph.
20.910.6 The provisions of Section 19.20 and 19.50 shall not apply to these uses.
20.910.6 Other Requirements. All other requirements and procedures of this Section 20.90 and
the applicable base zoning district shall continue to apply.
20.920 Special Provisions Related to Lots of 5,000 Square Feet or Less. Notwithstanding any
provision of the applicable base district regulations or any provision of this Section
20.90, for lots of 5,000 square feet or less in existence as of January 1, 2005 and held
in separate ownership from any abutting lot, the following dimensional standards shall
apply as of right.
20.920.1 Maximum Floor Area Ratio. The maximum FAR shall be as permitted in Section
20.95.1.
20-46
20.920.2 Maximum Height. The maximum height shall be as permitted in Section 20.95.2,
subject to the limitations imposed in the Parkway Overlay District (Section 20.60).
20.920.3 Yard Requirements. The following yard requirements only shall apply.
1. Front Yard. A fifteen foot front yard shall be required.
2. Side and Rear Yards. A ten foot side and rear yard shall be required.
3. Any Yards Abutting a Residential or Open Space District. Any yard abutting a
residential or open space district shall be twenty-five feet and shall consist
entirely of Green Area or Permeable Open Space.
20.920.4 Required Open Space. The minimum ratio of Open Space to the total area of the lot
shall be fifteen (15) percent and shall consist of any combination of Green Area,
Permeable, Public, Publicly beneficial or Private open space. The Open Space shall
be located at grade.
20.920.5 Permeable Area Requirement. There shall be no Permeable Area requirement
provided the City Engineer certifies to the Superintendent of Buildings that the
development meets the Department of Public Works standards for water quality
management and the retention/detention of the difference between the 2-year 24-hour
pre-construction runoff hydrograph and the post-construction 25-year 24-hour runoff
hydrograph to the maximum extent possible.
20.920.6 Other Requirements. All other requirements and procedures of this Section 20.90 and
the applicable base zoning district shall continue to apply.
20.100 MASSACHUSETTS AVENUE OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.101 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Massachusetts Avenue
Overlay District which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified
in this Section 20.100. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to
the area described generally as Northern Massachusetts Avenue and certain abutting
portions of the neighborhood abutting it.
20.102 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.100 to augment base zoning regulations
in the District in order (a) to protect and promote the retail and service ecosystem
along the Avenue, (b) to create a more harmonious and consistent image for the
development along the Avenue and adjacent areas, to encourage good building
design and site development which enhances the pedestrian amenities along the
Avenue, (c) to ensure that changes along the Avenue are compatible with the scale
and character of the abutting neighborhoods, (d) to encourage the retention of existing
buildings of historic value and uses which serve the abutting neighborhoods, and to (e)
discourage new development inappropriate in both scale and design.
20.103 Applicability. The Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District shall be an overlay district
on the zoning map established by Section 3.20.
20.103.1 The buildings and land uses within said district shall be controlled by the pertinent
regulations within the base zoning district, except as modified by the requirements of
this Section 20.100 which shall apply in addition to regulations imposed by the base
20-47
zoning map designations. Where the base zoning regulations differ from the
requirements of this Section 20.100 the stricter provisions shall apply except where a
waiver from those requirements is granted by special permit from the Planning Board
under any of the provisions of this Section 20.100.
20.103.2 deleted #1385
20.104 Dimensional Standards in the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District.
20.104.1 Maximum Height. The maximum height of any structure in the Overlay District shall be
sixty (60) feet or the height applicable in the base district, whichever is less.
20.104.2 Modifications to the Definition of Gross Floor Area. Notwithstanding the definition of
Gross Floor Area contained in Article 2.000 - Definitions, the following shall not be
included as part of the gross floor area of any building in the Overlay District:
1. Enclosed bays and other small projections from the principal wall plane of a
building normally included as gross floor area, provided they are three (3) feet or
less in depth and further provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The maximum width of the projection does not exceed six (6) feet in
length;
b. No more than fifty (50) percent of the area of each principal wall plane is
covered with such projections.
20.104.3 Additional Dimensional Standards for Lots Located in both a Business C zoning district
and an abutting Residence C-1 or Residence B Zoning District
The provisions of this Section 20.104.3 shall apply to lots held in single ownership as of
June 1, 2008 that are located entirely within the Overlay District and shall be granted
after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board
1 . Modification of the Transitional Requirements of Section 5.40. The Planning
Board may waive the Front and Side Yard and Height requirements of Section
5.40 for Hotel or Motel Use provided the Board finds that the intended buffering
provided by the provisions of Section 5.40 is reasonably provided through other
means. The Board shall specifically find the following:
a. The lot contains a contiguous area that is within the adjoining residential
district.
b. The portion of the lot in the residential district is substantially dedicated to
at grade Green Area, Permeable, or Publically Beneficial Open Space as
defined in Article 2.000.
c. The portion of the lot dedicated to Open Space provides an adequate
transition buffer between any structure constructed in the commercially
zoned portion of the lot and adjacent residential uses in the residential
district. Such Open Space shall have a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet.
2. Modification of the FAR limitations for a Hotel or Motel Use (Sections 5.30 and
5.33), for a lot located in both a Business C and a Residence B Zoning District.
The Planning Board may allow a FAR of 1.60, calculated on the area of the entire
lot, in both the Business C and Residence B districts, subject to the following
conditions and limitations:
a. All of the resulting Gross Floor Area will be located on the Business C
20-48
portion of the lot.
b. All parking required by this ordinance will be located in a below-grade
parking facility.
c. The at-grade portion of the lot within the Residence B District is
substantially dedicated to Green Area, Permeable, or Publically Beneficial
Open Space as defined in Article 2.000.
d. The additional FAR of 1.60 shall only apply to the first 15,000 square feet
of a lot. For portions of the lot greater than 15, 000 square feet the FAR
permitted in the applicable base Business C and residential districts shall
continue to apply.
e. No preferably preserved significant building, as determined by the
Cambridge Historical Commission, is demolished, as set forth in the City of
Cambridge Demolition Ordinance #965.
20.105 Restrictions in Required and/or Provided Setbacks. That area between the principal
wall plane of a building and a public street or public park whether required or provided
shall be devoted to Green Area Open Space as defined in Article 2.000 of this
Ordinance, an expansion of the adjacent public sidewalk, park, or other landscaped or
paved area devoted exclusively to pedestrian use and extending along the entire
length of the lot facing the street or park. Areas devoted to vehicular use are
prohibited from this area with the exception of access drives to parking facilities
located elsewhere on the site and which shall be limited to a total of thirty (30) feet of
width for each one hundred (100) feet of lot frontage.
The required Green Area Open Space, landscaping or other paved area devoted to
pedestrian uses shall be located at the mean grade of the relevant public street or
open space at the property line unless an exception is granted under the provisions of
Section 20.108 of this Section 20.100.
20.106 Use Restrictions. The ground (first) floor of that portion of a building facing a public
street or public park shall consist of Gross Floor Area devoted to any one or
combination of the following uses: Residential (Section 4.31), Office (Section 4.34),
retail business (Section 4.35), Institutional (Section 4.33) meeting the following
conditions:
1. At least eighty (80) percent of the floor elevation of the ground (first) floor shall
be no higher than the four (4) feet above the mean grade of the adjacent public
sidewalk or public park, at the property line, except that Retail Business uses in
new construction shall be located at mean grade;
2. The use shall have a depth of at least twenty (20) feet;
3. Where a lot fronts on two streets the provisions of this Section 11.106 shall
apply only to the principal arterial street frontage provided the remainder of the
ground floor of the building facing the public street shall be screened with a
permanent wall in materials equal in quality to those of the rest of the building
and having a minimum opacity of fifty (50) percent.
20-49
4. The ground (first floor use of any building, to a minimum depth of forty (40) feet
from the ground floor building facade fronting the principal arterial street, shall not
include areas of parking facilities in a structure that is not underground according
to the standards and definitions set forth in Section 5.25 of this Zoning
Ordinance. Without limitation, in accordance with Section 5.25, this exclusion
shall apply to parking spaces and vehicular access drives that are either fully
enclosed within the building, or covered by a structure above while remaining
open on the sides. Access drives that are open to the sky are permitted in
accordance with the requirements of Section 20.105 above. North of Porter
Square, one parking space for each unit in a Townhouse shall be exempt from
the limitations of this Section 20.106.
20.106. 1 Accessory Parking and Vehicular Access for Hotel Use. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Table 4.30 and Section 6.22,, for a lot located in both a Business C and a
Residence B zoning district, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to allow
accessory Hotel or Motel Use parking within the Residence B District, including
vehicular access to the parking facility and loading facility, with the following limitations
and conditions:
1. The portion of the lot in the Residence B district is contiguous to the portion of
the lot in the BC District.
2. The parking is located in a below-grade parking structure.
3. The at-grade portion of the lot within the Residence B district is substantially
dedicated to Green Area, Permeable, or Publically Beneficial Open Space as
defined in this Ordinance.
20.107 Design Standards
20.107.1 Building Facades. Building facades shall be designed to enhance the visual quality of
the Overlay District, create an environment pleasant and inviting for the pedestrian
and compatible with the residential neighborhoods in close proximity to the district.
The following standards shall apply:
1. Principal building entrances shall face Massachusetts Avenue where a lot
abuts the Avenue;
2. Where office and/or retail uses are accommodated on the ground floor each
separately leased space shall have an individual public entrance onto the
abutting street where any portion of the space fronts towards the street;
3. Facades facing a public street, a public park, or designated city landmark
building, or building in a local historic district or neighborhood conservation
district, on an abutting lot, shall consist of a minimum twenty-five (25) percent
clear glass in total for the facade, with clear glass increased to fifty (50) percent
on the ground floor where retail and office uses are established. The maximum
amount of clear glass permitted shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the facade.
Reflective and opaque glass shall be prohibited.
20-50
20.108 Divergence from the standards specified in Sections 20.105 - 20.107 may be allowed
by issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board. The Board shall grant such
a permit upon its determination that the development proposed will better serve the
objectives of this Section 20.100 than if the standards were followed and that the
criteria specified in Section 10.43 will be satisfied.
The Board shall be guided in its determination by Northern Massachusetts Avenue
Urban Design Guidelines and other such guidelines as may be established for this
portion of Massachusetts Avenue. This Section 20.108 is intended for variations from
the standards which may be appropriate in specific locations and circumstances and
where careful design detail is a controlling factor.
20.109 Nonconforming structures. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.23, that
portion of a legal, nonconforming structure lying within the Massachusetts Avenue
Overlay District which is destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, or other catastrophe
may be rebuilt or restored and used again, in the same way as it had been legally
used immediately before the damage, without limit as to cost of such rebuilding or
restoring provided the following conditions are met:
1. Any restoration or rebuilding shall commence within twelve (12) months after
the catastrophe;
2. The structure shall be restored or rebuilt to the same design, including
materials and design details as existed previously; or should the restoration not
be feasible necessitating that the structure be rebuilt to a different design, said
design shall be at least equal to the original design of the structure in quality of
materials used, the quantity and quality of design details employed, and the
compatibility of the site design with abutting properties;
3. The Community Development Department shall certify to the Superintendent
of Buildings that the above conditions have been met.
With respect to the comparability of newly designed buildings, the Community
Development Department shall consult the Cambridge Historical Commission for
structures greater than fifty (50) years old. Should the Community Development
Department find that said conditions have not been met the restoring or
rebuilding shall require a special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeal.
The restored or rebuilt structure shall in no aspect increase the nonconforming
nature of the original structure; nothing in this Section 20.110, however, shall
prohibit a rebuilding or restoring which reduces the nonconforming nature of the
original structure.
20.110 Additional Standards Applicable in the Business A-2 Districts. Within the portions of
the Overlay District having a base Business A-2 zoning district designation (the BA-2
Districts) the regulations set forth above in Subsections 20.103 to 20.109 shall apply
except as modified by this Section 20.110. However, the provisions of this Section
20.110 shall not apply in the portion of the BA-2 District north of the centerline of
Richard Avenue.
20-51
20.110.1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District shall
apply equally within the included BA-2 Districts. The intent of the additional standards
applicable in the BA-2 Districts is to encourage the retention and expansion of
pedestrian-friendly ground floor retail and other active non-residential uses on the
ground floors of buildings along the Avenue. Additionally, as sites are redeveloped in
the future, new buildings and streetscapes should have a scale, urban design, and mix
of uses that strengthens the urban character of the Avenue as the principal
commercial corridor serving the North Cambridge, Agassiz and Neighborhood Nine
neighborhoods while also respecting the historic characteristics of the Avenue.
20.110.2 Use Regulations. In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 20.106, the
following regulations shall apply.
20.110.21 Required Ground Floor Non-Residential Uses. The ground floor of any building that
fronts directly onto Massachusetts Avenue shall consist of at least one (1) active nonresidential
use meeting the following requirements:
1. Range of Qualifying Uses. The required ground floor active non-residential uses
shall be limited to one or a combination of the following uses, to the extent
permitted in the base zoning district:
a. Section 4.34 a (office of a physician, dentist or other medical practitioner not
located in a clinic listed under subsection 4.33(d)), b (office of an accountant,
attorney, or other non-medical professional person (includes properly
licensed massage therapists), c (real estate, insurance or other agency
office), d (general office use), e (bank, trust company or similar financial
institution (retail banking only));
b. Section 4.35 a (retail sales), c (barber shop, beauty shop, laundry and dry
cleaning pickup agency, shoe repair, self service laundry or other similar
establishment), d (hand laundry, dry cleaning or tailoring shop), e
(lunchroom, restaurant, cafeteria), f (restaurant or bar), g (entertainment), h
(theater or hall for public gatherings), i (commercial recreation), k (printing
shop, photographer’s studio), l (veterinary establishment, kennel, pet shop or
similar establishment), o (fast order food establishment), q (art/craft studio), r
(bakery, retail);
c. Section 4.36 a (sales place for flowers, garden supplies, agricultural produce
conducted partly or wholly outdoors; commercial greenhouse or garden);
d. Section 4.56 a(4) (religious or social recreation center), c(4) (college theater),
e(4,5,6) (medical clinics), f (social service or community center), g(3)
(museum), g(5) (public park, playground, or public recreation building), i(2)
(museum or non commercial gallery).
2. Minimum Depth. The required ground floor uses shall have a minimum depth of
forty (40) feet measured from the Massachusetts Avenue frontage of the building
(or the full depth of the building if less than forty (40) feet).
20-52
3. Floor Elevation. The floor elevation of the required ground floor uses shall be at
the mean grade of the adjacent public sidewalk.
4. Minimum Linear Frontage. The required ground floor non-residential use shall
occupy a minimum of 75% of the linear frontage of the building facing
Massachusetts Avenue.
5. Individual Store Size.
a. In portions of the included BA-2 Districts north of Porter Square, any separately
leased required ground floor non-residential use shall contain no more than
5,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area, which calculation of square footage shall
include any floor area located below grade.
b. In portions of the included BA-2 Districts south of Porter Square, any separately
leased required ground floor non-residential use shall contain no more than
2,500 squre feet of Gross Floor Area, which calculation of square footage shall
exclude any floor area located below grade. However, the Planning Board may
grant modifications to such Gross Floor Area limitation, pursuant to Section
20.110.22 below, to accommodate a pre-existing non-residential use of building
or for other reasons that are in support of the non-residential use purposes of the
Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District.
6. Minimum Ground Floor Height. For any ground floor portion of a building
containing a required non-residential use the minimum ground floor height shall be
fifteen (15) feet measured in the manner described in Paragraph 20.110.42. If the
ground floor height is reduced below fifteen (15) feet by special permit or variance,
there shall be a commensurate reduction in the total height of the building.
7. Maximum Bank Frontage. No bank, trust company or similar financial institution
may occupy a building frontage of more than twenty-five (25) feet.
20.110.22 Modifications to Standards. As set forth below, the Planning Board may grant a special
permit to waive certain requirements of Subsection 20.110.21 above. A project
receiving a special permit pursuant to this Subsection 20.110.22 shall be considered
to meet the requirements of Subsection 20.110.21 for the purpose of applying the
other provisions of this Section 20.110.
1. Modifications to the Dimensional Provisions of Subsection 20.110.21
The Planning Board may approve modifications to the dimensional requirements
set forth in Subsection 20.110.21 Paragraphs (2-7) upon making a determination
that (a) the proposed modified dimensions do not substantially derogate from the
intent of the requirement to provide for a reasonably continuous active ground
floor frontage along the public street and (b) the overall floor area of required
active non-residential ground floor uses is not substantially reduced and (c) the
modifications are the minimum necessary to reasonably accommodate the new
construction or use on the lot.
20-53
2. Additional Non-Residential Uses Not Otherwise Permitted in Subsection
20.110.21
The Planning Board may approve active non-residential ground floor uses not
specifically listed in Subsection 20.110.21 Paragraph (1), to the extent permitted in
the base zoning district, upon making a determination that an alternate ground
floor use will provide services or amenities to the general public and will promote
an active, pedestrian-friendly street front consistent with the objectives of this
Overlay District and the purpose of the standards applicable in the BA-2 Districts.
20.110.23 In general, it shall not be allowed to construct a new building directly fronting
Massachusetts Avenue that cannot meet either the requirements of Section 20.110.21
or the standards by which modifications to that section are permitted by special permit
as set forth in Section 20.110.22.
However, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to waive the requirements of
Section 20.110.21 to allow the construction of a building substantially or completely
devoted to residential or dormitory uses provided the Board determines that all of the
following conditions and requirements are met:
(a) the existing site does not currently contain active non-residential uses as listed in
Subsection 20.110.21 Paragraph (1), and has not contained such uses within the
past five (5) years prior to applying for a special permit;
(b) the provision of active non-residential ground floor uses would be detrimental to
abutting properties or to the neighborhood character; and
(c) active non-residential ground floor uses would not be commercially viable at that
specific location.
A project that has been exempted from the requirements of Subsection 20.110.21 by
special permit as set forth in this Subsection 20.110.23 or by variance shall not be
considered to meet the requirements of Subsection 20.110.21 for the purpose of
applying the other provisions of this Section 20.110.
20.110.3 Dimensional Regulations
20.110.31 FAR. Notwithstanding the general applicability standards set forth in Subsection
20.103.1, the following Floor Area Ratio (FAR) limitations shall apply in place of those
set forth in the base zoning district or elsewhere in the Overlay District to the portions
of a lot contained within the BA-2 Districts, provided that such lot has direct frontage
onto Massachusetts Avenue. For a lot with no direct frontage onto Massachusetts
Avenue, and for portions of a lot that are not contained within the BA-2 Districts, the
FAR requirements generally applicable in the base district or elsewhere in the Overlay
District shall apply.
1. Mixed Use Lots. The maximum allowed FAR shall be 1.75 for any lot that consists
entirely of residential or dormitory uses, as listed in Subsections 4.31 (a-h) and
20-54
paragraph 4.33(b)(7), above the ground floor and includes ground floor active nonresidential
uses meeting the requirements of Subsection 20.110.21.
2. Other Lots. The maximum allowed FAR shall be 1.0 for any lot that does not meet
the definition of a Mixed Use Lot as set forth in Paragraph (1) above. This shall
include any lot that is predominantly non-residential in use or any lot that is
predominantly residential or dormitory in use but does not meet the requirements
of Subsection 20.110.21, and shall specifically include any lot for which a waiver
has been granted as set forth in Subsection 20.110.23.
20.110.32 Basement Gross Floor Area Exemption. Notwithstanding any provision of the
applicable base zoning district, in the BA-2 Districts the Gross Floor Area of any
basement space directly accessed through and serving a ground floor establishment
of any mixed use building facing Massachusetts Avenue shall be exempt from the
calculation of FAR on a Mixed Use Lot as set forth in Section 20.110.31 above.
20.110.33 Floor Area Waiver for Enclosed Bays and Projections. The following provisions shall
apply in place of the provisions set forth in Subsection 20.104.2. Notwithstanding the
definition of Gross Floor Area contained in Article 2.000 – Definitions, the floor area
contained within enclosed bays and other small projections from the principal wall
plane of a building, including projections and bays carried to the ground, normally
defined as Gross Floor Area, shall be exempted from the calculation of GFA and FAR
on a lot, provided all of the following standards are met:
1. The exempted bays and projections must not extend more than three and a half
(3.5) feet from the principal exterior wall plane of the building, and no individual
bay or projection may exceed twelve (12) feet in width.
2. No more than fifty (50) percent of the area of each principal wall plane may be
covered with such projections.
20.110.34 Maximum Height. Generally, the maximum height of any structure shall be the height
applicable in the base district. However, notwithstanding the base district regulations
and notwithstanding the general applicability standards set forth in 20.103.1, to the
extent that the height of the ground floor non-residential space exceed ten (10) feet as
measured in the manner described in Paragraph 20.110.42 below, the maximum
height may be increased to fifty (50) feet in the included BA-2 Districts for any mixed
use building with direct frontage onto Massachusetts Avenue and located on a Mixed
Use Lot as set forth in Section 20.110.31 above. Additionally, the portion of such a
mixed use building that faces Massachusetts Avenue shall be exempt from the bulk
control plane requirements of Footnote 5.33(k) in the Table of Dimensional
Requirements; however, the provisions of Footnote 5.33(k) shall nonetheless apply to
rear portions of a building within 50 feet of a residential zoning district line.
20.110.35 Restrictions in Required and/or Provided Setbacks. The requirements set forth in
Section 20.105 shall apply. However, where a building fronts on more than two
streets, the provisions of Section 20.105 shall apply on only two streets. In any case,
20-55
where a building fronts Massachusetts Avenue, the provisions of Section 20.105 shall
apply to the Massachusetts Avenue frontage.
20.110.36 Required Front Yards. In the BA-2 District south of Arlington Street, notwithstanding
the provisions of footnote (m) in Section 5.33, Paragraph 2 of this Zoning Ordinance, a
five-foot front yard setback shall be required in all instances unless the Planning Board
reduces or waives the requirement upon granting a special permit. Such special
permit may be granted if the Planning Board finds, that considering the size of the
sidewalk and the setbacks of the abutting buildings, a reduction or waiver of the
regiment would support the purpose and objectives of the Massachusetts Avenue
Overlay District.
20.110.4 Design Standards. Buildings shall conform to the requirements set forth in Section
20.107, except as modified below.
20.110.41 Building Facades. The requirements for public entrances and clear glass set forth in
Subsection 20.107.1 Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall apply to any ground-floor nonresidential
use, including those uses required by Subsection 20.110.21. Required
clear glass on the ground floor façade shall be distributed on the façade such that at
least seventy-five (75) percent of the required glass is located below the midpoint
between the finished floor and the underside of the joists above.
20.110.42 Measurement of Building Facades. For purposes of this Section 20.110, where
reference is made to the area of the façade of any given floor, the vertical dimension
of that floor shall be measured from the finished interior floor to the underside of the
structural joists of the floor above. The horizontal dimension shall be measured to the
centerline of the demising wall of a separately leased space, or to the exterior wall of
the building, as applicable. Where reference is made to the entire façade, the vertical
dimension shall be measured from the mean grade of the façade facing the street (or
other feature) to the underside of the structural rafters supporting the roof.
20.110.5 Parking Exemption for Seasonal Outdoor Seating. Notwithstanding any provision of
the applicable base zoning district, seasonal, temporary outdoor seating available for
any length of time between April 15 and October 31 shall be exempt from the parking
requirements of Section 6.36.5 (e) and (f) for any retail use listed in Section 6.36.5 (e)
or (f), provided that the total number of seasonal seats does not exceed fifty (50) or
fifty percent of the total number of permanent seats provided at the establishment,
whichever is less.
20.110.6 Existing and Historic Structures
20.111.61 The building design standards and conditions set forth in Section 20.106 Paragraphs
(1) and (2), Section 20.107, and Subsection 20.110.21 Paragraphs (2), (3) and (6)
shall not apply to any building constructed before April 5, 2012. However, a building
constructed before April 5, 2012, which in whole or in part meets the requirements of
this Section 20.100, shall not be altered so as to increase the degree to which it does
not comply with this Section 20.100.
20-56
20.110.62 Any lot containing a historic structure as listed below, or as may be designated a
Preferably Preserved Significant building by the Cambridge Historical Commission,
shall be exempt from the requirements of 20.110.21. If the applicable requirements of
Section 20.110.21 are not met, the lot shall not be considered a Mixed Use Lot under
the provisions of Subsection 20.110.31 above. However, notwithstanding any other
provisions of Subsection 20.110.31, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to
increase the allowed FAR in the BA-2 Districts, but not to exceed 1.75, for any
combination of permitted uses upon finding that the increased FAR would (a) facilitate
the preservation of the historic structure through economic reuse, (b) preserve the
essential historically significant elements of the structure’s architecture and setting, (c)
introduce uses that are respectful of the structure’s historic character, and (d) advance
the stated purpose of the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District and the purpose of
the standards applicable in the BA-2 Districts.
Lots Containing Identified Historic Structures. The following street address numbers
on Massachusetts Avenue shall designate lots containing historic structures for the
purpose of this Subsection 20.110.62: 1675, 1676, 1679, 1684,1686, 1696, 1705,
1720,1734, 1735, 1741, 1749, 1751, 1753, 1759, 1771, 1800, 1991, 1996-2006, 2014-
2018, 2020-2024, 2026-2080, 2029, 2067, 2088-2098, 2103, 2161, 2179, 2200, 2203,
2210, 2211, 2218, 2222-2224 , 2240, 2254, 2270, 2301, 2307, 2343, 2508-2596,
2535, 2557-2585; and in addition, 3 Linnaean Street.
20.110.63 Nonconforming Structures. The provisions of Section 20.109 shall not apply in the BA-
2 District north of Porter Square. Except as otherwise set forth in this Section 20.110,
nonconforming structures shall be governed by the regulations set forth in Article
8.000 of the Zoning Ordinance.
20.111 The Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District shall be considered an area of special
planning concern. Notwithstanding the provisions in Section 19.43.1 – Applicability of
Large Project Review Procedure, in the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District the
Large Project Review Procedure shall apply to any development proposal containing
more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of Gross Floor Area but less than fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet, unless such development is exempt by virtue of the
provisions of Section 19.45.
20.200 PROSPECT STREET OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.201 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Prospect Street Overlay
District which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this
Section 20.200. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to a
single area described generally as Prospect Street and certain abutting portions of the
neighborhood around it.
20.202 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.200 to augment base zoning regulations
in the District in order to create a more harmonious and consistent image for the area
along Prospect Street and adjacent areas, to encourage good building design and site
development which enhances the pedestrian amenities along the street, to ensure that
20-57
future development and redevelopment is compatible with the character of the abutting
neighborhoods, to encourage the retention of existing buildings of historic value and of
uses which serve the abutting neighborhoods.
20.203 Applicability. The Prospect Street Overlay District shall be an overlay district on the
zoning map established by Section 3.20.
20.203.1 The buildings and land uses within said district shall be controlled by the pertinent
regulations of the base zoning district, except as they may be modified by the
requirements of this Section 20.200 which shall apply in addition to regulations
imposed by the base zoning districts.
20.204 Dimensional Standards in the Prospect Street Overlay District.
20.204.1 Modifications to the Definition of Gross Floor Area. Notwithstanding the definition of
Gross Floor Area contained in Article 2.000 - Definitions, the following shall not be
included as part of the gross floor area of any building in the Overlay District:
1. Enclosed bays and other small projections from the principal wall plane of a
building normally included as gross floor area, provided they are forty-two (42)
inches or less in depth and further provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The maximum width of the projection does not exceed six (6) feet in length;
b. No more than fifty (50) percent of the area of each principal wall plane is
covered with such projections.
2. Temporary awnings over entrances, porches, or outdoor eating areas,
permanent canopies over building entrances.
20.204.2 Minimum Green Area Open Space in the Prospect Street Overlay District. If such
Open Space is not required under the applicable base zoning district for some or all
permitted uses, a minimum of 15% Green Area Open Space shall be required. This
Green Area Open Space may serve to help meet the requirement for Private Open
Space in any applicable base zoning district provided all dimensional standards for
Private Open Space are met. Notwithstanding the definition of Green Area Open
Space in Article 2.000, Definitions, a paved expansion of three (3) feet wide or less of
the adjacent public sidewalk devoted exclusively to pedestrian use, as permitted in
Section 20.204.32, may serve to help meet this Green Area Open Space
requirement.
20.204.3 Yard Requirements
20.204.31 Minimum Yard Requirements in the Prospect Street Overlay District. If no front yard
is required under the applicable base zoning district, the minimum required front yard
for that portion of a lot fronting Prospect Street or another street in a business district
shall be three (3) feet.
20.204.32 Restrictions in Required and/or Provided Yards. The area between the principal wall
plane of a building and a public street, whether required or provided, shall be devoted
to any combination of the following: Green Area Open Space as defined in Article
2.000 of this Ordinance, an expansion of the adjacent public sidewalk, or a
landscaped or paved area devoted exclusively to pedestrian use and extending along
the entire length of the lot facing the street.
20-58
Areas devoted to vehicular use, including canopies over fuel pumps at Automobile
Service Stations, are prohibited from this area with the exception of access drives
leading directly to parking facilities located elsewhere on the site. Such drives shall
be limited per lot to a maximum of one two-way access drive (and associated curb
cut) or two one-way access drives (and associated curb cuts) per lot shall be
permitted. Any access drive shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width in nonresidential
districts for a two-way drive or fifteen (15) feet in width for a one-way drive,
and twenty (20) feet in width in residential districts for two-way drives and ten (10)
feet in width for a one-way drive.
The required Green Area Open Space, landscaping or other paved area devoted to
pedestrian uses shall be located at the mean grade of abutting public streets at the
property line, unless an exception is granted under the provisions of Section 20.208
below. Nothing in this Section 20.200 shall prohibit customary landscape features,
elements and grading that may vary the grade of the required setback above that of
the adjacent street or park, provided the setback remains essentially at grade.
20.204.33 Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 20.204.31 and 20.204.32 above or any
provision of Article 6.000, any on grade open parking facility shall be set back from
front lot line by at least seven (7) feet. Such setback shall be landscaped as required
in Section 20.204.32 above.
20.205 Use Restrictions
20.205.1 The ground (first) floor of that portion of a building facing a public street or public park
shall consist of Gross Floor Area devoted to any one or combination of the following
active uses: Residential (Section 4.31), Office (Section 4.34), retail business (Section
4.35), Institutional (Section 4.33), but specifically excluding as a permitted use or
activity mechanical rooms, Gross Floor Area in structured parking, and canopies over
fuel pumps at Automobile Service Stations. Additionally, such active uses on the
ground floor shall meet the following conditions:
a. At least eighty (80) percent of the floor elevation of the ground (first) floor shall be
no higher than the four (4) feet above the mean grade of the adjacent public
sidewalk or public park, at the property line, except that Retail Business uses in
new construction shall be located at mean grade; and
b. The use shall have a depth of at least twenty (20) feet.
20.205.2 Where service and repair of cars is permitted in the base district, repair work shall be
conducted within a building and parking of vehicles awaiting repair shall be screened
from the sidewalk and from neighboring residential development by a fence or
vegetation.
20.206 Design Standards
20.206.1 Building Facades. Building facades shall be designed to enhance the visual quality of
the Overlay District, create an environment pleasant and inviting for the pedestrian
and compatible with the residential neighborhoods in close proximity to the district.
The following standards shall apply to any building constructed after December 1,
2006; a building constructed before December 1, 2006, which in whole or in part
20-59
meets the requirements of this Section 20.206.1, shall not be altered so as to increase
the degree of non-conformity with this Section.
a. Where office and/or retail uses are accommodated on the ground floor each
separately leased space shall have an individual public entrance onto the abutting
street where any portion of the space fronts towards the street; and
b. Facades facing a public right of way, a public park, or designated city landmark
building, or building in a local historic district or neighborhood conservation district,
on an abutting lot, shall consist of a minimum twenty-five (25) percent clear glass
in total for the facade, with clear glass increased to fifty (50) percent on the ground
floor where retail and office uses are established. The maximum amount of clear
glass permitted shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the facade. Reflective and
opaque glass shall be prohibited.
c. Where the façade of the ground floor is required to have a minimum of 50% clear
glass, that glass shall be distributed on the façade such that at least seventy-five
percent of the requirement is located below the midpoint between the finished
floor and the underside of the joists above.
d. For the purposes of this Section 20.206.1, the area of the façade of any given
floor shall be measured vertically from the finished interior floor to the underside of
the structural joist of the floor above.
20.206.2 Landscape. Front yards of buildings shall be landscaped to enhance the pedestrian
experience along Prospect Street. To the extent practicable, shade trees should be
incorporated along the sidewalk. The following standard shall apply:
For any new development or redevelopment on a lot, an existing or new tree shall be
required, on the lot within ten (10) feet of the public sidewalk or in the public sidewalk,
for each twenty-five (25) feet of lot frontage along Prospect Street.
20.207 Divergence from Standards
Divergence from the standards specified in Sections 20.204 - 20.206 may be allowed
by issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board. The Board shall grant such
a permit upon its determination that the development proposed will better serve the
objectives of this Section 20.200 than if the standards were followed and that the
criteria specified in Section 10.43 will be satisfied.
The Board shall be guided in its determination by Prospect Street Design Guidelines
and other such guidelines as may be established for the Prospect Street Overlay
District. This Section 20.207 is intended for variations from the standards, which may
be appropriate in specific locations and circumstances and where careful design detail
is a controlling factor.
20.208 Area of Special Planning Concern
The Prospect Street Overlay District shall be considered an area of special planning
concern. Notwithstanding the provisions in Section 19.43.1 – Applicability of Large
Project Review Procedure, in the Prospect Street Overlay District the Large Project
Review Procedure shall apply to any development proposal containing Gross Floor
20-60
Area of two thousand (2,000) square feet or more but less than fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet, unless such development is exempt by virtue of the provisions of Section
19.45.
For parcels that fall within both the Prospect Street Overlay District and the Central
Square Overlay District, this Large Project Review Consultation shall be conducted by
the Central Square Advisory Committee.
Before issuance of any special permit for development proposed within the Prospect
Street Overlay District that is subject to the Large Project Review Procedure or any
special permit required in this Section 20.200, Section 11.10 - Townhouse
Development, Section 4.26 – Multifamily Special Permit, and Section 19.20 - Project
Review, the Planning Board shall determine that the proposal is consist with the
Prospect Street Design Guidelines.
20.209 Prospect Street Design Guidelines
New buildings and redevelopment of old buildings should contribute to improving the
character of Prospect Street. While it is recognized that not every project will meet
every guideline, it is expected that new development in the Prospect Street Overlay
District should be broadly consistent with the following principles:
1. Street-level facades should include active uses such as residential units and
entrances, shops, restaurant, cafes, exhibition space or display windows, or
commercial lobbies and front doors.
2. Blank walls should be avoided along the street. Transparent materials and
interior lighting should be used to maximize visibility of street level uses.
3. Principal building entrances should be located facing Prospect Street, where
appropriate.
4. Buildings should create a consistent street edge, with setbacks used generally
for stoops, porches, and front gardens in residential development or for café
seating, benches, or small open spaces in commercial development.
5. Awnings and canopies are encouraged to provide shelter and to enliven the
ground floor facade.
6. Where appropriate, buildings should be designed with individual units and front
doors facing the street, including units on the lower levels of multi-family
buildings.
7. Buildings should reflect a rhythm and variation appropriate to the urban context.
Facades should be articulated as several smaller masses using different
materials or colors, vertical breaks, bays, porches, stoops, and other architectural
elements.
8. Variations in height and architectural elements such as parapets, cornices and
other details are encouraged to create interesting and varied rooflines and to
clearly express the tops of buildings.
9. Where possible, windows should be located facing the street to increase safety.
10. Loading activities should be located on side streets or service alleys, where
possible.
20-61
11. Buildings should be designed to use natural resources and energy resources
efficiently in construction, maintenance, and long-term operation of the building.
12. Rooftop mechanical equipment should be sited and shielded to limit visual and
noise impacts.
13. Storage of trash should be sited and shielded to contain noise and visual clutter.
14. Lighting fixtures in surface parking lots should be designed to minimizing light
spillover onto adjacent properties.
20.300 CENTRAL SQUARE OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.301 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Central Square Overlay
District which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this
Section 20.300. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to a
single area described generally as the Central Square business district and certain
abutting portions of the neighborhoods around it.
20.302 General Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.300 to augment existing zoning
regulations to respond to the unique problems and pressures for change particular to
Central Square. The regulations in said section provide for more careful public
scrutiny of development proposals that may alter the established urban form of the
Central Square area. These regulations are intended to channel the extreme
development pressures in ways which will preserve and enhance the unique functional
environment and visual character of Central Square; to mitigate the functional impacts
of new development on adjacent residential neighborhoods; to maintain the present
diversity of development and open space patterns and building scales and ages; and
to provide sufficient regulatory flexibility to advance the general purposes of this
Section 11.300.
20.303 General Provisions.
20.303.1 The Central Square Overlay District shall be considered an area of special planning
concern.
Development proposals listed in Subsection 19.42 and 19.43, Development
Consultation Procedures, shall be subject to the Development Consultation
Procedures specified in Article 19.000 except that any Large Project Review (new
buildings of two thousand (2,000) square feet or more shall be conducted by the
Central Square Advisory Committee using procedures as specified in Subsection
20.304.1 of this Section 20.300.
20.303.2 Criteria for Development Consultation Review and Review of Applications for Special
Permits and Variances.
In reviewing applications for variances, special permits or development consultation
reviews the permit or special permit granting authority or the Central Square Advisory
Committee shall be guided by the objectives and criteria contained in the publication
“Central Square Action Plan”, City of Cambridge, November 1987, and “Central
Square Development Guidelines”, July 1989, in addition to the requirements of
20-62
Section 10.30 - Variances, 10.40 - Special Permits, and Subsection 20.305 of this
Section 20.300. These guidelines are also intended to assist in shaping any
contemplated physical change within the Central Square Overlay District.
20.303.3 National Register and Contributing Buildings.
For the purpose of this Section 20.300 the following definitions shall apply:
1. National Register Building shall be a building individually listed or determined
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places as determined by the
Secretary of The Department of the Interior.
2. A contributing building shall be
a. Identified as a contributing building in a listed or eligible National Register
District as determined by the Secretary of the Department of the Interior; or
b. A building located outside a National Register District but identified as a
contributing building in the Central Square Development Guidelines.
However, a building shall no longer be considered a contributing building as
defined in this Subsection 20.303 (2) for the purpose of this Section 20.300 if,
upon application for a demolition permit, the Cambridge Historical Commission
shall determine the building not to be a preferably preserved significant building
as defined in the City of Cambridge Demolition Ordinance #965.
20.304 Detailed Provisions.
20.304.1 Central Square Advisory Committee. There shall be established a Central Square
Advisory Committee, with members appointed by the City Manager, which shall have
the following duties, responsibilities, and membership.
1. Purpose. It is the intent of this Subsection 20.304.1 that the Committee in its
official actions fulfils the following purposes.
a. To establish a formal, ongoing body that will review all major development
actions in the Central Square Overlay District.
b. To provide a forum within which a wide range of perspectives on development
actions can be heard.
c. To establish a citizen/professional body which can advise both public agencies
and private interests as to the development and urban design issues raised by a
development or planning proposal and suggest avenues of research which might
be pursued to resolve identified conflicts or make the project better fulfill both
public and private objectives for the Central Square Overlay District.
2. Responsibilities. The Committee shall undertake all Large Project Reviews and
shall receive all applications for variances and special permits for activities within
the Central Square Overlay District for review and comment. In addition, the
Committee may comment on any preliminary proposal, for which any public
agency or private interest may wish to receive advice and recommendations.
3. Procedures.
20-63
a. Within the six (6) months preceding any application for (1) a building
permit for any project subject to a Large Project Development Consultation
Review or (2) a special permit or variance for any project within the Central
Square Overlay District, the graphic and other material required in Section
19.43 - Large Project Review Procedure shall be submitted to the Central
Square Advisory Committee for their review and comment.
b. Within thirty (30) days of that submittal, (or within up to sixty (60) days with
the written consent of the applicant) the Committee shall prepare a written
report of findings and recommendations with respect to the applicant’s
proposed project.
c.The Committee’s written report shall outline the urban design and
development issues raised by the proposal. It shall suggest those areas
within which additional exploration of alternatives might be sought or factual
information gathered which might help to resolve potential conflicts between
public and private objectives or which might help to shape the project to
better serve these objectives.
d. The report shall be forwarded to the applicant and shall be included in any
application for a building permit, special permit or variance.
e. It is expected that, in making decisions regarding special permits and
variances within the Overlay District, the Planning Board and/or Board of
Zoning Appeal will give due consideration to the report and
recommendations of the advisory committee.
Where the Committee makes recommendations with respect to the granting
of special permits and/or variances, the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board
of Appeal does not follow said recommendations, then the Board(s) shall
make written reply to the Committee, detailing why the Board(s)’ decisions
were different from the Committee recommendations.
f. The Community Development staff shall serve as staff to the Committee.
4. Membership and Terms
a. Membership. Members in all categories shall be Cambridge residents or
business persons or landowners within the Overlay District.
(1). One member having recognized qualifications as architect or
landscape architect who shall also serve as chair of the Committee.
(2). Four (4) members representing the business community in Central
Square with diverse representation from property owners, small and
large scale merchants and office tenants.
(3).Four (4) members representing residents of the four (4) abutting
Cambridge neighborhoods.
b. Terms. Committee members shall be appointed for terms of three (3)
years each. Initial appointments shall, however, be staggered such that
three (3) members shall have terms of two (2) years, and three (3) members
shall have terms of three (3) years each.
20-64
20.304.2 Building Height Limitations. The maximum height of buildings in the Central Square
Overlay District shall be governed by the requirements of this Section 20.304.2;
however, at locations where the base zoning district establishes a more restrictive
height limitation, the more restrictive shall apply.
1. As of Right Height Limitations. The maximum height of any building shall be
fifty-five (55) feet except as further limited below:
(a) Where the lot abuts Bishop Allen Drive or Prospect Street between
Bishop Allen Drive and Harvard Street, any portion of the building
above forty-five (45) feet shall be set back behind a forty-five degree
(45°) bulk control plane beginning at an elevation of forty-five (45) feet
above the front lot lines on Bishop Allen Drive and/or Prospect Street
and rising over one or more lots at a forty-five degree (45°) angle.
(b) Where the Residence C-2A district serves as the base district, the
maximum height shall be forty-five feet. No additional height shall be
permitted in this district notwithstanding any provision in Paragraph 2
below.
2. Special Permit for Additional Height. Additional height may be permitted as
follows:
(a) The maximum allowable height in the Central Square Overlay District
may be increased up to eighty (80) feet upon issuance of a Special
Permit by the Planning Board provided that those portions in excess
of sixty (60) feet are set back from the street line at least ten (10) feet
and that those portions are also set back from one or more forty-five
degree (45°) bulk control planes beginning sixty (60) feet above any
streetline in the district and rising over one or more lots at a forty-five
degree (45°) angle.
(b) Where the lot abuts Bishop Allen Drive, or Prospect Street where the
lot lies in a Business A District, and where the lot lies within a
Business A District, any portion of the building above forty-five (45)
feet shall be set back behind a forty- five degree (45°) bulk control
plane beginning at an elevation of forty-five (45) feet above (1) the
front lot lines on Bishop Allen Drive and/or Prospect Street and (2)
any residential zoning district line abutting the Business A District, and
rising over one or more lots at a forty-five degree (45°) angle.
3. The bulk control plane restrictions of Paragraphs 1 and 2 above may be waived
by the Planning Board upon issuance of a Special Permit.
20.304.3 Floor Area Ratio Limitation. The maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) limitations
established in the applicable base zoning district shall continue to apply to any lot in
the Central Square Overlay District unless specifically modified by the following
provisions:
20-65
1. As Of Right Limitation.
The maximum as of right FAR shall be 3.0 in the Office 3 base zoning district for
Residential Uses, Section 4.31 a-h, and 2.0 for all other uses; 4.0 for all
Residential uses in the Business B base zoning district; and 2.0 in the Residence
C-3 and Residence C-2A base zoning districts.
2. Special Permit for additional FAR.
The maximum FAR on any lot in a Residence C-3 or Residence C-2A district
may be increased to 3.0 and 2.5 respectively upon issuance of a special permit
from the Planning Board.
3. Special Permit for Additional FAR for Affordable Housing.
The maximum FAR on any lot in an Office 3 District may be increased to 3.75
upon issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board provided a minimum of
twenty (20) percent of the total gross floor area authorized is devoted to affordable
housing as defined in Section 11.201. The affordable housing shall conform to
the standards of Section 11.204 except that lodging housing or single room
occupancy facilities shall be specifically permitted. The additional FAR bonus
permitted in Section 11.203.2, however, shall not apply to developments
employing this Section 20.304.3c
4. Additional FAR for Residential Uses
Upon issuance of a special permit, the Planning Board may increase the allowed
FAR on any lot or portion of a lot located within the Business B (BB) portion of the
Central Square Overlay District to a total FAR of 4.00 for all non-residential and
residential uses combined, notwithstanding the Rules for Calculation of Permitted
Gross Floor Area on a Lot as set forth in Section 5.30.12, provided that the
maximum FAR permitted for non-residential uses on a lot shall not exceed the
limitation on non-residential FAR applicable in the base zoning district and that the
proposed FAR of all non-residential uses on the lot shall not exceed the proposed
FAR of all residential uses on the lot.
5. FAR exemption for Residential Balconies
In the Business B district only, notwithstanding any other provision of this Zoning
Ordinance, the Gross Floor Area of balconies, porches, stoops, or mezzanines on
any floor of a structure that are accessory to residential uses and not exceeding
six (6) feet in depth measured back from the adjacent wall plane of a building shall
be exempted from the calculation of Gross Floor Area permitted on the applicable
lot. Also, terraces that are created by stepping back the upper floors of a building,
provided that they are open to the sky and a minimum of eight (8) feet in depth
measured from the façade of the story beneath, shall be exempted from the
calculation of Gross Floor Area permitted on the lot.
6. FAR Exemption for Rooftop Spaces
In the Business B district only, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance, the Gross Floor Area of open-air spaces on the roofs of buildings,
such as roof gardens, terraces, walk ways, including open or enclosed egresses,
covered staircases, mechanical head-houses, or observation spaces shall be
20-66
exempted from Gross Floor Area and FAR limitations upon the granting of a
special permit by the Planning Board. In granting any special permit, the Planning
Board must be able to find that the proposed rooftop spaces have been located
and designed to minimize impacts on neighboring uses, including but not limited
to light trespass, noise or other nuisance, and may place further requirements or
conditions on the design or operational aspects of spaces exempted pursuant to
this Paragraph, including but not limited to hours of operation, range of activities
permitted, signage and lighting fixtures, visual screening devices, sound
mitigation, and other measures to ensure ongoing compliance with the Board’s
findings.
7. FAR Exemption for Ground Floor Retail
In the Business B district only, retail spaces of 1,500 square feet or less shall be
excluded from the calculation of floor area ratio.
20.304.4 Waiver of Setback and Open Space Requirements.
1. Yard Setbacks. Upon issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board the yard
requirements of a base zoning district may be waived except where such yard abuts
a lot, but not a public way, outside the Overlay District. However, in waiving or
reducing a front yard setback, the Planning Board shall take into account the width of
the adjacent public sidewalk and may limit the reduction of the setback in order to
provide additional sidewalk width within the front yard setback where appropriate,
taking into account applicable City standards and expected pedestrian traffic on the
street.
2. Private Open Space. Open Space shall be provided as required in the Base Zoning
District, however the Planning Board may allow, by Special Permit, the reduction of
required Open Space, and permit such Open Space to be located at levels other than
at grade if the applicant can demonstrate that the urban design objectives as set forth
in the Central Square Overlay District can be met.
20.304.5 Use Limitations and Restrictions. In addition to the use regulations applicable in each
base zoning district the following use restrictions and limitations shall apply in the
Central Square Overlay District:
1. Ground Floor Restrictions.
The ground (first) floor of that portion of a building facing or abutting
Massachusetts Avenue and/or Main Street and which is on a lot which shares a
common lot line with Massachusetts Avenue or Main Street shall consist of
Gross Floor Area devoted to any one or combination of uses permitted in the
applicable base zoning district [except that such gross floor area in buildings
abutting Massachusetts Avenue and/or Main Street between Inman and Pleasant
Streets on the west and Columbia and Sidney Streets on the east shall be
devoted to one or a combination of the following uses: Residential Uses (Section
4.31); Office and Laboratory Uses (Section 4.34 c and e); Retail, Business and
Consumer Service Establishments (Section 4.35)], but specifically excluding
20-67
Gross Floor Area in structured parking counted as Gross Floor Area, and shall in
addition meet the following conditions:
a. At least eighty (80) percent of the floor elevation of the ground (first) floor
shall be at the mean grade of the abutting Massachusetts Avenue and/or
Main Street at the property line except that residential uses may be located
no higher than four (4) feet above the mean grade of the abutting street at
the property line.
b. The use shall have a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet.
c. Where other than residential uses are established, the ground (first) floor
facade shall consist of a minimum of fifty (50) percent clear glass.
2. Prohibited Uses.
The following uses shall be prohibited in the Central Square Overlay District: (1)
Open Air or Drive-In Retail Services, Sections 4.36 b, f, g, h, i,.
3. Restricted Uses.
a. In the Central Square Overlay District, an establishment where alcoholic
beverages are consumed and where dancing and entertainment is provided,
dance hall or similar place of entertainment (Section 4.35g) shall be
permitted by right if the principal public entrance or entrances are directly
from Massachusetts Avenue, Prospect Street between Massachusetts
Avenue and Bishop Allen Drive, or Main Street, or by Special Permit from the
Planning Board in the Business B (BB) district where the principal public
entrance or entrances are on another side street that intersects with
Massachusetts Avenue if the Board finds that such location will not adversely
impact adjacent residential uses, with consideration to hours of operation,
proximity to a residential neighborhood, signage, lighting, and sound
mitigation.
b. Unless specifically waived upon the granting of a special permit by the
Planning Board, no individual bank or financial institution (Section 4.34e)
shall occupy more than twenty-five (25) feet of building frontage facing
Massachusetts Avenue or Main Street, and no more than thirty percent
(30%) of a lot's aggregate building frontage facing one or more public streets
may be occupied by such uses.
4. Formula Business District. A Formula Business as defined in this Ordinance
may be established in the Central Square Overlay District only after the
issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board. In reviewing an
application the Planning Board shall take the following into consideration:
a. The extent to which the design of the proposal reflects, amplifies, and
strengthens the established historical character of existing buildings and
store fronts in Central Square.
b. The extent to which the particulars of the building or storefront design is
varied from the formula or standard design of the chain in order to reflect the
unique character and conditions of Central Square generally or the specific
location in particular.
20-68
c. The extent to which the standard elements of the enterprise as they define
it as a Formula Business are modified to respect and provide unique
expressions of Central Square history and traditions as well as innovation in
physical design and marketing that will distinguish the Central Square
location from other locations of the Formula Business.
20.304.6 Parking and Loading Requirements. The provisions set forth in Article 6.000 shall
apply except as modified by the provisions set below.
1. Maximum Parking. Where any of the following listed uses are established in the
Central Square Overlay District as of August 1, 2016, the accessory off-street parking
for such uses shall be limited by the maximum rates set forth below. For uses not
listed below, any maximum rate set forth in Article 6.000 shall apply. Exceeding the
maximum allowed parking shall require a waiver of maximum parking under the
general provisions of Article 6.000.
(a) Residential Uses (6.36.1), excluding Hotel and Motel (i-2 and i-3): 0.75 space per
dwelling unit
(b) Hotel or Motel Uses (6.36.1 i-2 or i-3): 0.25 space per sleeping room
(c) Office Uses (6.36.4), excluding Technical Office (f): 0.90 space per 1,000 square
feet
(d) Technical Office Uses (6.36.4 f): 0.80 space per 1,000 square feet
(e) Retail and Consumer Service Establishments (6.36.5): 0.50 space per 1,000
square feet
2. Minimum Parking and Loading. The minimum parking and loading requirements as
specified in Section 6.36 Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements shall apply
except as set forth below:
(a) For Residential Uses (6.36.1), excluding Hotel and Motel (i-2 and i-3), the
minimum required parking ratio shall be 0.50 space per dwelling unit.
(b) Where the minimum number of parking spaces derived from the requirements of
Article 6.000 is greater than the maximum number of parking spaces derived
from Paragraph 1 above, the minimum required number of parking spaces shall
be reduced to the greatest number that conforms to the maximum requirements
derived from Paragraph 1 above.
3. Waiver of Parking and Loading Requirements. Uses in the Central Square Overlay
District which meet the following requirements shall be exempt from the parking and
loading requirements as specified in Section 6.36 - Schedule of Parking and Loading
Requirements and the minimum requirements set forth in Paragraph 2 above.
(a) The use is contained within a structure or portion of a structure in existence on or
before June 1, 1940 or if constructed later is identified as a National Register or
contributing building; or
(b) The use is contained in a new structure or new addition to a structure identified in
(1.) above, after the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board provided:
20-69
(i) The total development authorized on the site is reduced to ninety (90)
percent of the maximum permitted on the lot; or a cash contribution is made
to the Central Square Improvement Fund to be established by the City of
Cambridge in an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the cost of construction
of the parking spaces not provided, said contribution to be used by the City of
Cambridge for one or more of the following improvements in the Central
Square Overlay District:
(1) Provision of public parking, preferably for short term users;
(2) Programming, events, and infrastructure that contribute to the Cultural
District established in Central Square;
(3) Improvements to public parks, or restoration of historic structures,
monuments and other features owned by the City of Cambridge or other
public agency or a nonprofit organization;
(4) Improvements to public pedestrian and bicycle facilities such as
sidewalks, crosswalks, dedicated cycling paths and bicycle parking.
The Central Square Advisory Committee shall receive and make comments
on any proposal for the expenditure of such cash contributions. The funds
shall not be used for ordinary maintenance activities normally undertaken by
the City of Cambridge. The value of the cash contribution shall be
determined by the Community Development Department assuming
equivalent structured parking spaces and using generally accepted cost
estimation methods customarily used by architects and engineers or using
actual construction costs for comparable contemporary parking construction
in Cambridge.
(ii) The subject lot is sufficiently small in size as to contribute to a development
pattern of diverse, small scale, new structures and the retention of existing
structures (for lots exceeding 10,000 square feet a specific finding shall be
made that this objective has been met).
(iii) The Planning Board shall specifically find that an exemption from parking and
loading requirements will result in a building design that is more appropriate
to its location and the fabric of its neighborhood and that it is in conformance
with the objectives and criteria contained in Central Square Development
Guidelines.
(iv) No National Register or contributing building is demolished or so altered as
to terminate or preclude its designation as a National Register or contributing
building; and
(v) No National Register or contributing building has been demolished or altered
so as to terminate or preclude its designation within the five (5) years
preceding the application.
4. Location of Parking. For any new development in the Central Square Overlay District
that requires a special permit from the Planning Board, notwithstanding anything to
20-70
the contrary in Article 6.000, the accessory parking may be provided on-site or within
existing parking facilities elsewhere in the Central Square Overlay District, subject to
Planning Board Approval. In general, new development shall use below-grade
structured parking instead of existing surface parking lots; however, the Planning
Board may approve the use of existing surface parking in special circumstances,
such as temporary parking for a phased development or special permits for smallscale
retail uses in existing buildings.
20.305 Standards for Issuance of Special Permits. In addition to the general standards for the
issuance of a special permit found in Section 10.40 of the Zoning Ordinance, the
special permit granting authority shall in addition make the following findings:
1. The proposed development is consistent with the goals and objectives of the
Central Square Action Plan:
• encourage responsible and orderly development;
• strengthen the retail base to more completely serve the needs of the
neighborhoods;
• preserve the Square’s cultural diversity;
• create active people oriented spaces;
• improve the physical, and visual environment;
• provide retail establishments that serve people of diverse economic and
social groups who live in the surrounding neighborhoods;
• encourage the development of new mixed income housing; and
•promote compatible retail adjacent to residential uses.
2. The building and site designs are consistent with “Urban Design Plan for
Central Square” as outlined in the “Central Square Action Plan” and the “Central
Square Development Guidelines”;
3. The building and site designs adequately screen the parking provided and are
sensitive to the contributing buildings in the vicinity;
4. No National Register or contributing building is demolished or so altered as to
terminate or preclude its designation as a National Register or contributing
building; and
5. No National Register or contributing building has been demolished or altered so
as to terminate or preclude its designation within the five (5) years preceding the
application.
20.306 Signs
20.306.1 Signs shall be permitted as they are allowed in the base zoning districts.
20.306.2 Nonconforming Signs. Notwithstanding the provisions in Article 7.000, Section
7.15 relating to nonconforming signs, any sign nonconforming as to size and having been
erected for at least ten (10) years shall be removed where the space to which the sign is
accessory is vacant.
20-71
20.307 Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict
20.307.1 Establishment and Scope.
There is hereby established within the Central Square Overlay District (and including
the rear portions of certain split lots that are partially located with the Central Square
Overlay District), the Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict which shall
be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this Section 20.307.
These regulations are intended to provide incentives for residential development and
provide a transition between the character, uses and scale of Kendall Square, as well
as the adjacent Cambridgeport Revitalization Development District, and provide a
transition to the abutting residential districts behind Bishop Allen Drive. The subdistrict
is within the City’s Central Square (C2) Study area and adoption of this Section 20.307
follows extensive planning efforts to encourage residential and ground-floor retail uses
and transit-oriented development. The Central Square Study expands on past zoning
changes in industrial and commercial zones to encourage housing by offering greater
density to incentivize the creation of buffer zones for existing residential
neighborhoods adjacent to Central Square. The Mass and Main Residential Mixed
Income Subdistrict will also enable the City to respond to the 2014 Central Square
Customer Survey by supporting vibrant ground-floor retail and active retail uses at this
key intersection in Central Square, adjacent to mass transit. It is the intent of this
Section that these regulations will apply to a single area located at the intersection of
Main Street and Massachusetts Avenue and bounded and described in Section
20.307.2 below. The Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict will further
the objectives of the Central Square Study findings and other planning studies
completed by the City for the Central Square area by encouraging housing and
requiring both low- and moderate-income affordable housing in amounts above those
required by the City’s inclusionary housing requirements in Section 11.200.
20.307.2 Boundaries of the District.
The Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict shall be bounded as shown
on Map 20.307 and shall include two zones: the Mass Ave Residential Zone and the
Bishop Allen Drive Residential Support Zone. The Mass and Main Residential Mixed
Income Subdistrict includes lots located within the Business B and Business A base
zoning districts, with portions of some lots located within the Residence C-1 district
(and not included in the Central Square Overlay District) included in this subdistrict for
purposes of clarity with respect to the treatment of these split lots.
The Mass Ave Residential Zone consists of the Mass Ave Height Area and the
Columbia/Douglass Street Height Area and affects lots or portions of lots as shown on:
Mass Ave Height Area
Assessors Plat #4772 and Map 91, Lot 190,
Assessors Plat #4776 and Map 91, Lot 195 (the portion of such lot containing
Coolidge Place),
Assessors Plat #4759 and Map 91, Lot 111,
Assessors Plat #4752 and Map 91, Lot 102 (portion),
20-72
Assessors Plat #4777 and Map 91, Lot 199 (portion), and
Assessors Plat #4715 and Map 91, Lot 53.
Columbia/Douglass Street Height Area
Assessors Plat #4773 and Map 91, Lot 191,
Assessors Plat #4714 and Map 91, Lot 52,
Assessors Plat #4777 and Map 91, Lot 199 (portion),
Assessors Plat #4758 and Map 91, Lot 108,
Assessors Plat #4767 and Map 91, Lot 180,
Assessors Plat #4768 and Map 91, Lot 181,
Assessors Plat #4775 and Map 91, Lot 194,
Assessors Plat #4752 and Map 91, Lot 102 (portion), and
Assessors Plat #4774 and Map 91, Lot 192.
The Bishop Allen Drive Residential Support Zone affects lots or portions of lots as
shown on:
Assessors Plat #4750 and Map, 91, Lot 98,
Assessors Plat #4751 and Map 91, Lot 99,
Assessors Plat #4732 and Map 91, Lot 81,
Assessors Plat #4763 and Map 91, Lot 119, and
Assessors Plat #4710 and Map 91, Lot 23.
20.307.3 Applicability.
Except as otherwise noted herein, the provisions of this Section 20.307 shall apply to
both zones within the subdistrict.
For developers electing to conform to the provisions of this Section 20.307, any such
project shall be referred to herein as a “Residential Mixed Income Project” and,
notwithstanding any other provisions of the Ordinance, the use, dimensional, open
space, parking, loading and inclusionary housing requirements applicable to a
Residential Mixed Income Project shall be as set forth in this Section 20.307.
Divergence from the standards established in this Section may be allowed only by
issuance of a Special Permit by the Planning Board as specifically allowed pursuant to
applicable special permit provisions set forth elsewhere in the Ordinance, including the
provisions of Section 10.40. Further, the Planning Board may grant any applicable
special permit for a Residential Mixed Income Project that would ordinarily be granted
by the Board of Zoning Appeal. The Board may grant such a special permit upon its
determination that the development proposed will better serve the objectives of this
Section 20.307 and that the criteria specified in Section 10.43 specific and all other
criteria applicable to the special permit will be satisfied. A Residential Mixed Income
Project may contain more than one building constructed as part of a common scheme
of development or phased development program.
20.307.4 Review Process.
Projects in the Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict shall be subject
to the development review procedures set forth in Article 19.000 and Section 20.304.1.
20-73
20.307.5 Use Regulations.
Use regulations of the applicable base zoning designation shall apply to each lot within
the Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict, except that Carsharing
Spaces provided pursuant to Section 20.307.7 below shall be deemed to be a
permitted use. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Ordinance, in
addition to the uses permitted in the applicable base district, lots within the Mass and
Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict may be used as accessory parking for any
other lot within the subdistrict, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 20.307.7
below.
20.307.6 Dimensional Standards.
20.307.6.1 Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio permitted in the Mass and Main
Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict shall be the same as permitted in the applicable
base zoning district, except that the maximum floor area ratio applicable to Residential
Mixed Income Projects within the Mass Ave Residential Zone shall be 6.5, provided
that no increases in development otherwise permitted under this Zoning Ordinance
shall cause the FAR on a lot to exceed 6.5, and further subject to compliance with the
affordability and unit mix requirements set forth in Section 20.307.8 below.
Additionally, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Zoning
Ordinance, the floor area ratio applicable to residential uses shall apply to and include
any retail space included within a Residential Mixed Income Project, subject to the
exemption for retail spaces less than 1,500 square feet set forth in Section 20.307.9.6
below, such that the provisions of Section 5.30.12 shall not be applicable to
Residential Mixed Income Projects within the Mass and Main Residential Mixed
Income Subdistrict (i.e. the same floor area ratio will apply to both residential and retail
space within a Residential Mixed Income Project).
20.307.6.2 Maximum Height. The maximum height permitted in the Mass and Main Residential
Mixed Income Subdistrict shall be the same as permitted in the applicable base zoning
district, except as follows:
a. Within the area shown as the “Mass Ave Height Area” on Map 20.307, building
heights up to 195 feet shall be permitted for a Residential Mixed Income Project,
provided that only one building within such zone may exceed 80 feet and
provided further that buildings in a Residential Mixed Income Project will be
restricted to a floor plate size of 10,000 square feet above 80 feet in height.
b. Within the area shown as the “Columbia/Douglass Street Height Area” on Map
20.307, building heights up to 70 feet shall be permitted for a Residential Mixed
Income Project.
20.307.6.3 Minimum Yards. Minimum yard requirements in the Mass and Main Residential Mixed
Income Subdistrict shall be the same as required in the applicable base zoning district;
however, notwithstanding any other provisions in the Ordinance, including without
limitation the provisions of Section 5.28.1(c) (which applies the dimensional standards
of a Residence C-3 district to dwellings in a Business B district), the minimum yard
20-74
requirements for non-residential uses in the Business B zoning district shall apply to all
Residential Mixed Income Projects within the Business B district.
20.307.6.4 Private Open Space. Open space requirements in the Mass and Main Residential
Mixed Income Subdistrict shall be the same as required in the applicable base zoning
district, including without limitation the provisions of Section 5.28.1(c) (which applies
the dimensional standards of a Residence C-3 district to dwellings in a Business B
district), except that the applicable Private Open Space requirement under Article
5.000 may be satisfied with any combination of Private Open Space and pedestrian
amenities open to the public such as a pedestrian plaza or arcade.
20.307.7 Required Parking.
Required parking and loading in the Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income
Subdistrict shall be as required in the applicable base zoning district, except as
follows:
a. The minimum required parking for Residential Mixed Income Projects shall be 0.5
parking spaces per residential unit and shall be further subject to waiver/reduction
in accordance with the provisions of Section 20.304.6 and Article 6.000. The
maximum permitted parking for Residential Mixed Income Projects shall be 0.75
parking spaces per residential unit.
b. No separate off-street parking shall be required for ground-floor retail uses in a
Residential Mixed Income Project.
c. Accessory off-street parking facilities for a Residential Mixed Income Project may
be located on the same lot as the use being served or on another lot within the
Central Square Overlay District, in accordance with the following conditions:
1. said other lot is contiguous to the lot on which the use being served is
located; or
2. said other lot is within four hundred (400) feet of the lot on which the use
being served is located.
d. A Residential Mixed Income Project shall provide, at a minimum, one (1) parking
space for every 100 residential units that shall be dedicated for use by a
carsharing organization (such as ZipCar or other similar program) (each such
parking space will be referred to herein as a “Carsharing Space”). Each
Carsharing Space within a Residential Mixed Income Project shall allow the
required number of residential parking spaces to be reduced by five (5) spaces,
but in no event may there be a total reduction of more than 0.17 spaces per
dwelling unit resulting from the application of this Paragraph (d).
e. Loading bays, drives, and a maneuvering space for a Residential Mixed Income
Project may be located entirely on the lot or adjacent easement areas with
immediate and direct ingress to the building intended to be served.
20-75
f. Any tandem parking spaces for two vehicles shall count as two parking spaces
within the Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income Subdistrict if such spaces are
accessory to a Residential Mixed Income Project, provided that such tandem
parking spaces may not account for more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
required parking.
g. For purposes of Section 6.104.1, the applicable distance for Long-Term Bicycle
Parking shall be measured from the lot line of the lot on which the Long-Term
Bicycle Parking is located to the lot line of the lot on which the building or project
intended to be served is located.
20.307.8 Affordable Housing and Unit Mix Requirements for Residential Mixed Income Projects
20.307.8.1 Additional Inclusionary Housing Requirements. The provisions of Section 11.200 in
effect as of the date of adoption of this Section 20.307 shall apply to a Residential
Mixed Income Project. However, notwithstanding anything in Section 11.200, the FAR
of a Residential Mixed Income Project shall not exceed 6.5. Additionally, a Residential
Mixed Income Project shall be subject to the following requirements that may exceed
the requirements of Section 11.200:
a. A minimum of seventeen percent (17%) of the total number of units in a
Residential Mixed Income Project shall be Affordable Units for low and moderate
income households meeting the requirements of Section 11.200 for such
Affordable Units.
b. A minimum of three percent (3%) of the total number of units in a Residential
Mixed Income Project shall be Middle Income Units as defined in Section
20.307.8.2 below.
c. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total number of units in a Residential
Mixed Income Project shall be 3-bedroom units.
20.307.8.2 Definitions. For purposes of this Section 20.307.8, the following definitions shall apply:
“Middle Income Unit” shall mean a unit for which the rent (including utilities) does not
exceed thirty (30) percent of the income of the renting household or for which the
mortgage payment (including insurance, utilities and real estate taxes) does not
exceed thirty (30) percent of the income of the purchasing household or other
standards as may be established pursuant to any city, state or federal housing
program designed to assist middle income households, for which the applicable
eligible household shall be an Eligible Middle Income Household.
“Eligible Middle Income Household” shall mean any household whose total income
does not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the median income of
households in the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area adjusted for family
size, or such other equivalent income standard as may be determined by the Board of
Trustees of the Affordable housing Trust as defined in Section 11.201.
20-76
In no event shall the combined total number of Affordable Units for low and moderate
income households together with the Middle Income Units required in Section
20.307.8.1 above be fewer than twenty percent (20%) of the total number of units in a
Residential Mixed Income Project.
20.307.9 Local Retail and Street Activation.
In order to effectuate the goals of promoting a vibrant retail environment and streetlevel
activation, any proposed development within the Mass Ave Residential Zone with
building frontage along Massachusetts Avenue or Main Street shall include a plan (the
“Retail Plan”) for encouraging local, independent retail and active street-level uses
meeting the requirements of this Section 20.307.9, which Retail Plan shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Community Development Department prior
to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a Residential Mixed Income Project.
The owner shall use commercially reasonable efforts to ensure that the Retail Plan for
any Residential Mixed Income Project meets the goals of this Section 20.307.9 and,
taken in its entirety, is reflective of the economic and cultural diversity of the Central
Square neighborhood.
20.307.9.1 No banks or financial institutions shall be permitted on the ground floor level within the
Mass Ave Residential Zone.
20.307.9.2 The ground floor space in any such building frontage along Massachusetts Avenue or
Main Street and extending 30 feet into such building (the “Building Frontage”) shall be
devoted to retail uses, except for spaces required for accessory uses and other
building functions serving the other floors of such building which are typically located
at the ground level, including without limitation lobby space, building security,
access/egress, mailrooms, mechanical spaces and bicycle parking, which spaces
shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of the total Building Frontage.
20.307.9.3 A minimum of 25% of the retail space required pursuant to Section 20.307.9.2 above
shall consist of Independent and Local Retailers. “Independent and Local Retailers”
shall include any retail operator which does not own or operate more than 10 retail
locations in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts with the same name and retail
concept, such determination to be made as of the date of execution of a lease or
commencement of ownership of or other right to occupy such retail space.
20.307.9.4 The Retail Plan shall include a proposal for a seasonal public market concept/space
(the “Public Market”).
20.307.9.5 Retail spaces of 1,500 square feet or less in a Residential Mixed Income Project shall
be excluded from the calculation of floor area ratio.
20.307.10 Grandfathered Parking Structures Within the Bishop Allen Drive Residential Support
Zone.
20-77
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 8.000, any nonconforming parking structure
located in whole or in part within the Bishop Allen Drive Residential Support Zone and
which existed at the time of adoption of this Section 20.307 may be continued,
provided that it primarily serves a use permitted in the Mass and Main Residential
Mixed Income Subdistrict.
20.307.11 Sustainable Design Requirements for Residential Mixed Income Projects.
Residential Mixed Income Projects in the Mass and Main Residential Mixed Income
Subdistrict shall comply with the provisions of Section 22.20 of the Ordinance,
provided, however, that any new construction that is part of a Residential Mixed
Income Project shall be designed to a minimum standard of LEED Gold. In connection
with the submission requirements of Section 22.24.2.a., the developer of such
buildings shall submit a Statement of Energy Design Intent produced through the
EnergyStar Target Finder tool, or comparable method.
20.307.12 Design Guidelines Applicable to Residential Mixed Income Projects.
In reviewing any Residential Mixed Income Project subject to a Project Review Special
Permit under Article 19.000, the Planning Board shall look to the Central Square
Design Guidelines dated February 2013 (updated May 2013) for guidance and
direction in assessing the project’s conformance with the applicable project review
criteria set forth in this Ordinance, provided that in the event of any conflict between
such Design Guidelines and this Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
govern. For a Residential Mixed Income Project proposing a building height exceeding
those contemplated in the Central Square Design Guidelines, the Planning Board shall
give consideration to the following supplemental guidelines:
a. Consider the variety of vantage points from which tall buildings will be seen,
especially from significant public spaces and nearby low-scale residential
neighborhoods, as well as city skyline views.
b. Tall buildings should be articulated to avoid a monolithic appearance, and should
emphasize slender, vertically-oriented proportions.
c. Avoid broad “slab” volumes that make the building appear bulky and visually
dominant. Point towers expressing vertical volumes are preferred.
d. Locate and shape tower elements to minimize shadows on existing or proposed
public open space and streets.
e. Configure towers to maximize sky views from public open space and enhance
visual connections through sites.
f. Consider variation in forms that present different profiles to different vantage
points.
g. If appropriate, step down tall buildings where they interface with adjoining historic
buildings.
20-78
h. Minimize impacts on the environmental performance and amenity of adjoining
residential buildings.
i. Consider the appearance of the building top both by day and night, while
demonstrating responsible use of lighting and energy consistent with sustainability
requirements.
j. Design buildings to minimize negative wind impacts on streets and public spaces.
20.307.13 Letter of Commitment
The Letter of Commitment dated May 18, 2015, signed by Stephen J. Cusma on
behalf of the proponent of the “Mass and Main” Zoning Petition referred to therein as
“Normandy/Twining,” (“Letter)” shall be binding upon any developer and/or owner of a
Residential Mixed Income Project as defined herein. The issuance of any building
permit or certificate of occupancy for a Residential Mixed Income Project shall be
conditioned upon certification by the Community Development Department and all
other relevant City departments to the Superintendent of Buildings evidencing that
such Residential Mixed Income Project is proceeding in accordance and in compliance
with all provisions of the aforementioned Letter.
20.400 PATHWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.401 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Pathway Overlay District,
which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified in this Section
20.400. It is the intent of this section that these regulations will apply to those areas of
the city now or formerly railroad rights of way and which are anticipated to be used
now or in the future as bicycle and pedestrian commuting and recreational corridors.
20.401.1 The Pathway Overlay District shall be established on the Zoning Map of the City of
Cambridge under the provisions of Section 3.20.
20.402 General Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section 20.400 to modify existing base
district zoning regulations to ensure that (1) the unique opportunities presented by
railroad corridors to accommodate recreational bicycle and pedestrian paths are not
lost should their railroad function be abandoned, and that (2) the development
potential provided by virtue of the provisions of the base zoning district regulations
remains available for use beyond the limits of the Overlay District as the ownership of
the rights of way may change in the future.
20.403 General Provisions. Any portion of a lot encompassed by the Pathway Overlay District
shall consist entirely of any combination of Green Area, Permeable, or Public Open
Space or any railroad use in existence within the District on or before January 1, 2005
or any other railroad use permitted by the applicable base zoning district. The use,
dimensional and other provisions of the applicable base zoning district shall continue
to apply, but their application to a lot or portion of a lot in the Pathway Overlay District
are required to be consistent with this Section 20.403.
20-79
20.403.1 Reduction in the Required Open Space. The required area of Open Space may be
reduced after the issuance of a special permit from the Planning Board to allow
activities and uses, including vehicular access drives and accessory parking spaces,
permitted in the base district but in no case shall the construction of a building be
permitted. In granting such reduction the Planning Board shall find that the use or
activity proposed will not impair the future opportunity to construct pedestrian and
bicycle paths within the Pathway Overlay District nor otherwise derogate from the
intent and purpose of the Overlay district.
20.403.2 Additional Permitted FAR. Where a fee or easement property interest is conveyed to
the City of Cambridge (in a form acceptable to the City and recorded in the Registry of
Deeds) for any portion of land within the Pathway Overlay District, for use by the City
in the future to construction of a bicycle or pedestrian pathway, the applicable FAR on
that portion of land conveyed shall be equal to twice the FAR otherwise permitted on
the property as-of-right or by special permit in the applicable base zoning district or
Overlay district.
20.500 LESLEY PORTER OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.501 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Lesley Porter Overlay
District which shall be governed by regulations and procedures specified in this
Section. The District encompasses property constituting Lesley University’s Porter
Square campus and has a Business C District base zoning designation.
20.502 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to augment existing zoning regulations to
respond to issues associated with institutional uses and unique planning opportunities
immediately adjacent to Porter Square’s MBTA station. These regulations are
intended to allow for the establishment of an emerging art district associated with the
University, to enhance the vitality of Massachusetts Avenue by encouraging ground
floor uses that will serve the needs of abutting neighborhood residents and enhance
the established streetscape, to create a more harmonious and consistent character for
the development along Massachusetts Avenue and where such development faces or
abuts low density residential districts, and to encourage the retention and appropriate
reuse of buildings of historic value.
20.503 Applicability. The Lesley Porter Overlay District shall be an Overlay District on the
Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge established in Section 3.20.
20.503.1 The buildings and land uses within this district shall be controlled by the pertinent
regulations of the applicable base Business C zoning district and the Massachusetts
Avenue Overlay District, Section 20.100, except as modified by the requirements of
this Section 20.500. Where regulations differ among the several applicable zoning
districts, the provisions of this Section 20.500 shall apply.
20.503.11 The following terms shall apply in the Lesley Porter Overlay District.
1. Lots located westerly of Massachusetts Avenue shall be known as the Mt Vernon
Lots.
20-80
2. Lots located easterly of Massachusetts Avenue and north of Roseland Street shall
be known as the University Hall Lot.
3. Lots located easterly of Massachusetts Avenue and south of Roseland Street shall
be known as the Church Lot.
20.504 Overlay District Requirements
20.504.1 Floor Area Ratio Limitations.
1. Institutional Uses.
Not withstanding the FAR limits set forth in Article 5.000 or elsewhere in this
Ordinance, the maximum FAR permitted in the Lesley Porter Overlay District
shall be 2.5 for those lots located easterly of Massachusetts Avenue and 2.0 for
those lots located westerly of Massachusetts Avenue for all educational
institutional uses set forth in Article 4.33.b (1) as further limited in Section 4.56 c
(4) and (6), after the granting of a Special Permit from the Planning Board,
subject to the following conditions and limitations:
a. Notwithstanding the definition of Lot in Article 2.000, a development project in
this Lesley Porter Overlay District may consist of non-contiguous lots and lots
separated by streets, which lots are held in common ownership. In
calculating the gross floor area (GFA) permitted for a development consisting
of educational institutional uses, the area of noncontiguous lots held in
common ownership within the Overlay District may be combined. For those
lots located easterly of Massachusetts Avenue, the resulting permitted Gross
Floor Area may be located on the individual University Hall or Church Lots or
transferred in part from the University Hall Lot to the Church Lot in an amount
not to exceed 25,000 square feet. All transferred Gross Floor Area shall be
located below grade.
b. Any Special Permit issued by the Planning Board in the Lesley Porter
Overlay District for increased FAR as permitted in this Section 20.504.1 (1)
shall result in a prohibition on dormitory uses on the Mt Vernon and
University Hall Lots.
c. Where, in seeking a special permit under the provisions of this Section
20.504.1, a development project is determined to be subject to the provisions
of Section 19.20 – Project Review Special Permit, that project shall be
required to submit a Traffic Study as required in Section 19.24,
notwithstanding any other provision of Section 19.20.
2. Retail Uses
For a building abutting Massachusetts Avenue on the University Hall Lot or the
Mt. Vernon Lots that is occupied by retail uses set forth in Section 4.35 that are
located on the ground (first) floor of that building, which building is otherwise at
least 50% occupied by institutional uses, those retail uses shall be exempt from
20-81
the requirements of FAR and shall not be counted as Gross Floor Area. In no
event, however, shall this retail FAR exemption exceed 25,000 square feet of
gross floor area in any single building.
The retail enterprises receiving such FAR exemption shall be open to the general
public during normal business hours and are expected to provide goods and
services of interest to the general public not affiliated with any educational
institutional occupant of such building. The institution shall report to Planning
Board on the leasing activity in such exempt retail space in its annual “Town
Gown Report” presentation to the Board for five years after initial occupancy of
the last exempt Gross Floor Area.
20.504.2 Height.
1. Height shall be that permitted in the base Business C zoning district and,
notwithstanding other provisions in the Zoning Ordinance, shall be measured from
mean grade measured at the perimeter of the lot.
However, the height of any historic structure (including any building determined to
be a Preferably Preserved Significant Building by the Cambridge Historical
Commission under the provisions of Ordinance No. 965, designated as a landmark
pursuant to Chapter 2.78 of the Cambridge Municipal Code or the subject of a
Preservation Easement granted to the Cambridge Historical Commission) shall be
exempted from the provisions of Sections 5.33.2 and 5.43. All other new
construction within the Overlay District, however, shall be subject to these sections.
2. For the Mt Vernon Lots located westerly of Massachusetts Avenue, the maximum
height shall be limited to 45 for the lot located north of Mount Vernon Street and forty
(40) feet for the lot located south of Mount Vernon Street and shall be measured
from grade as provided for in Paragraph 1 above. The 35 foot transition height limit
required in Sections 5.33.2 and 5.43 shall continue to apply.
20.504.3 Setbacks, yards
1. Setbacks, except as otherwise provided in Section 20.504.3 (2) below, shall be the
same as required in the base zoning district (Business C) for all new construction
provided, however, that historic structures (as defined above) shall not be subject to
the yard requirements of Sections 5.41 and 5.42, including if all or a portion of such
structures is relocated on the same lot in the Overlay District.
2. Church Lot Setbacks.
a. There shall be a required setback of twenty (20) feet from the side lot line of the
Church Lot perpendicular to Roseland Street.
20-82
b. There shall be required a 7.5 foot front yard setback along the Frost Terrace front
lot line. Such setback shall not be subject to the surface parking restrictions of
Section 6.44.1 or the Massachusetts Avenue Overlay District, Section 20.100.
c. In granting a special permit for development on the Church Lot the Planning
Board shall pay particular attention to the design details of the building wall facing
this lot line and the landscape treatment of the yard provided, as required in Section
20.505 (9) below. In general building walls should not remain uninterrupted for more
than thirty (30) feet, with changes in the plane of building wall of up to four (4) feet
encouraged.
20.504.4 Parking and Loading
Parking and loading requirements for any educational institutional use contained in the
Overlay District may be waived by the granting of a Special Permit from the Planning
Board except that any new Gross Floor Area in a building authorized by Special Permit in
the Lesley Porter Overlay District that results in the elimination of existing parking spaces
on the lots located westerly of Massachusetts Avenue or in the surface parking lot along
Roseland Street on the University Hall Lot shall not be permitted unless replacement
parking is provided.
Above ground parking structures shall not be permitted in the Overlay District with the
possible exception of the area on the University Hall Lot bordered by Roseland Street,
the MBTA railroad right of way, and a line parallel to and 250 feet easterly of the easterly
street line of Massachusetts Avenue, but only after a determination by the Planning
Board that the parking structure will be architecturally and visually well integrated within
the overall development. In order to make such a determination the Planning Board must
find the following:
1. The parking structure shall contain a principal use other than parking.
2. Portions of the structure containing parking that can be viewed from a public way shall
be architecturally treated so as to not appear to be a parking facility.
3. The portion of the structure where parking is located does not have an adverse effect
on the architectural character of the proposed building.
4. Portions of the parking structure are located below grade where feasible.
20.504.5 Open Space Requirements
The following Open Space requirements shall apply to those lots or portions of lots
located easterly of Massachusetts Avenue. The required Open Space may be any
combination of Green Area, Permeable, Public, Private or Publicly Beneficial Open
Space.
1. For the Church Lot in the Business C District located south of Roseland Street there
shall be a minimum ratio of Open Space to Lot Area of ten (10) percent. For purposes of
calculating Open Space under this provision the following requirements shall apply:
a. Open Space shall be located along the Massachusetts Avenue frontage and
have a depth of at least twenty (20) feet and shall have a minimum area of 3,000
contiguous square feet;
20-83
b. Area that is covered by a portion of a building but is open on three (3) sides with
a height of at least twelve (12) feet may be included;
c. Area that is ten (10) feet or more in any direction may be included.
2. For that portion of the University Hall Lot bordered by Roseland Street, the MBTA
railroad right of way, and a line parallel to and 250 feet easterly of the easterly street line
of Massachusetts Avenue there shall be a minimum ratio of Open Space of twenty-five
(25) percent and contain a minimum of 5,000 contiguous square feet of Open Space.
20.504.51 Special Church Lot and University Hall Lot Provisions.
Where a special permit is required for any development on the Church Lot under the
provisions of the Lesley Porter Overlay District, the applicant shall be required to submit
as part of that application a plan for providing a portion of the Open Space required in
Section 20.504.5 (2) above on the University Hall Lot, particularly focused along the
Roseland Street edge. The plan should also include proposed improved pedestrian
connections throughout the lot.
The plan as approved by the Planning Board shall be implemented simultaneously with
the construction authorized by the special permit for the development on the Church Lot.
20.505 Special Permit Criteria
In granting a Special Permit under this Section 20.500, in addition to the other criteria
specified in Section 10.40, the Planning Board shall take into consideration the following
and make appropriate findings related thereto:
1. Contribute to the vitality of Porter Square by concentrating academic activities
that will provide publicly accessible uses including arts libraries, galleries and a
wide range of activities and classes and that will have positive spillover effects on
the retail environment of the Square.
2. Contribute to Porter Square’s vitality, identity and sense of place by removing
existing on-grade parking lots and constructing new structures that spatially
define and enrich Massachusetts Avenue and incorporate active ground floor
uses and buffering them from the activity and noise along Massachusetts
Avenue.
3. Minimize adverse impacts on abutting low-density housing by appropriately
designing and programming new structures’ location on the lot, massing, scale,
use and operations.
4. Preserve, reuse and highlight historic structures as integral, publicly accessible
parts of the overlay district.
5. Provide retail activity that serves local residents’ and Lesley community needs,
strengthens the corridor’s existing retail base and provides a more dynamic,
mixed-use image.
20-84
6. Minimize vehicular traffic and demand for on street parking in the residential
neighborhood by concentrating activity near the T station, maximizing a mix of
uses that reinforce each other, and enhance the pedestrian environment.
7. The Open Space along the easterly side of Massachusetts Avenue south of
Roseland Street, described in Section 20.504.5 (1), should be inviting and
provide places for rest and gathering with an appropriate public art focus.
8. The Open Space along Roseland Street described in Section 20.504.5 (2) should
reflect an “urban campus” character, which would include an entry forecourt
along the axis of neighboring Frost Street. There shall also be a well-defined
walkway through this area that provides pedestrian connections from Roseland
Street to Massachusetts Avenue.
9. Where proposed construction abuts existing residential development, special
attention should be paid to proposed setbacks, location of open space features,
and building design to ensure reasonable compatibility between the scale and
extent of new construction and the scale and character of the existing pattern of
residential development. Use of variable height and variable setback planes,
reduction in the length of continuous building walls, amount of landscaping, etc.
should be employed to achieve these objectives.
10. The Board shall consider the impact of the development on residential neighbors
as it may affect privacy. Location and size of windows, screening elements,
decks, entries and other aspect of the design shall be reviewed to maintain
reasonable levels of privacy for abutters. The Board shall also consider the
nature of the uses contained in the buildings constructed.
11. Inclusion of physical improvements to the public right of way along
Massachusetts Avenue that enhance its quality as a pedestrian environment,
retail shopping district and place for meeting and congregating for neighborhood
residents and visitors.
12. The adequacy of the proposed construction mitigation plan, as set forth in
Section 18.20 of the Zoning Ordinance.
20.506 Consistency with Letter of Commitment
Prior to the issuance of any building permit or Certificate of Occupancy for any
construction authorized by special permit under the provisions of this Section 20.500, the
Community Development Department shall certify to the Inspectional Services
Department that all provisions of the Letter of Commitment dated June 22, 2009 by
Lesley University are continuing to be met.
20.600 BASEMENT HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.610 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Basement Housing Overlay
District which shall be governed by the Regulations and procedures specified in this
Section 20.600. The purpose of this Section 20.600 is to allow for the creation of studio
20-85
or one-bedroom apartment units in appropriate unused basement level space of certain
existing multifamily residential buildings that have one or more existing basement level
apartment units. Given the increasing expense of unsubsidized rental housing in
Cambridge, the shortage of reasonably priced, affordable studio and one bedroom units,
and the difficulty this poses for local workers, students and the elderly, it is in the public
interest to permit the creation of additional units under circumstances which promote the
maintenance and improvement of older buildings, including improved stormwater and
wastewater management, and which provide additional housing without building new
structures or increasing the size of existing structures. The corridor along Massachusetts
Avenue between Harvard Square and Porter Square contains a significant number of
buildings wholly or partially on lots with a base district among the Residence C family of
use categories (Res. C, C-1, C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, C-3B) which because of
their age, location, current existence of one or more basement units, and proximity to
public transit options, present an ideal set of circumstances for the City to encourage the
creation of basement units and thereby explore the desirability and viability of possible
expansion of similar development elsewhere in the City.
20.620 Applicability. The regulations of this Section 20.600 shall apply within the Basement
Housing Overlay District to existing structures designed and built for residential use,
which also meet all of the following standards:
a. the structure is located wholly or partially within a Residence C, C-1, C-1A, C-2A,
C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, or C-3B base zoning district;
b. the structure is currently occupied by at least thirty (30) dwelling units;
c. the structure was built before 1930 and its footprint or foundation has not been
expanded or altered after the effective date of this Section 20.600 except as may
be required and approved as a condition to the grant of a special permit
hereunder;
d. the structure currently contains at least one dwelling unit located entirely at the
basement level.
Portions of those structures that meet the applicability requirements set forth above that
are not located within a Residence C family zoning district would be treated for all
dimensional and use requirements as if wholly located within a Residence C family
zoning district.
20.630 Standards. Where it is proposed to create additional dwelling units by converting existing
Gross Floor Area, which is not presently occupied by dwelling units, into dwelling units at
the basement level of the existing structure, the dimensional and parking standards
generally applicable in any base zoning district shall apply. However, where some or all
of those requirements cannot be met, the Planning Board may waive some or all of the
dimensional and parking standards generally applicable in the base district upon
issuance of a special permit, subject to the following limitations:
a. Where the Floor Area Ratio of the existing structure exceeds the maximum Floor
Area Ratio allowed in the base zoning district, the Gross Floor Area of the
existing structure shall not be increased.
b. Where the existing structure or lot does not conform to the height, yard, or private
open space requirements generally applicable in the district, the Planning Board
may approve those dimensional characteristics of the existing building or lot.
However, no nonconforming dimensional element or aspect of the existing
structure shall be extended or increased, with the exception that the permitted lot
area per dwelling unit may be decreased, and incursions into setback areas may
be approved by the Planning Board only for the purpose of providing or altering
window wells or egress stairs as may be deemed advisable in response to safety
and flooding concerns.
c. The number of dwelling units in the existing structure shall not be increased by
more than ten (10) units or fifteen percent (15%) of the number of dwelling units
in the existing building, whichever is fewer.
20-86
d. Newly created dwelling units shall be restricted to studio or one-bedroom
apartments only.
e. The Planning Board may reduce or waive the number of accessory off-street
motor vehicle parking spaces required by Article 6.000 upon making a finding
that such reduction will not result in substantial adverse impacts to on-street
parking, based on information provided by the Applicant regarding the availability
of alternate transportation options or other factors that would result in a reduced
demand for parking. As a condition of a special permit, the Planning Board may
require measures to minimize parking demand generated by the building. The
requirements of Article 6.000 may not otherwise be waived.
f. At least one additional secure long-term bicycle storage space shall be created
on the lot for each new dwelling unit created under the provisions of this Section.
Such bicycle parking spaces shall conform to the design standards of Section
6.49, and the City of Cambridge Bicycle Parking Guide, published spring 2008 or
later.
20.640 Conditions for Grant of Special Permit. Prior to granting a special permit pursuant to this
Section the Planning Board shall determine that the proposed conversion of basement
space to dwelling units complies with the General Special Permit Criteria set forth in
Section 10.43 as well as with the following requirements:
a. Each new unit converted from existing basement space shall comply with all
building, health, and accessibility codes applicable to residential dwelling units in
the basement of structures. A special permit granted pursuant to this Section
shall be conditioned upon full compliance with all building and sanitary code
requirements applicable to basement unitsto be approved by the Commissioner
of Inspectional Services at the time of application for a building permit. As a
condition of the special permit, the Planning Board may require reasonable
measures as are deemed necessary for the adequate privacy and security of the
occupants.
b. Buildings must contain, or install, full separation between storm water and
sanitary sewer lines from the building to the connection in the street regardless of
whether the street in which the building is connected currently is separated.
c. Adequate, properly installed, backflow prevention devices that comply with all
building code and other applicable requirements must be installed for all newly
created units along with any additional measures determined to be advisable by
the City Engineer.
d. An application for a special permit pursuant to this Section shall include a report
on historical occurrences and future likelihood of basement flooding in the area of
the proposed conversion, prepared by a registered professional engineer, with a
functional scope determined by the City Engineer to be appropriate to the
location of the project. In general, the report shall assess the likelihood of
flooding in the basement units by way of sewer system backups or overland
flooding and identify proposed mitigation to prevent any such flooding. The
Applicant shall obtain approval of the report and proposed mitigation, if any, from
the City Engineer prior to submitting a special permit application. As a condition
of the special permit, the Planning Board may require preventive measures to
safeguard against future flooding in the proposed basement-level units as
recommended by the City Engineer.
20.650 Affordability. The Inclusionary Housing requirements of Section 11.200 shall apply to any
new dwelling units that exceed the threshold for an Inclusionary Project as set forth in
Section 11.201. Any project which receives a special permit pursuant to this Section, but
does not exceed the threshold for an Inclusionary Project, shall provide no less than one
Affordable Unit, as defined in section 11.201 and subject to the Standards for
Construction and Occupancy of Affordable Units set forth in Section 11.204.
20-87
20.660 Notwithstanding the base district in which any part of the structure is located, the entirety
of any structure that meets the applicability requirements of Section 20.620 and that is in
the Basement Housing Overlay District shall be eligible for the special permit created by
this Section 20.600. Where any proposed dwelling units in that structure are to be located
in any portion of the structure that is in a base zone in which the use would not otherwise
be allowed, or would not be allowed without separate approval under Article 8, those
dwelling units shall be eligible to be allowed pursuant to a Special Permit under this
Section 20.600 and upon the grant of that Special Permit shall be allowed without need
for approval under Article 8 or the grant of any variance or additional zoning approvals.
20.700 deleted (see Section 11.800)
20.800 CAMBRIDGE HIGHLANDS OVERLAY DISTRICT
20.801 Purpose. It is the purpose of the Cambridge Highlands Overlay District to modify the
base zoning requirements applicable in the Cambridge Highlands neighborhood with the
intent of supporting the unique character of that district, which is predominantly modestsized
single-family and two-family homes. Stricter controls are applied to development
on larger lots so that they might better fit the established character of the neighborhood.
20.802 Establishment and Applicability. There is hereby established on the Zoning Map of the
City of Cambridge the Cambridge Highlands Overlay District. Except as set forth in this
Section, the requirements applicable in the base zoning district shall apply within the
Cambridge Highlands Overlay District.
20.803 Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. The permitted number of dwelling units on a lot within the
Cambridge Highlands Overlay District shall be calculated as follows. A minimum lot area
per dwelling unit of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall apply to the first
five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area. For those portions of any lot exceeding five
thousand (5,000) square feet, the minimum lot area of each permitted dwelling unit shall
be five thousand (5,000) square feet. However, for any lot in existence as of May 5, 2014
that is subsequently subdivided into two or more lots, the total number of units on the
subdivided lots, in total, shall at no time exceed that permitted on the lot before the
subdivision occurred. Unless otherwise permitted by special permit from the Board of
Zoning Appeal, the dwelling units permitted on each subdivided lot shall be in the same
ratio as that lot’s area is to the area of the unsubdivided lot. Nothing in this Section shall
prohibit the subdivision of a Townhouse Development conforming at the time of its
construction, as permitted in Section 11.10. Where the base zoning sets forth a more
restrictive standard, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
20.804 Townhouse and Multifamily Special Permit Applicability. A special permit pursuant to the
Procedure for Townhouses and Multifamily Dwellings set forth in Section 10.47 of the
zoning Ordinance shall be required for any development resulting in a total of three (3) or
more units on a lot that is wholly or partially within the Cambridge Highlands Overlay
District.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
ARTICLE 21.000 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS REGULATIONS
21.10 General Provisions
21.20 Eastern Cambridge Development Rights Transfer Districts (TDD and
TRD)
21.30 Special Districts 8, 8A, 9 and 10
21.40 Alewife Overlay Districts 1-6
21.10 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) – GENERAL PROVISIONS
21. 11 Purpose. It is the intent of this Article 21.000 to establish regulations by which Gross Floor
Area (GFA) permitted on one lot or lots, as determined by the zoning district applicable to that
lot [the Donating Lot(s)], may be transferred and used on another lot or lots [the Receiving
Lot(s)] in the same or different zoning district in order to (i) introduce a level of flexibility into
the development of designated areas in the city in ways that construction on one lot at a time
cannot accomplish, (ii) allow multiple owners to coordinate development on small lots that may
not be contiguous, (iii) facilitate the implementation of urban design and other planning
objectives, particularly in contexts where there may be many, small lots and multiple property
owners, and (iv) to allow development to respond to market forces and infrastructure patterns
in ways that further public transportation and urban design objectives. The restrictions that
otherwise apply in the Zoning Ordinance restricting development to a single lot in single
ownership shall be modified by the regulations contained in this Article 21.000.
21.12 Establishment and Scope. The Transfer of Development Rights may be secured through the
provisions of a (1) a Development Rights Transfer Overlay District designated from time to
time on the Zoning Map or (2) through the provisions of an Overlay District, having multiple
regulatory objectives or through the provisions of a Special District. The Transfer of
Development Rights shall be regulated by the general provisions of this Section 21.10 and by
specific provisions established for each individual district.
21.13 Procedure. The transfer of GFA from a Donating Lot to a Receiving Lot shall be permitted by
special permit from the Planning Board and shall be subject to further provisions set forth
below in Section 21.13.1. The transfer shall be permitted between contiguous and noncontiguous
lots that may be held in common or separate ownership, notwithstanding any
definition of lot or owner set forth in Article 2.000 of this Ordinance or elsewhere in the
Ordinance.
21.13.1 Special Permit Procedures.
21.13.11 Required Information. In applying for a special permit to permit the transfer of GFA from one
or more Donating Lots to one or more Receiving Lots, the following information shall be
provided:
1. The location of all Donating Lots and all Receiving Lots.
2. Enumeration of the GFA to be transferred, GFA to be retained on the Donating Lot, and
the total GFA to be accommodated on the Receiving Lot; the calculations by which the
proposed GFA on all sites has been determined.
3. Schematic development plans showing the proposed development on both the Donating
and the Receiving lots.
4. A narrative describing the plan’s compliance with all requirements of this Section 21.10
and the specific Transfer of Development Rights provisions of other applicable sections
of the Zoning Ordinance, consistency with any applicable design guidelines and area
plan, and with the Citywide Urban Design Objectives, Section 19.30.
5. The schedule by which necessary demolition will take place and authorized construction
will commence and be completed. Where it is proposed to occupy transferred GFA
before a Donating Lot has been brought into compliance with the requirements of the
special permit, the legal instruments proposed by which the requirements applicable to it
will be met.
6. The status of leaseholds for tenants in any GFA on a Donating Lots in structures that are
required to be demolished or converted to residential uses, and the mechanisms by
which those leaseholds will be terminated and the site brought into compliance with the
requirements of the special permit.
21.13.12 Special Permit Conditions. The Planning Board shall establish in its Decision granting a
special permit under the provisions of this Section 21.10 conditions that address at a
minimum, the following:
1. The sequence by which construction and demolition are to occur on both the Donating and
Receiving Lots;
2. The binding commitments to be executed if occupancy of new GFA on the Receiving Lot is to
occur before demolition of GFA transferred out from the Donating lot or before new on the
Donating Lot.
3. The legal instruments by which a proposed park or other public amenity is to be made
available to the general public, where applicable.
4. The process by which final development plans are to be approved by the Planning Board.
21.14 Reservation of Gross Floor Area by Owners of Donating Lots. To provide flexibility over time
in the utilization of GFA available to be transferred, the Planning Board may issue a special
permit to permit the reservation of GFA from a Donating Lot to be applied at a later date to a
Receiving Lot through a second special permit process. The reservation may be for any
length of time acceptable to the Planning Board.
The Board, in granting the special permit, shall approve the permanent development plan for
the Donating Lot.
Substantial Use of such special permit, as required in Section 10.46 of the Zoning Ordinance,
shall be that date at which it is filed with the Registry of Deeds for Middlesex County.
The Planning Board may establish such conditions as it deems appropriate to ensure that
development on the donating lot is consistent with the conditions of the special permit until the
development rights are fully utilized on a future receiving lot.
21.15 Application for a Building Permit. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any construction on
any Donating or Receiving Lot linked through the issuance of a single special permit, the
Superintendent of Buildings shall determine, based on information provided with the
application (including a certification from the Community Development Department that all
conditions of the special permit are met), that all Donating and Receiving Lots continue to be
in conformance with the conditions of the special permit, the provisions of this Section 21.10,
and the applicable base zoning districts. Among the information to be provided are the
following:
1. An identification of all lots subject to the requirements of a single special permit.
2. A list of all building permits issued for those lots since the granting of the authorizing
special permit.
3. The GFA existing and authorized on each lot at the time of the application.
4. An enumeration of the GFA authorized on each lot by the Special Permit.
21.16 Dimensional Limitations. Except as may be provided elsewhere in the Ordinance in the
individual Transfer of Development Rights Districts and Provisions, all development on both
Donating and Receiving Lots shall be subject to the dimensional limitations of the applicable
base district with the exception of the FAR limitation. On Receiving Lots, Gross Floor Area
may be increased above the FAR limit normally applicable to the extent of GFA transferred
from Donating Lots by special permit.
21.20 EASTERN CAMBRIDGE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS TRANSFER DISTRICT
(TDD and TRD)
21.21 Purpose. It is the intent of this Section 20.30 to (1) reduce the density of development close to
the existing residential neighborhoods and (2) encourage housing construction compatible with
the existing residential neighborhoods through the transfer of existing or potential development
to other locations. It is also intended to facilitate the construction of additional residential,
office, research and development, retail, and manufacturing uses in areas of eastern
Cambridge that are close to transit services, and on sites now fully developed that can more
effectively serve the city’s Urban Design Objectives, as set forth in Section 19.30 of the
Ordinance, with additional building construction. For the purposes of this Section 20.30,
residential use shall be as defined as uses set forth in Section 4.31 a-h
21.22 Establishment and Scope. There is hereby established the Eastern Cambridge Development
Rights Transfer Districts which shall be governed by the regulations and procedures specified
in this Section 20.30. These regulations shall apply to areas described below or as they may
be otherwise identified on the Zoning Map, which shall be designated as “Eastern Cambridge
Development Rights Transfer Donating District” (TDD) or “Eastern Cambridge Development
Rights Transfer Receiving District” (TRD) on the Zoning Map of the City of Cambridge
established in Section 3.20.
21.23 Boundaries of the Districts.
The boundaries of the districts shall be as described below.
1. The Eastern Cambridge Development Rights Transfer Donating District shall be
coterminous with the boundaries of the Eastern Cambridge Housing Overlay District (Section
20.40 below) and the portion of the PUD-4B District located north of Binney Street. The
Donating District shall be that area from which Gross Floor Area (GFA) is removed for use on
a lot in the Receiving District. A Donating Lot shall be a lot in the Donating District from which
GFA is removed.
2. The Eastern Cambridge Development Rights Transfer Receiving District shall be (a) that
area bounded by the centerlines of Binney Street to the north, First Street to the east, Main
Street to the south, and on the west a line parallel to, easterly of, and one hundred and fifty
feet distant from the easterly sideline of Portland Street and Cardinal Medeiros Avenue, and
(b) that portion of the Industry B zone located south of Main Street and bounded by the
centerlines of Albany Street; Massachusetts Avenue; Windsor Street; a line southerly of,
parallel to, and one hundred and fifty feet distant from the southerly sideline of Main Street; a
line easterly of, parallel to and one hundred and fifty feet distant from the southwesterly
extension of the centerline of Portland Street north of Main Street; and then Main Street to the
point of beginning . The Receiving District shall be that area where GFA from a Donating Lot is
used for development. A Receiving Lot shall be a lot in the Receiving District to which GFA is
moved.
21.24 Procedure. The transfer of GFA from the Donating District to the Receiving District shall be
permitted by special permit from the Planning Board and shall be subject to further provisions set
forth below in Section 20.36. The transfer shall be permitted between non-contiguous lots that
may be held in separate ownership, notwithstanding any definition of lot set forth in Article 2.000
of this Ordinance.
21.25 Limitations, Requirements, and Conditions Applicable to Lots in the Sending District
21.25.1 Non Residential Gross Floor Area Available for Transfer from a Lot in the Donating District to
Any Lot in the Receiving District.
The total GFA that may be transferred from any Donating Lot to any Receiving Lot shall be the
greater of the following:
(1) The total amount of non-residential GFA permitted on a lot in any non-residential
zoning district in the Donating District at the time of application to permit the transfer, or
(2) The existing amount of non-residential GFA contained on a lot in any zoning district in
the Donating District at the time of application to permit the transfer.
21.25.2 Residual Gross Floor Area Available for Residential Development on a Donating Lot after the
Non-residential GFA Transfer has been Authorized.
The total Gross Floor Area available for residential development on any Donating Lot shall be
the greater of the following:
(1) The total amount of residential GFA permitted on the Donating Lot after the nonresidential
GFA has been transferred, including existing residential GFA and residential
GFA allowed through the application of the provisions of Section 5.28.2 – Conversion of
Non-Residential Structures to Residential Use, where it is proposed to reuse a nonresidential
structure for residential use, or.
(2) The GFA resulting from an FAR of 0.75 in Residence C-1 base district or 1.25 in any
non-residential base district.
21.25.21 Residual Residential Gross Floor Area on a Donating Lot Available for Transfer to a Lot in the
Receiving District.
The residential GFA permitted on a lot in any residential or non-residential zoning district as
determined by Section 20.34.2 above may be transferred to any receiving lot provided the
future residential development potential on the Donating Lot is not reduced below an FAR of
0.75.
21.25.3 Restrictions on the Donating Lot after Transfer is Authorized.
(1) All non-residential GFA existing or permitted under the zoning district regulations
applicable on the Donating Lot, whichever is greater, must be transferred, held for future
transfer, or abandoned. No non-residential development potential shall remain on the Donating
Lot and no use variance may be granted to reestablish non-residential uses after the transfer
of GFA has occurred. Any active non-residential use shall be discontinued.
(2) Development on the Donating Lot is limited to residential use or a public park. Where
residential development is proposed to be established, the future residential development shall
not have an FAR of less than 0.75. All existing gross floor area not redeveloped to residential
use shall be demolished where housing is to be established on the site. The entire site shall
be cleared if it is to be developed as a public park.
(3) No building or structure determined to be a Preferably Preserved Significant Building by the
Cambridge Historical Commission, as provided in Ordinance No. 965 of the Ordinances of the
City of Cambridge, may be demolished. Any such building required to remain shall be
converted to a permitted residential use.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraphs (1) – (3) above, or other provisions of this
Section 20.30, the remaining residential GFA on a Donating Lot may contain any office or
retail use permitted in the applicable base district up to ten (10) percent of the permitted
residential GFA.
21.26 Dimensional and Use Limitations on the Receiving Lot.
The GFA transferred from any Donating Lot to a Receiving Lot shall be subject to the following
provisions:
(1) The transferred GFA shall not be subject to any FAR or GFA limitations applicable to
the receiving lot, including lots which already exceed permitted FAR limits.
(2) Transferred Non-residential GFA may be used for any use permitted on the Receiving
Lot. However, where any non-residential use is limited to a maximum percentage of total
development on the Receiving Lot or Development Parcel, the transferred GFA shall be
subject to that limitation unless the transferred GFA is in addition to, and not a substitute
for, the GFA and use limitations otherwise applicable on the Receiving Lot or
Development Parcel.
(3) Residential GFA transferred, as permitted in Section 20.34.21 above, shall only be
used for residential uses on the receiving lot.
(4) All other dimensional limitations applicable to the receiving lot shall apply to the
transferred GFA.
21.30 SPECIAL DISTRICTS 8, 8A, 9 and 10
Transfer of Development Rights shall be permitted in Special Districts 8, 8A, 9 and 10 for the
purpose of creating open space facilities, pursuant to the general provisions of Section 21.10
above and the following specific requirements.
21.31 Transfer of Development Rights and/or Additional Height to secure Publicly Accessible Open
Space.
The Planning Board may permit the transfer of all of the gross floor area permitted as of right
or by special permit on one or more Donating Lots located in Special District 8, Section 17.81,
or Special Districts 8A, 9 and 10, Sections 17.82, 17.90 and 17.100, to one or more Receiving
Lots located in Special District 8 and may permit in conjunction with that transfer an increase
in the permitted height on the Receiving Lot for the purpose of creating an open space facility
of approximately fifty-nine thousand (59,000) square feet and such other additions to that
space or the creation of other such open space facilities as may be offered that are accessible
to the general public and designed and intended to be used for active and/or passive
recreation. The special permit shall be granted subject to the following requirements:
1. One open space parcel containing an area of approximately fifty-nine thousand (59,000)
square feet, as shown on Lots # 48 and 57 on Assessor's Plat # 95, shall be a Donating
Lot and must be secured as an open space as required in this Section 21.30 before any
other lot may be considered a Donating Lot; other open space parcels within the Special
District 8 or Special Districts 8A, 9 and 10 may also be Donating Lots.
2. The FAR on the Receiving Lot does not exceed 2.5 for nonresidential uses or 3.0 FAR
for residential and dormitory use.
3. The Receiving Lot for the one hundred three thousand, two hundred fifty (103,250)
gross square feet or more of floor area to be transferred is located in Special District 8.
4. The maximum height of any structure on the Receiving Lot may be increased subject to
the following limitations:
a. Sixty (60) feet in that area lying between Sidney Street and a line, which line is
parallel to, southeasterly of and one hundred (100) feet distant from Sidney
Street;
b. Ninety (90) feet in that area lying between the parallel line described in
Paragraph (a) above and Albany Street;
c. One hundred (100) feet in that area lying southeasterly of Albany Street.
5. The donating site for an open space contribution of approximately fifty-nine thousand
(59,000) square feet is located at 82 Pacific Street as shown on lots # 48 and 57, on
Assessor's Plat # 95.
6. Open space facilities shall be under the control of, and be programmed and maintained
by the City of Cambridge or its designated agent. Transfer of open space facilities to the
City shall be by fee simple conveyance, easement, lease (see Paragraph 8 below) or other
legal mechanism, and shall be made as a condition precedent to the issuance of the first
building permit for a project on a Receiving Lot which utilizes development rights granted
by Special Permit for that project. Special Permits granted under this Section 21.30 shall
run with the land.
7. The site is physically suitable for the recreational uses proposed and certified by the
City to meet environmental standards such as they are applied to other such open spaces
in the City at the time of transfer to the City of Cambridge.
8. If the development rights transferred by the Special Permit to a Receiving Lot are not
fully utilized or applied in the construction of a project, the remaining development rights
shall remain available for use or application, on a phase by phase basis, on the receiving
lot. If development rights are applied by a landowner, on a phase by phase basis, the
donating lot (from which the development rights derive) shall be leased, on a completely
“net” basis, by the owner of the donating lot to the City of Cambridge, or its designated
agent, until such time as the receiving lot has fully utilized or applied the development
rights derived from the donating lot. When those development rights are fully utilized or
applied, which shall be determined by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
building making use of such rights, fee simple title to the donating lot shall be conveyed to
the City of Cambridge or its designated agent; in its decision the Planning Board shall
determine if fee simple title shall be conveyed in phases as development rights are utilized
or applied or when the entire amount of development rights is fully utilized. If development
rights are applied or utilized on a phase by phase basis, and if, because of an amendment
or other change in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cambridge, the owner of the
receiving lot is unable to receive the full benefits of those development rights (in the same
manner and to the same extent as if the Zoning Ordinance had not been amended or
otherwise changed), the lease of the donating lot to the City of Cambridge shall terminate
automatically upon the effective date of that amendment or other change in the Zoning
Ordinance.
Any special permit issued under the provisions of this Section 21.30 shall be in force and
effect for the length of lease of property for open space purposes as required in this
Section 21.30. For the purposes of Section 10.46, the use authorized by any special
permit issued under this Section 21.30 shall be deemed to have commenced with the
granting of the lease of land for open space purposes as defined in this Paragraph 8.
21.32 Special Permit Conditions. In granting a special permit under this Section 17.81.5 the Planning
Board shall consider the following:
1. The proposed open space is consistent with the objectives of this Section 21.30 to
create a private open space or recreational facility addressing the unmet needs of the
adjacent residential neighborhood and those of the new residents of the district and, if one
is adopted, is consistent with a plan for the distribution and use of open space in the
District.
2. If less than one acre, the open space is clearly an element of a plan to be implemented
incrementally created through the issuance of additional special permits, or is clearly
acceptable as an independent facility.
1. If it is intended to be a part of a larger facility, the open space is useable on its
own, as an independent facility, if intended future special permits are not sought
or granted.
21.40 ALEWIFE OVERLAY DISTRICTS 1-6
21.41 Purpose. It is the intent of this Section 21.40 (i) to reduce the density of development adjacent
to the existing residential neighborhood of the Cambridge Highlands; (ii) to encourage greater
development density closer to public transit and to facilitate infrastructure improvements that
will make those transit services more widely available in the Alewife Overlay Districts; (iii) to
facilitate a more orderly development pattern within the Alewife Overlay Districts, including
increasing the opportunities for installation of new circulation pathways for pedestrian, bicycles
and vehicles; creation of new public or private open space facilities; and development of new
pedestrian connections from the Quadrangle to the Triangle; (iv) to make additional land
surface available for better stormwater management and increased permeability; and (v) to
encourage a more attractive pattern of new buildings consistent with the urban design
objectives set forth in the Concord-Alewife Plan.
21.42 Procedure. The procedures set forth in Section 21.10 above shall apply to this Section 21.20.
21.43 Limitations, Requirements, and Conditions Applicable Donating Lots.
21.43.1 Gross Floor Area Available for Transfer from a Donating Lot to a Receiving Lot.
1. Some or all of the Gross Floor area permitted on the Donating Lot, as determined by the
applicable base zoning district regulations, any additional development allowed in Section
20.90 by special permit, and by the provisions of Section 5.28.2 as they apply to existing
development on the site, may be transferred to a Receiving Lot.
2. Where any legally established Gross Floor Area existing on the lot at the time of application
to permit the transfer exceeds that permitted on the lot, that Gross Floor Area shall be
available in whole or in part for transfer to the Receiving Lot.
3. Residential Gross Floor Area transferred from a Donating Lot may only be used for
residential purposes on the Receiving Lot. Non-residential Gross Floor Area transferred from
a Donating Lot may be used for any permitted use on the Receiving Lot.
4. Special Provisions Related to Utility and Railroad Land. As railroad and utility facilities
cannot easily be reused for other purposes while the railroad or utility function is active, special
limitations shall be imposed for the transfer of any development potential on those sites though
the provisions of this Section 21.40. Therefore, Gross Floor Area permitted on a railroad rightof
way, railroad freight terminal, railroad yard and shop (Section 4.32 (c)) or utility transformer
station, substation, gas regulator station (Section 4.32 (g 2) may not be transferred to any
other lot under the provisions of this Section 21.40 unless the Planning Board finds that the
donating lot, after the transfer of GFA, will be substantially improved to the benefit of the
general public, consistent with the objectives of the Concord-Alewife Plan. In making that
finding the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a. Significant portions of the Donating Lot are redeveloped to housing, technical office
uses, or permeable open space as set forth in Section 21.43.2 (1) below.
b. Rights of way or construction of pedestrian and bicycle pathways and roadway
segments, elements of the pedestrian bridge across the railroad right of way from the
Quadrangle to the Triangle, and water retention/detention systems are provided,
consistent with the Plan.
c. The additional GFA on the Receiving Lot can be reasonably accommodated in a
positive way with regard to management of the additional traffic created and site and
building design proposed in the context of the surrounding pattern of development.
d. In other demonstrable ways the objectives of the Plan are advanced to an extent
commensurate with the scale of the GFA transfer being requested.
21.43.2 Restrictions on the Use of the Donating Lot after Transfer is Authorized.
1. Where it is proposed to transfer all development allowed on the Donating Lot, the
lot shall be thereafter developed in one of the following ways:
a. As a Public, Green Area, Permeable or Publicly Beneficial Open Space.
b. For any residential use permitted in a Residence C-1 District in a building
or buildings meeting all the dimensional requirements of the Residence
C-1 District. An FAR of 0.75 shall be authorized on the site, in addition
to that authorized for transfer to the Receiving Lot. Such additional
FAR, however, shall not be granted for transfers of GFA that only occur
within the boundaries of a single Overlay District.
c. Any technical office for research and development, laboratory and
research facility, Section 4.34 f, in a building or buildings constructed to
meet all the dimensional requirements of the Office 1 District. An FAR
of 0.75 shall be authorized on the site, in addition to that authorized for
transfer to the Receiving Lot. Such additional FAR, however, shall not
be granted for transfers of GFA that only occur within the boundaries of a
single Overlay District.
i. Where an existing building has a Gross Floor Area at or
below an FAR of 0.75 and is occupied by a Technical office for
research and development use, such building and use shall be
considered to meet the requirements of this Subparagraph c
and the full transfer from the lot of permitted FAR shall be
permitted.
2. Where it is proposed to retain some of the development potential on the Donating
Lot, either in new construction or in existing buildings, the provisions of the
applicable base district and Section 20.90 shall apply to that development.
21.43.3 Dimensional and Use Limitations on the Receiving Lot.
The GFA transferred to a Receiving Lot shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. The transferred GFA shall not be subject to any FAR or GFA limitations applicable to the
Receiving Lot, including lots that already exceed permitted FAR limits.
2. Transferred Non-residential GFA may be used for any use permitted on the Receiving Lot
3. Transferred Residential GFA shall only be used for residential uses on the receiving lot.
4. All other dimensional limitations applicable to the receiving lot shall apply to the transferred
GFA.
5. The total GFA transferred shall not exceed twenty (20%) percent of the GFA otherwise
permitted on the Receiving Lot when the transfer occurs between two or more Overlay
Districts.
21.43.4 Location of Donating and Receiving Lots
21.43.41 Transfer of Development Rights within a Single Overlay District. Transfer of GFA shall be
permitted within the boundaries of a single Overlay District from any Donating Lot to any
Receiving Lot. Where a lot is divided by an Overlay District line, all transferred GFA shall be
located within that portion of the lot located within the Overlay District.
21.43.42 Transfer of Development Rights Between Two or More Overlay Districts. Where it is proposed
to transfer GFA out of one Overlay District into another the following rules shall apply.
1. Overlay Districts 1 and 3 shall contain only Donating Lots. Gross Floor Area from
these Districts may only be transferred to Overlay Districts enumerated in Paragraphs
(2) and (3) below.
2. Overlay Districts 4, 5 and 6 shall contain only Receiving Lots and may receive
transferred GFA only from Overlay Districts 1 and 3.
3. Overlay District 2 shall contain only Receiving Lots and may receive transferred GFA
only from Overlay Districts 1 and 3. However, transferred GFA shall only be permitted
if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that there is in place
a safe and functional pedestrian connection from Overlay District 2 across the railroad
tracts to Overlay District 6; or that the development authorized by a Transfer of
Development Rights Special Permit will provide physical elements or property right
interests that will facilitate the construction of such a pedestrian connection in the
future, to include but not be limited to: fee, easement or other property interest
sufficient to permit the construction of a pedestrian bridge and to permit the general
public access the facility; construction of elements of the bridge on the site or within
buildings to be constructed on the site, or actual construction of the pedestrian
connection.
ON-LINE ZONING ORDINANCE DISCLAIMER
The Web version of the City of Cambridge, Massachusetts Zoning Ordinance is provided
for reference and the convenience of having the Ordinance in a computer-readable
format. The print version of the Zoning Ordinance, together with any amendments
adopted by the City Council subsequent to the most recent update to the print version,
remains the official version of the Ordinance. If any discrepancies exist between the
print and web versions of the Zoning Ordinance, the print version, together with any City
Council amendments, shall be considered correct. Recent amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance may appear on the Web prior to being incorporated into the print version of
the Ordinance.
ARTICLE 22.000 SUSTAINABLE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT
22.10 INTENT AND PURPOSE
22.20 GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
22.30 GREEN ROOFS
22.40 EXTERIOR WALLS AND INSULATION
22.50 OVERHANGS AND SUN-SHADING DEVICES
22.60 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
22.70 WIND TURBINE SYSTEMS
22.10 INTENT AND PURPOSE
It is the intent of this Article 22.000 to promote environmentally sustainable and energy-efficient
design and development practices in new construction and renovation of buildings in the city.
Some of the regulations in this Article include design standards that shall be applied to new
construction and renovation projects of a significant size. Other regulations in this Article modify
regulations found elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance in order to encourage the incorporation of
specific design features that will improve the sustainability and energy-efficiency of buildings.
22.20 GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
22.21 Statement of Purpose. This Section 22.20 is adopted to ensure that major new projects and
substantially rehabilitated buildings in the City of Cambridge are planned, designed and
constructed in a sustainable way so as to minimize adverse environmental impacts as they are
initially constructed and as they are occupied and operated over the course of their useful lives. It
is the purpose of this Section 22.20 to encourage the reuse of existing buildings and materials; to
encourage the conservation of natural resources and reduction of toxins in new construction and
substantial rehabilitation of existing buildings through selection of recycled and otherwise
environmentally appropriate building materials and methods; to ensure a reduction in the use of
energy in both the initial construction of the project and in its daily operation; and to encourage an
arrangement of buildings and mix of uses, on individual lots and within the city as a whole, that
will foster pedestrian, bicycle, and public transit use in the city. While the provisions of this
section apply to projects of 25,000 square feet or larger, developments of all sizes are
encouraged to incorporate sustainable design principles. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
Article 22.00, the requirements of all local, state and/or federal regulations applicable to a project
must be met, particularly the State Building Code, including its energy components.
22.22 Applicability. Any new construction, or any substantial rehabilitation of an existing building for an
existing or new use, that totals 25,000 square feet of Gross Floor Area or more and that (1)
requires the issuance of a special permit under any provision of this Zoning Ordinance (including
but not limited to special permits required in Article 13.000 – Planned Unit Development Districts,
Section 19.20 – Project Review Special Permit, and Section 5.28.2 – Conversion of Non-
Residential Structures to Residential Use) or (2) is subject to the provisions of Section 19.50 –
Building and Site Plan Requirements, shall be subject to the requirements of this Section 22.20.
22.23 Requirement. LEED, when used in this Section 22.20, refers to the Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design Green Building Rating System as developed and revised from time to time
by the United States Green Building Council (USGBC).
1. For construction of at least 25,000 square feet of gross floor area but less than 50,000 square
feet.
Such projects shall be required to meet the requirements of the most current applicable LEED
building rating system at the level ‘Certified’ or better.
2. For construction of 50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area.
Such projects, shall be required to meet the requirements of the most current applicable LEED
building rating system at the level ‘Silver’ or better.
There shall be a period of twelve months from the time of adoption of a new version of LEED,
during which projects shall have the option to file under either the old or newly-adopted version.
22.24 Procedures. Any project subject to this Section 22.20 shall comply with the following procedural
requirements.
1. Special Permit Application or Section 19.50 Compliance Documentation.
As an element of the application or documentation, the applicant shall submit a completed
LEED Project Checklist for the appropriate LEED building standard to demonstrate how the
project is anticipated to meet the requirement of Section 22.23 above. The Checklist shall be
accompanied by a brief narrative indicating the mechanisms proposed to achieve each of the
credits and prerequisites and demonstrating the anticipated methods by which compliance
with the requirements of this Section will be achieved at the time of construction of the
authorized project. The checklist and narrative shall be accompanied by an affidavit by a
LEED-Accredited Professional (LEED-AP) Project Manager or by appropriate consultants
stating that to the best of their knowledge, the project has been designed to achieve the
requirements of Section 22.23 above.
2. The following requirements shall apply to all development subject to this Section 22.20:
a. Prior to the issuance of the first Building Permit for each authorized building.
(1) Submittal of an updated LEED checklist and narrative description outlining
compliance with the certification level required by Section 22.23 above to the
Inspectional Services Department (ISD) and the Community Development
Department (CDD). The narrative shall highlight any design changes made
subsequent to the Development Consultation or granting of the Special Permit.
(2) The checklist and narrative shall be accompanied by an affidavit by a LEED-AP
Project Manager or appropriate consultants stating that to the best of their
knowledge, the project has been designed to achieve the stated credit requirements.
b. Prior to issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy for each authorized building.
(1) Submittal of a final LEED checklist and narrative description indicating in detail how
the requirements of this Section 22.20 have been met to the Inspectional Services
Department (ISD) and the Community Development Department (CDD).
(2) The checklist and narrative shall be accompanied by an affidavit by a LEED-AP
Project Manager or appropriate consultants stating that to the best of their
knowledge, the project has been designed and constructed to achieve the
requirements of Section 22.23 above.
22.30 GREEN ROOFS
22.31 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to remove potential impediments to the development of
green roof systems on new and existing buildings by clarifying that such systems should not
count against a building’s Gross Floor Area, and by providing for limited access and enjoyment of
green roofs by occupants of a building.
22.32 Functional Green Roof Area shall be defined as area atop a roof surface on a building, open to
the sky and air, which is surfaced with soil and living plant materials for the purpose of retaining
rainwater and absorbing heat from sunlight. The depth of soil and planted material shall be at
least two (2) inches to be considered Functional Green Roof Area. For the purposes of
maintaining the plant material, Functional Green Roof Area may be accessible by means of a roof
entrance.
22.33 Floor Area Exemptions for Functional Green Roof Area.
22.33.1 Spaces meeting the definition of Functional Green Roof Area as defined in Subsection 22.32
above, which are to be accessed only for maintenance purposes and are not intended to be used
by building occupants or others, shall be exempt from the calculation of Gross Floor Area of a
building.
22.33.2 Spaces meeting the definition of Functional Green Roof Area as defined in Subsection 22.32
above, which are intended to be accessed for use by occupants of the building or others, and
which are located above the third floor of the building, may be exempted from the calculation of
Gross Floor Area of a building only after the granting of a special permit by the Planning Board.
The proponent seeking such a special permit must demonstrate that the Functional Green Roof
Area is designed such that the vegetation will withstand the foot traffic associated with its
anticipated use. The Planning Board shall also consider the potential visual, noise and privacy
impacts of the anticipated use on neighbors. Unless such a special permit is granted, any
Functional Green Roof Area located above the third floor of a building that is intended to be
accessed for use by building occupants or others shall be counted as Gross Floor Area.
22.34 Floor Area Exemptions for Patios or Decks Adjacent to Functional Green Roof Area
22.34.1 In non-residential zoning districts and in Residence C-1A, C-2, C-2A, C-2B, C-3, C-3A, and C-3B
zoning districts, where a rooftop surface above the third floor includes Functional Green Roof
Area as defined in Section 22.32 above, adjacent open-air outdoor space intended for use by
building occupants or other persons that does not meet the definition of Functional Green Roof
Area, such as a patio or deck, shall be exempted from the calculation of Gross Floor Area of the
building, provided that the total space exempted in such a manner shall not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the amount of Functional Green Roof Area on the building and that all such
usable outdoor space shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all outer roof edges.
22.34.2 In residential zoning districts not listed in Section 22.34.1 above, where a rooftop surface above
the third floor includes Functional Green Roof Area as defined in Section 22.32 above, adjacent
open-air outdoor space intended for use by building occupants or other persons that does not
meet the definition of Functional Green Roof Area, such as a patio or deck, may be exempted
from the calculation of Gross Floor Area of the building only after the granting of a special permit
by the Planning Board. The total space exempted in such a manner shall not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the amount of Functional Green Roof Area on the building and all such usable
outdoor space shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from all outer roof edges. In granting the
special permit, the Planning Board shall consider the location and orientation of the patio or deck
in relation to adjacent properties and potential visual, noise and privacy impacts of the anticipated
use on abutters.
22.40 EXTERIOR WALLS AND INSULATION
22.41 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to remove potential impediments to the construction of
exterior walls with additional insulation or wall-based mechanical systems that can improve the
energy-efficiency of a building, by exempting the additional gross floor area created by such
features from the calculation of a building’s total Gross Floor Area.
22.42 Double-Skin Facades
22.42.1 A Double-Skin Façade shall be defined as a multilayer exterior wall system comprising a solid
outer wall, a solid inner wall, and a ventilated intermediate air space, intended to improve
insulation and manage solar heat gain as an element of a building-wide mechanical system for
heating and cooling a building.
22.42.2 Floor Area Exemption for Double-Skin Façades. Within an exterior wall system that meets the
definition of a Double-Skin Façade as defined in Section 22.42.1 above, the area occupied by the
intermediate air space shall be excluded from the calculation of Gross Floor Area on a lot, up to a
depth of one (1) foot, provided the space is not to be accessed except for maintenance purposes.
22.43 Exterior Insulation
22.43.1 Floor Area Exemption for Added Exterior Insulation. Where the thickness of a solid, nonremovable
exterior wall of a building is greater than six (6) inches, such wall being comprised
entirely of structural material, insulating material and interior and exterior finishes, any Gross
Floor Area that is further than six (6) inches from the innermost solid plane of the exterior wall
may be excluded from the calculation of Gross Floor Area of a building.
22.43.2 Yard Exceptions for Added Exterior Insulation. Existing conforming or pre-existing nonconforming
buildings or buildings that received a building permit prior to August 2, 2010 that
cannot add insulation exterior to the exterior structural wall of the building without intruding into a
required setback may encroach or further encroach into the required yard setback through the
addition of insulation external to the exterior structural wall of the building, provided that the
additional insulation does not increase the thickness of the exterior wall by more than four (4)
inches and that the resulting outermost plane of each exterior wall is no closer than seven feet,
two inches (7’-2”) to the nearest property line.
22.50 OVERHANGS AND SUN-SHADING DEVICES
22.51 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to remove potential impediments to the addition of
passive solar shading devices intended to reduce the impact of solar heat gain on a building or
lot, by exempting areas underneath such devices from the calculation of Gross Floor Area under
certain circumstances.
22.52 Floor Area Exemption for Sun-Shading Devices. Areas directly underneath a building overhang,
eave, awning or other sun-shading device shall be excluded from the calculation of Gross Floor
Area for a lot, provided that the overhang, eave, awning or other sun-shading device extends no
more than three (3) feet from the exterior wall plane of the section of the building beneath it, and
provided that the ground surface directly beneath the overhang, eave, awning or other sunshading
device meets the definition of Permeable Open Space as defined in Article 2 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
22.53 Floor Area Exemption for Pergolas, Arbors and Trellises. Ground space directly underneath an
outdoor pergola, arbor or trellis structure shall be excluded from the calculation of Gross Floor
Area of a lot, provided that the structure is at least 80% open to the air across all horizontal or
vertical surfaces, and that any parallel structural support members with a cross-section of greater
than one (1) inch by two (2) inches are separated from each other by at least three (3) feet on
center. These features may be freestanding or attached to a building.
22.60 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
22.61 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to define solar energy systems within the zoning
ordinance, to provide a mechanism for publicly registering such systems so that nearby
developers can be aware of their existence, and to provide limited zoning protections for such
systems in some instances where developers of neighboring properties are seeking a special
permit or variance.
22.62.1 Solar energy systems are viewed as potentially valuable contributors to meeting the City’s
objective of encouraging sustainable development and energy conservation. However, the
complex nature of urban development in the city limits the extent to which the city’s zoning
regulations can be employed to guarantee long-term access to sunlight on a wide geographic
basis. Therefore, the following provisions are intended to provide limited support for such systems
and to raise awareness of their contribution to the objectives of this Article 22.000 on the part of
the general public and property owners.
22.62 A Solar Energy System shall be defined as a device or combination of equipment that converts
radiant energy from the sun into heat or electricity that can be used for the purpose of heating
indoor spaces, producing hot water, or powering electrical devices.
22.63 A Registered Solar Energy System shall be defined as a Solar Energy System for which a
building permit has been issued, provided that at least one year has passed since the issuance of
such permit, and whose sun-exposed elements are at a height no lower than five (5) feet below
the maximum height allowed within the base zoning district in which it is located. Such systems
shall be recorded on a public registry of Solar Energy Systems that shall be maintained by the
City’s Inspectional Services Department and made available to property owners by request.
22.64 Protection of Registered Solar Energy Systems. The impacts of a proposed development seeking
a special permit or variance on a Registered Solar Energy System shall be considered by the
Board of Zoning Appeal or the Planning Board, whichever is applicable, in making its
determination, as described in Article 10, Subsection 10.32 and Article 19, Subsection 19.33 of
this Zoning Ordinance. No protection shall be provided by this Zoning Ordinance to a Solar
Energy System that does not meet the definition of a Registered Solar Energy System.
22.70 WIND TURBINE SYSTEMS
22.71 Purpose. It is the intent of this Section 22.70 to permit the limited use of wind turbines throughout
the city (a) for the purpose of small scale generation of electricity for on-site consumption as an
accessory use to other activities located on the same lot, (b) for the purpose of researching,
testing, evaluating, or demonstration of the efficacy in an urban setting of such instruments as a
means by which renewable sources of energy might be employed to generate electricity at a
larger scale for both a domestic and commercial purposes, and (c) in appropriate locations in non
residential districts for the generation of electricity for commercial sale as a principal use. These
provisions are intended to ensure that such facilities are well designed, carefully sited, and
operated in a manner that will not pose a nuisance or hazard to the general public or nearby
neighbors.
22.72 Wind Turbine Systems Permitted by Special Permit.
A Wind Turbine System may generally be permitted anywhere in the city after the granting of a
special permit from the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and limitations described in this
Subsection 22.72. In special cases, there is a limited provision for the permitting of Wind Turbine
Systems as-of-right, without the granting of a special permit, as described in Subsection 22.73
below.
22.72.1 Dimensional Limitations.
1. Height. There shall be no maximum height limit for a Wind Turbine, but the permitted height of a
Wind Turbine shall be specifically approved by the Planning Board.
2. Setbacks. There shall be no required minimum yard setbacks for a Wind Turbine, but the
permitted placement of a Wind Turbine with respect to public street lines and adjacent lot lines
shall be specifically approved by the Planning Board. All equipment and structures accessory to
the Wind Turbine shall be subject to the yard requirements of the applicable zoning district unless
waived by the Planning Board.
22.72.2 Application Material.
At a minimum the special permit application shall contain the following material:
1. Plans of the site showing the location of the Wind Turbine System and its relationship to other
uses and buildings on the site, including elevations of Wind Turbines and other features on
the site; plans, descriptions, illustrations and/or photographs describing the surrounding uses
and physical context in sufficient detail to allow an assessment of the proposal on those
surrounding activities; illustration of the laydown options for maintenance of the equipment;
any proposed screening and landscaping.
2. A detailed description of the Wind Turbine System including number, size, materials, noise
rating, operational plan, maintenance schedule.
3. A narrative discussion of the extent to which the operation of the proposed Wind Turbine
System will generate continuous shadows, intermittent shadows (a.k.a. flicker), and/or noise
that may be detected from adjacent properties and from the public street.
4. Photo simulations or other representations, from at least two vantage points (one of which
should be from a public street), illustrating the proposal in its physical context.
5. A detailed estimate of the cost of removal of the Wind Turbine System.
22.72.3 Standards for Granting of the Special Permit.
In addition to the limitations requirements described in Section 22.74 below and the criteria
established in Section 10.43 of the Zoning Ordinance for the granting of a special permit, the
Planning Board shall consider the following specific criteria.
1. The visual impact of the Wind Turbine System on the abutting properties and the
neighborhood. In recognition of the fact that a Wind Turbine of any significant size will
introduce a physical structure and form not typical of most residential and commercial
neighborhoods in the city, the Planning Board shall consider the following when assessing
whether a proposal has any unreasonable negative impacts on neighborhood character or
adjacent uses:
a. the size, scale and bulk of the proposed Wind Turbine System in relationship to the scale
of typical buildings and other elements in the neighborhood;
b. the visibility and impact of the proposed Wind Turbine System from important view
corridors and viewsheds, with the understanding that reasonable efforts should be made
to make the system visually unobtrusive, although in many cases a system may not be
reasonably expected to be screened from public view;
c. the nature of adjacent uses, including the historical and architectural quality of
surrounding buildings, the consistency of that architectural character over an extended
area, and the extent to which the proposed Wind Turbine System is visually integrated
with that character and with the larger urban landscape; and
d. in the case of building-mounted Wind Turbine Systems, the visual relationship between
the system and the architecture of the building upon which it is installed.
2. The extent, frequency and duration of continuous and intermittent shadows and their
relationship to interior spaces and places people will regularly occupy. Such impacts should
be minimized and directed away from sensitive spaces in residential environments. It shall be
the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that there shall be no significant adverse impact
on adjacent properties.
3. The extent of detectable noise and vibration impact on neighboring uses.
4. Where a Wind Turbine System is proposed in an Open Space District or near an open space
facility, particularly one with a significant natural aspect, the system’s impact on any
conservation, historic, or recreational value should be carefully analyzed.
5. Other factors with regard to the operational and visual impacts of the Wind Turbine System
that may suggest that a time limitation should be imposed on the special permit.
22.73 Wind Turbine Systems Permitted As-of-right.
A Wind Turbine System shall be permitted as-of-right, without the granting of a special permit,
only if the conditions and limitations of this Subsection 22.73 and the requirements of Subsection
22.74 below are met. Any proposed Wind Turbine System not meeting all of the conditions and
limitations of this Subsection 22.73 may be permitted only after the granting of a special permit by
the Planning Board, as described in Subsection 22.72 above.
22.73.1 District Limitations.
The Wind Turbine System and all associated monitoring and testing equipment must be located
in a Residence C-3, C-3A, C-3B or Special District 6 zoning district.
22.73.2 Use Limitations.
1. The Wind Turbine System must be accessory to an educational use, Section 4.56 c,
Paragraphs 4-6, dormitory use accessory to such educational use, Section 4.56 c, Paragraph
8, or museum use, Section 4.56 i, Paragraph 2 where such museum has as its core mission
the display, exploration and dissemination of knowledge, scientific principles, and natural
phenomena to the general public.
2. The Wind Turbine System shall only be installed for the purpose of advancing the educational
and instructional purposes of the institution to which it is accessory and shall not be installed
for the specific and principal purpose of generating electricity for sale. However, energy
generated by the Wind Turbine System may be used in the operation of the physical plant of
the institution to which it is accessory.
22.73.3 Dimensional Limitations.
1. The Wind Turbine must be installed on a building and may not be a freestanding structure.
2. Height: The Wind Turbine Height may not extend more than forty (40) feet above the existing
height of the portion of the building upon which it is mounted. Such limitation shall apply
even if the height of the building is non-conforming and already exceeds the height of
structures permitted in the zoning district. The height shall be measured to the highest point
of the turbine, including the height of blades when in the vertical position.
3. Setbacks. The Wind Turbine shall be subject to the following minimum setbacks, which shall
apply regardless of the location of the building upon which the turbine is installed.
a. No portion of the Wind Turbine may be located nearer than two hundred (200)
feet to any structure containing a residential use (exclusive of transient
residential uses, Section 4.31 i) that is neither owned nor under the control of the
institution erecting the turbine.
b. The minimum setback of the Wind Turbine from any public street line or from a
lot line of a lot not in the ownership of the institution to which the Wind Turbine is
accessory shall be a distance equal to the Wind Turbine Height. However, a
Wind Turbine with a height of ten (10) feet or less shall have no required
minimum setback.
22.73.4 Time Limitations
A building permit authorizing the installation of a Wind Turbine System under the provisions of
this Subsection 22.73 shall limit said use to a period not to exceed two years unless, prior to
expiration of said two years, a request in writing is submitted to the Inspectional Services
Department for an extension of the permit for an additional two years. Such extension shall not be
unreasonably withheld and may be granted if the conditions and requirements of this Subsection
22.73 and Subsection 22.74 below continue to be met by the Wind Turbine System and no
nuisance or hazard has been identified during the previous two years of operation. Such building
permit may be extended for additional two year intervals in the same manner.
22.74 General Limitations and Requirements for Wind Turbine Systems
22.74.1 In all cases, a Wind Turbine System shall be subject to the following limitations and requirements:
1. The Wind Turbine System shall be free from any appurtenances with the exception of
equipment necessary to monitor, regulate, secure, and maintain the system and the
electricity it may produce. No sign may be attached to the system with the exception of
unobtrusive manufacturer identification and operational guidance informational signs. No
cellular or mobile phone equipment may be attached to the system.
2. The Wind Turbine System shall not be independently lighted except as may be required by
any local, state or federal regulation.
3. The Wind Turbine System shall be painted in subdued tones of white, black, silver, grey, dark
green, brown, blue or similarly subdued, non-reflective color unless otherwise required by
local, state and/or federal regulations or allowed by the Planning Board.
4. In operation the Wind Turbine System shall meet the requirements of the Cambridge Noise
Ordinance, cumulatively for all equipment installed at a single location. All equipment shall be
rated for noise generation so that it can be evaluated prior to installation.
5. The site shall be capable of accommodating the laydown of the Wind Turbine without
trespass onto city streets or adjacent lots held in a different ownership.
6. The Wind Turbine System shall be designed and located so as to prevent unauthorized
access and otherwise be maintained in a safe operating condition.
7. Abandonment. Given the unique safety considerations associated with Wind Turbines, the
owner shall be obligated to remove the Wind Turbine System if any one of the following
occurs:
a. abandonment of the Wind Turbine System through disuse for a period of one year;
b. non-functioning of the Wind Turbine System for more than 100 days, where
substantial steps have not been initiated to make necessary repairs; or
c. failure to request an extension of a building permit as required in Subsection 22.73.4
above, or a special permit authorized under Subsection 22.72 above, where that
special permit may have been time-limited by the Planning Board.
Upon failure to remove the Wind Turbine System 150 days after any one of these threshold
events occurs, the City of Cambridge shall have the authority to enter the property and
remove the system at the expense of the owner/operator where it finds that the equipment
constitutes a hazard to the general public. At or before issuance of a building permit for the
system, the Permittee shall post a bond or other surety in a form and in an amount
acceptable to the City that shall cover the cost of removal of the system by the City should
that be necessary, such bond amount to be consistent with estimates for removal prepared at
the Permittee’s expense by a qualified engineer. The surety mechanism shall account for
cost of living adjustments over the expected life of the system.
8. A Wind Turbine System principally used for the express purpose of the commercial selling of
the energy generated shall be permitted only in non-residential zoning districts. In residential
districts, such commercial use is shall not be permitted. However, it is understood that in
those residential districts a portion of the energy generated by the system that is not
immediately consumed on-site may at times be sold back or credited to the local-serving
power utility, consistent with any applicable state or federal law or regulation. Furthermore, a
cooperative system serving multiple adjacent properties shall be permitted in residential
districts and may share the output of the system without being considered a commercial use.
22.74.2 Waiver of Requirements
When granting a special permit for a Wind Turbine System, the Planning Board may grant a
waiver from the general requirement to accommodate laydown of a Wind Turbine without
trespass onto city streets or adjacent lots as described in Subsection 22.74.1, Paragraph 5
above. The Planning Board may also grant a waiver of the requirement to post a bond or other
surety that shall cover the cost of removal of the Wind Turbine System by the City, as described
in Subsection 22.74.1, Paragraph 7 above. The Planning Board may grant such a waiver if the
Board finds the requirement to be unnecessary in a given case.
22.75 Definitions
22.75.1 Wind Turbine. A device that converts wind energy to rotational energy that then drives an
electrical generator. A conventional turbine generally consists of a tower or pole, a nacelle body,
and a rotor with multiple blades. Variations may include vertical axis turbines and structural
elements housing and encapsulating the rotating elements of the turbine. It is anticipated that as
testing and experimentation continues the physical form of turbines may become much more
varied.
22.75.2 Wind Turbine System. A combination of equipment designed to be permanently mounted on a
building or freestanding, including Wind Turbines and associated and accessory equipment and
structures, necessary to convert wind energy to electricity.
22.75.3 Wind Turbine Height. The vertical dimension of a Wind Turbine as measured from ground level in
the case of a freestanding turbine, or from the height of the portion of the building upon which it is
mounted in the case of a building-mounted turbine, to the highest point of the Wind Turbine,
including the height of blades when in the vertical position.

ARTICLE 23.000 - STANDARDS FOR URBAN AGRICULTURE 
 
23.10 - INTENT 
It is the intent of this Article 23.000 to provide standards for Urban Agriculture that will improve residents' access to healthy, locally-produced food and other agricultural products, allow additional opportunities for economic development and social service, promote sustainability and ecological stewardship, advance public knowledge of agricultural practices, maintain public health and safety, and mitigate potential conflicts between agricultural and other urban land uses.  
23.20 - URBAN AGRICULTURE DEFINITIONS 
Apiary. A location or structure on a lot containing one or more beehives and associated beekeeping equipment. 
Bee. Any life stage of the common domestic honey bee, Apis mellifera. 
Bee Colony. An aggregate of worker bees, drones, a single queen, and brood living together as one social unit. 
Beekeeping. The housing of one or more bee colonies on a lot for the purpose of collecting products including honey, beeswax, propolis, pollen, and royal jelly, and/or to support the ecological benefits of pollination. 
Beehive. A structure intended for the housing of one Bee Colony.  
23.30 - GENERAL STANDARDS FOR URBAN AGRICULTURE 
23.31  Activities controlled by this Article shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations, including those related to water use and discharge. 
23.32  Activities controlled by this Article shall be conducted in accordance with all City of Cambridge Ordinances, including the Noise Control Ordinance (Cambridge Municipal Ordinance 8.16.010). 
23.33  Activities controlled by this Article shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable regulations of the Cambridge Public Health Department.  
23.40 - STANDARDS FOR BEEKEEPING 
23.41  General Standards . 
a.  Beekeeping is allowed as an accessory use pursuant to Article 4.000 of this Zoning Ordinance, according to the standards herein. 
b.  A permit must be obtained from the Cambridge Public Health Department for all keeping of bee colonies, and permit-holders must be in compliance with all local public health regulations and state public health laws pertaining to beekeeping. 
23.42  Beehive and Apiary Size . 
a.  A free-standing beehive shall be no greater than twenty (20) cubic feet in volume. A beehive that is attached to or contained within a building may be greater in volume, provided that no portion of the beehive greater than twenty (20) feet in volume may project beyond the principal wall plane of the building. 
b.  The maximum height of a beehive or apiary shall be six (6) feet from grade, or from an elevated surface if located atop such a surface. This height limitation shall not apply to fences or other structures intended to separate a beehive or apiary from adjacent uses, which shall remain subject to other applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
23.43  Warning Signage . 
a.  Where any beehive is located within ten (10) feet of a public street, park, school grounds, walkway, or bikeway, a sign legible from the public way indicating that a beehive is present nearby shall be maintained so that it is readable from the public way. 
b.  Where any beehive is located on a shared porch, balcony, or rooftop, a sign indicating that a beehive is present shall be located at the entrance to such area. 
