Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Interpretation and Rules of Construction; Penalties
[Adopted as Ch. 1 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM by
Art. 16]
§ 1-1. Citation; time of taking effect.
The following provisions shall constitute and be entitled "Revised By-Laws
of the Town of Dedham". These by-laws, if adopted at a Special Town
Meeting shall take effect at the dissolution of the next Annual Town
Meeting, and if adopted at an Annual Town Meeting shall take effect at its
dissolution, subject in either case to the requirements of law.
§ 1-2. Continuation of by-laws; effect of repeal.
The provisions of these by-laws so far as they are the same as those in force
at the adoption of this revision shall be construed as a continuation thereof
and not as new by-laws. Except as stated in this section, all by-laws in
force upon the effective date of this revision, other than those entitled "The
Personnel, Wage and Salary Administration Plan", "Plumbing By-Laws",
"Building Code", "Wiring Code", and "Zoning By-Laws" not included in
this revision are hereby repealed. The foregoing plan, by-laws and codes
not thus included shall continue to be applicable in the form in effect
immediately prior to this revision until amended or repealed in accordance
with law. The repeal of a by-law hereby shall not affect any act done, any
liability incurred under such by-law prior to its repeal. Such repeal shall
not affect any action or prosecution pending at the time of a penalty or a
forfeiture incurred under such repealed by-law. The repeal of a by-law shall
not thereby have the effect of renewing any by-law theretofore repealed.
§ 1-3. References to offices to include successors.
Words and phrases specifying or naming any officer, board or committee
of the Town shall be construed as including the lawful successor, or the
person or persons having substantially the same powers and performing
substantially the same duties as such officer, board or committee.
§ 1-4. Officers have right to license or permit.
Whenever in a by-law anything is prohibited from being done without the
license or permission of a certain officer, board or committee, such officer,
board or committee shall have the right to license or permit such thing to
be done.
§ 1-5. Amendment or repeal of by-laws; authority for Town Clerk to
assign appropriate number. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
By-laws may be adopted, repealed or amended at any Town Meeting in
accordance with law. The Town Clerk shall hereby be authorized to assign
appropriate numbers to by-law sections, subsections, paragraphs and
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
subparagraphs, where none are approved by Town Meeting, and, if such
are approved by Town Meeting, after consultation with the Town Manager,
to make non-substantive, editorial revisions to ensure consistent and
appropriate sequencing and numbering, provided that such editorial
revisions shall be identified by a footnote or other convention.
§ 1-6. Enforcement; general fines set; non-criminal disposition.
A. Enforcement through Indictment or on Complaint to District Court. Any
by-law of the Town of Dedham may be enforced through any lawful
means in law or in equity including but not limited to enforcement by
criminal indictment or on complaint before the district court pursuant
to G.L. c.40, § 21. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. A fine of up to $300 may be imposed for each
violation.
B. Enforcement through Non-criminal Disposition.
Any by-law of the Town of Dedham, or rule or regulation of its officers,
boards or departments adopted at a public meeting for which notice
is provided in a newspaper of local circulation at least once a week
for the two weeks prior to the meeting and which is on file with
the Town Clerk, may in the discretion of the Town official who is
the appropriate enforcing person, be enforced through non-criminal
disposition as provided in G.L. c.40, § 21D. The specific penalty for
purposes of non-criminal disposition for each such violation, if not
otherwise specified, shall be as follows: [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM
by Art. 18]
First violation – warning
Second violation – $50
Third violation – $100
Fourth and subsequent violations – $300
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for
purposes of this by-law.
The term “enforcing person” as used in this by-law shall mean: any
Town of Dedham police officer with respect to any offense; as well as
the Fire Chief, Town Manager, Director of Department of Public
Works, Building Inspector, Conservation Commission or its agent,
Board of Health or its agent, Sealer of Weights and Measures, Code
Enforcement Officer, Zoning Enforcement officer, and their designees,
and such other officials as the Board of Selectmen may from time to
time designate, each with respect to violation of by-laws, rules and
regulations within their respective jurisdictions. If more than one
official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an
enforcing person with respect thereto.
Any particular fine specified in a by-law shall be included on a list
maintained in the office of a Town Clerk.
§ 1-5 DEDHAM CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-7. Limitation on actions.
No person shall be prosecuted or tried for any breach of the provisions of
any of these by-laws unless the complaint for such breach shall be made
within six months from the time of committing such breach.
§ 1-8. Definitions.
C. Local Appeal Process. The fines set forth in the notice of violation
issued in accordance with this By-law shall be payable to the Town
within 21 days of the date set forth on the notice or, if the person so
notified seeks to contest the violation, such person may request a
hearing before the District Court. The person so notified may also seek
to resolve the matter locally by appealing the issuance of the notice, in
writing, to the Town Manager no later than 14 days following the date
of the notice of violation. The Town Manager or the Manager’s designee
shall, no later than 20 days following the date of the notice of violation,
decide the appeal, or hold a hearing to determine such additional facts
as may be necessary. If the person so notified is dissatisfied with the
Town Manager’s determination and resolution, they may contest the
violation as set forth in the notice by seeking a hearing before the
District Court in accordance with G.L. c.40, § 21D. The Manager’s
failure to make a determination within the time set forth herein shall be
construed for purposes of this paragraph as a determination to void the
notice of violation. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
A. Within these by-laws, words importing the singular number may extend
and be applied to several persons or things, words importing the plural
number may include the singular, and words importing a gender shall
include the other gender.
B. Unless another meaning is defined in the body of a section or is clearly
apparent from the manner in which the word is used, the following
words as used in these by-laws shall have the following meanings:
CHARTER — The Dedham Home Rule Charter of 1974 and any
amendments to it which have been or may hereafter be adopted.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person designated to assist with
the enforcement of all rules, regulations and by-laws of the Town of
Dedham.
DAYS — Business days, not including Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays when the time set is less than seven days; when the time set is
seven days or more, every day shall be counted. When the last day falls
on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday the period shall be extended to
the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
EMERGENCY — A sudden, unexpected, unforeseen happening,
occurrence, event or condition which necessitates immediate action.
GENERAL LAWS — Refer to the General Laws of Massachusetts, a
codification and revision of statutes enacted on December 22, 1920,
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
and including all amendments thereto subsequently adopted; citations
to the General Laws shall be in the following format, "G.L. c.__, § __."
LOCAL NEWSPAPER — A newspaper of general circulation in the Town
of Dedham.
MAJORITY VOTE — A majority of those present and voting, provided
that a quorum of the body is present when the vote is taken, unless a
higher number is required by law.
MULTIPLE MEMBER BODY — Any Town body consisting of two or
more persons and whether styled board, commission, committee, subcommittee,
or otherwise and however elected or appointed or
otherwise constituted.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, society, association,
partnership or other organization which acts as a body.
QUORUM — Unless otherwise required by law or this charter, shall
mean a majority of the members of a multiple member body then in
office, not including any vacancies which might then exist.
TOWN — The Town of Dedham.
TOWN AGENCY — Any board, commission, committee, department,
division or office of the Town government.
TOWN BULLETIN BOARD — The bulletin board in the Town hall and
in the libraries on which official Town notices are posted and those
at other locations within the Town which may from time to time be
designated as Town bulletin boards by by-law, or by vote of the Board
of Selectmen.
TOWN OFFICER — When used without further qualification or
description, shall mean a person having charge of an office or
department of the Town who in the exercise of the powers or duties
of that position exercises some portion of the sovereign power of the
Town.
VOTERS — Registered voters of the Town of Dedham.
§ 1-8 DEDHAM CODE § 1-8
1:6
Chapter 5
MANAGER
§ 5-1. Town Manager responsible for Town offices.
The Town Manager shall be responsible for the care, custody and
superintendence of the building or buildings and all facilities being used for
Town offices or any Town purposes except those buildings under the control
of the school committee from time to time, including all the rooms in said
building or buildings, the land and appurtenances thereto on which said
building or buildings are located, and all Town property contained therein.
§ 5-2. Manager's compensation.
The salary for the position of Town Manager shall be fixed by the Board of
Selectmen within the amount appropriated for the position.
§ 5-3. Manager's qualifications.
§ 5-4. Town Manager to negotiate employee contracts.
The Town Manager shall negotiate with the various unions in the Town,
as they may exist from time to time, to negotiate collective bargaining
agreements.
A. The Town Manager, in addition to the qualifications as stated in the
Dedham Home Rule Charter, shall have the following specific
qualifications:
(1) Hold at least an earned bachelor degree in public administration or
a closely related field from a recognized, accredited college or
university, and 10 years experience as a public administrator, the
most recent three years of which shall have been as a chief
administrative officer; or,
(2) Hold an earned bachelor degree in any field and an earned master
degree in public administration from a recognized, accredited
college or university, and five years experience as a public
administrator, the most recent three years of which shall have been
as a chief administrative officer.
B. The term "chief administrative officer" shall mean a person who has had
major responsibilities in a municipality, under any title, in most, if not
all, of the following areas; general supervision and management of all
administrative agencies of a city or Town, but not including schools;
direct involvement in the formulation of budget proposals for all
municipal offices and agencies and the administration of the budget
throughout the fiscal year; purchasing; and personnel administration.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5
1:7
§ 5-5. Town Manager to place all insurance.
The Town Manager, subject to appropriations made by the Town, shall have
full charge and control of placing insurance for the Town. All sums of
money appropriated by the Town for insurance shall be expended under the
Town Manager's sole direction. The Manager may in connection with the
supervision of construction of new buildings place builder's risk insurance
within the appropriation for such projects. The Manager is the officer
responsible for the administration and expenditure of the Town's selfinsurance
property and liability funds.
§ 5-6. Town Manager may submit articles for Town meeting.
The Town Manager, in addition to those persons enumerated in section
2-9(a) of the Dedham Home Rule Charter, may submit articles to the Board
of Selectmen for inclusion on the warrant for any annual or special Town
meeting.
Chapter 12
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
§ 5-5 DEDHAM CODE § 5-6
1:8
ARTICLE I
Date of Appointment
[Adopted 5-19-2008 ATM by Art. 28]
§ 12-1. Effective date.
Except as otherwise provided by statute or charter, all appointments to
appointed boards, committees and commissions shall be effective as of July
first of the year of appointment.
§ 12-2. Continuation of incumbency; vacation of position.
For purposes of effectuating this by-law, any incumbent of an appointed
board, committee or commission serving on the effective date of this by-law
amendment shall continue to serve on said board, committee or commission
and to perform the duties thereof until the expiration of the term for which
said individual was appointed or until said individual otherwise vacates
such position. The appointing authority shall make the next appointment to
said position for a term ending on the following June 30th until the term
for all members of such appointed board, committee or commission shall
commence on July first.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
Youth Commission
[Adopted as Ch. 21 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 12-3. Youth Commission established; terms set. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
There is hereby established a Youth Commission under G.L. c.40, § 8E.
The commission shall consist of not less than three nor more than seven
members appointed by the Town Manager for rotating three-year terms.
Any member of the Commission so appointed may, consistent with
applicable provisions of the Dedham Home Rule Charter, be removed for
cause by the Town Manager. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as an original appointment.
§ 12-4. Duties of the Commission.
§ 12-5. Director and staff. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall appoint a Director, who shall, with the approval
of the Town Manager, appoint such clerks and other employees as may be
required from time to time.
§ 12-6. Administration.
A. Except as may otherwise be provided by charter, by by-law or by vote of
Town meeting, the Youth Commission shall have the powers and duties
conferred upon Youth Commissions by state statute and shall be
responsible to the Town Manager for carrying out programs which may
be designed or established to meet the opportunities, challenges and
problems of the youth of Dedham and in conjunction with any similar or
related programs of any state, federal, or local agency or department.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
B. The Youth Commission shall keep accurate records of its meetings and
actions and shall file an annual report as required under § 78-3 of these
By-Laws.
C. The Commission may receive gifts of property, both real and personal,
in the name of the Town of Dedham. Gifts of personal property shall be
managed and controlled by the Commission for the purposes of this
chapter. Gifts of real property shall be used for the purposes of this
chapter or as directed by the terms of the gift and shall be under the
care, custody and superintendence of the Town Manager as provided in
Chapters 5 and 88 of these By-Laws. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
A. The Youth Commission shall, with the approval of the Town Manager,
establish policy and overall operating guidelines and for that purpose
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:11
shall, with or through the Youth Commission Director, regularly meet
with the Town Manager to submit reports, to consult on budgetary
and administrative issues and generally to coordinate activities to best
serve the interest of the youth of Dedham. [Amended 11-17-2014
ATM by Art. 18]
B. The Youth Commission Director shall be responsible to the Youth
Commission for implementing such policy as well as for the daily
direction of staff and operations.
§ 12-6 DEDHAM CODE § 12-6
1:12
ARTICLE III
Council on Aging
[Adopted as Ch. 22 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 12-7. Council on aging established; terms set. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
There shall be a Council on Aging as established under G.L. c.40, § 8B.
The Council shall consist of the chairman of the Recreation Commission,
the chairman of the Board of Health, the superintendent of schools, or
their respective representatives and not less than four nor more than eight
additional members who must be residents of the Town and who will be
appointed by the Town Manager for terms of one year. The council shall
annually choose from among its members a chair, a vice-chair and such
other officers as it deems necessary or expedient. Appointees shall hold
office until successors are designated.
§ 12-8. Duties of Council.
§ 12-9. Appointment of staff. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall appoint a Director, and the Director, with the
approval of the Town Manager, shall appoint all clerks and other employees
as the Council may from time to time require.
§ 12-10. Administration.
A. Except as may otherwise be provided by charter, by by-law or by vote of
Town meeting, the Council on Aging shall have the powers and duties
conferred upon councils on aging by state statute and shall be
responsible to the Town Manager for coordinating or carrying out
programs designated to meet concerns of the aging in coordination
with programs of the Council on Aging. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM
by Art. 18]
B. The Council shall keep accurate records of its meetings and actions and
shall file an annual report as required under § 78-3 of these By-Laws.
C. The Council may receive gifts of property, both real and personal, in the
name of the Town of Dedham. Gifts of personal property shall be
managed and controlled by the Council for the purposes of this chapter.
Gifts of real property shall be used for the purposes of this chapter or as
directed by the terms of the gift and shall be under the care, custody
and superintendence of the Town Manager as provided in Chapters 5
and 88 of these By-Laws. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
A. The Council on Aging shall, with the approval of the Town Manager,
establish policy and overall operating guidelines and for that purpose
shall, with or through the Council on Aging Director, regularly meet
with the Town Manager to submit reports, to consult on budgetary and
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10
1:13
§ 12-11. Confidentiality of records.
The names, addresses, telephone numbers, or other identifying information
about elderly persons in the possession of the council shall not be public
records, but the use of these records shall comply with G.L. c.19A, §§ 14
to 24, as a condition of receiving a government contract, program grant or
other benefit, or as otherwise required by law.
administrative issues, and generally to coordinate activities to best
carry out the purposes of this chapter. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM
by Art. 18]
B. The Council on Aging Director shall be responsible to the Council for
implementing such policy as well as for the daily direction of staff and
operations.
§ 12-10 DEDHAM CODE § 12-11
1:14
ARTICLE IV
Building, Planning and Construction Committee
[Adopted as Ch. 26 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 12-12. Establishment. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 16]
There shall be a Building, Planning and Construction Committee consisting
of seven members, including one member of the Planning Board, appointed
by said board, and six members appointed by the Town Manager. The
members appointed by the Town Manager shall include a registered
professional engineer or architect, an attorney admitted to practice in
Massachusetts, a person employed in the construction industry or a related
trade or occupation, a person with a discipline in Environmental Sciences
or a member of the Conservation Commission, and two other persons.
§ 12-13. Term of committee members set; department head to be
ex-officio.
§ 12-14. Committee to survey Town needs.
The Committee shall be responsible for surveying the growth of the Town,
the building needs of the community, and the physical condition of all
existing Town buildings.
§ 12-15. Committee to determine building needs and make
recommendation. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Committee shall meet with the various Town agencies from time to time
to determine the need for additions or renovations to any existing buildings,
or for the construction of new buildings for the Town, and shall report
to the Town Manager its recommendation with regard to such additions,
renovations, or construction.
§ 12-16. Committee to supervise authorized work. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
Whenever the addition to or renovation of any existing building, or the
construction of new buildings is authorized by the Town Meeting and
appropriation made therefor, the Town Manager may assign the Building,
A. The terms of the members of the Building, Planning and Construction
Committee shall be for three years; the terms of office of members shall
be so arranged that as nearly an equal number of terms as is possible
shall expire each year.
B. In addition to the foregoing members, the department head of each
given project shall be a non-voting, ex-officio member.
C. Said Committee shall choose its own officers and shall serve without
pay.
§ 12-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-16
1:15
Planning and Construction Committee to be responsible to the Town
Manager for the supervision of all work relating thereto, including architect
selection (if required), site planning, preliminary drawings, final plans,
preparation of request for construction bids and supervision of all
construction.
§ 12-17. Scope of chapter defined.
This chapter shall apply to the new construction of or new addition to
existing buildings, and to renovations which are not ordinary and normal
maintenance or replacement projects and which are capital improvements
within the meaning of § 39-9; provided, however, that this chapter shall
not apply to road, bridge, sewer, sidewalk construction or re-construction,
or maintenance of parks; provided, further, that this chapter shall not
apply to buildings under the control of the School Department if the Town
Meeting authorization shall specifically assign responsibility to the School
Department.
§ 12-16 DEDHAM CODE § 12-17
1:16
ARTICLE V
Open Space and Recreation Committee
[Adopted as Ch. 30 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 12-18. Establishment. [Amended 11-21-2018 ATM by Art. 18]
There is hereby established an Open Space and Recreation Committee
consisting of seven persons including a member of the Board of Selectmen
or its designee, a member of the Planning Board, a member of the
Conservation Commission, a member of the Park and Recreation
Commission, an engineer and two members at large appointed by the Board
of Selectmen.
§ 12-19. Term; compensation.
A member shall serve for a term of two years or until a successor is duly
appointed. All members shall serve without compensation.
§ 12-20. Officers.
The Committee shall annually elect from among its members a chairman, a
vice-chairman and a Clerk, and such other officers as the committee shall
deem necessary and proper.
§ 12-21. Duties.
The Committee shall:
A. Maintain continuous review and oversight of the Open Space Plan for
the Town of Dedham, keeping it current with both changing
circumstances within Dedham and State requirements for open space
or recreation plans and for opportunities as well as eligibility for State
funding for land acquisition by the Town;
B. Continuously review, revise, and update the existing Five-Year Action
Plan for open space preservation and recreational needs in Dedham;
C. Seek to increase public awareness and support of open or recreational
space in Dedham through education, advocacy for improved
recreational and open space areas, and promotion of the use of land
trusts and conservation or agricultural restrictions for suitable
properties within Dedham; and
D. Submit an annual report to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 12-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-21
1:17

ARTICLE VI
Civic Pride Committee
[Adopted as Ch. 32 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 12-22. Establishment. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
There is hereby established a Dedham Civic Pride Committee consisting of
seven or more persons to be appointed by the Town Manager. The Manager
may appoint officers or other employees of the Town and nonresident
commercial property owners or members of the business community, but
the number of Town officers and employees may not constitute a majority of
the committee. The Manager shall attempt to maintain at all times members
from each voting precinct of the Town.
§ 12-23. Term; compensation.
A member shall serve for a term of two years and until a successor is duly
appointed. All members shall serve without compensation.
§ 12-24. Officers.
The Committee shall annually elect from among its members a Chairman, a
Vice-chairman and a Clerk, and such other officers as the Committee shall
deem necessary and proper.
§ 12-25. Duties.
The Committee shall consider programs, projects and policies which (a)
foster, encourage and promote civic pride within the Town and (b) preserve,
improve and upgrade the overall physical beauty and aesthetic appearance
of the Town and shall make recommendations to the Manager regarding
their implementation. Each such recommendation shall consider
mechanisms for the coordinated and cooperative efforts of various Town
departments engaged in similar enterprises. To this end the Committee
shall conduct such studies and hold such conferences and meetings as are
necessary.
§ 12-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-25
1:19

ARTICLE VII
Cable Advisory Committee
[Adopted as Ch. 34 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 12-26. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Dedham Cable Advisory Committee consisting
of five persons to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The committee
shall be comprised of the following: a designee of the Board of Selectmen;
a member having a media related background; a member having a financial
related background and two members at large.
§ 12-27. Term; compensation.
A member shall serve for a term of two years and until a successor is duly
appointed. All members shall serve without compensation.
§ 12-28. Officers.
The Committee shall annually elect from among its members a chairman, a
vice-chairman and a Clerk, and such other officers as the Committee shall
deem necessary and proper.
§ 12-29. Duties.
The Committee shall be responsible to oversee compliance by the cable
television licensee(s); to receive and to respond to citizen concerns and
complaints; and to make recommendations to the Board of Selectmen as the
committee deems necessary.
§ 12-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-29
1:21

ARTICLE VIII
Sustainability Advisory Committee
[Adopted 5-18-2009 ATM by Art. 25; amended 11-18-2013 STM by
Art. 16]
§ 12-30. Establishment; term; compensation.
There is hereby established a Dedham Sustainability Advisory Committee
consisting of nine persons to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The
Committee shall be comprised of the following: a designee of the Board of
Selectmen; a high school student who is also a Dedham resident and seven
at-large members, all of whom shall serve without compensation.
§ 12-31. Officers.
The Committee shall annually elect from among its members a Chairman, a
Vice-chairman and a Clerk, and such other officers as the Committee shall
deem necessary and proper.
§ 12-32. Duties.
The Committee shall advise the Board of Selectmen on strategies for
advancing the Town's commitment to renewable energy, at the municipal,
business, and residential level and shall educate Dedham residents and
encourage energy conservation and sustainability by addressing the long
term impacts of fossil fuels such as pollution, global warming and climate
change, thereby engaging the community in making smart energy choices
and forging the path for a sustainable Dedham that will have a long-lasting,
positive impact on future generations.
§ 12-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-32
1:23

ARTICLE IX
School Building Rehabilitation Committee
[Adopted 11-16-2015 ATM by Art. 12]
§ 12-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this by-law is to provide a permanent School Building and
Rehabilitation Committee ("SBRC") that shall have continuing responsibility
to direct engineering and architectural studies to determine the current
physical condition of the Town School Department buildings and to make
recommendations to the Town relative to proposed rehabilitation, expansion
and/or new construction projects.
§ 12-34. Establishment.
There shall hereby be established an SBRC, which shall oversee and
supervise the design, construction, reconstruction, major alteration,
renovation, enlargement, major maintenance, demolition, and removal of
Town School Department buildings as provided in this by-law.
§ 12-35. Committee membership.
A. Voting Members. The SBRC shall be comprised of seven members, or
where specified, their designees, all of whom shall be registered voters
of the Town of Dedham, and all serving on the SBRC without
compensation, as follows:
(1) Two School Committee members, or designees.
(2) One Board of Selectmen member, or designee.
(3) One Finance and Warrant Committee member, or designee.
(4) Three Members-at-Large appointed by Town Moderator, whose
appointments shall be made consistent with the appointment goals
identified in 963 CMR 2.10(3)(b) and (e) to provide a broad range of
expertise and perspective, and which appointment(s) may, but need
not, include a parent of a child enrolled in the Town's school system
at the time of such appointment(s).
B. Ex Officio Members.
(1) Persons holding the following offices shall be considered ex officio
members of the Committee, with a voice but no vote, and therefore
shall not count towards the quorum required for the SBRC to take
action under the Open Meeting Law:
(a) Town Manager, or Town Manager's designee;
(b) Superintendent of Schools; and
(c) Principal of the affected school for the duration of the project
involving that school.
§ 12-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-35
1:25
§ 12-36. Term of appointment.
§ 12-37. Officers.
The SBRC shall annually elect among its members a chairperson, vicechairperson,
clerk and such other officers as the SBRC, in its discretion,
shall deem necessary and proper.
(2) Further, for each project, the SBRC may designate temporary ex
officio members or staff, with the approval of the Town Manager, or
other Town residents with particular expertise to advise the
Committee, solely and exclusively in an advisory capacity, related
to a particular project. The SBRC may also consult with, and seek
participation from, other Town employees with applicable
expertise, including but not limited to: (i) building maintenance and
engineering staff; (ii) finance and procurement staff; (iii) school
system administrators; (iv) school business management staff; (v)
school system curriculum and programming staff; and (vi) direct
student-support staff, such as teachers and counselors.
A. Members of the SBRC serving on behalf of multiple-member bodies, or
their designees, shall serve for such periods of time as may be
authorized by each member's respective multiple-member body in its
sole discretion.
B. The three Members-at-Large shall be appointed for alternating threeyear
terms. Pursuant to Section 6-4 of the Town Charter, in making the
original appointments under this By-Law, the appointing authority shall
designate one Member-at-Large to serve for three years, one Memberat-
Large to serve for two years, and one Member-at-Large to serve for
one year. Thereafter, vacancies shall be filled for three-year terms,
except as otherwise provided below. Upon expiration of a term,
Members-at-Large shall continue to serve until a successor has been
appointed and qualified. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the
appointing authority may authorize Member-at-Large to serve for such
additional period or periods of less than three years as will allow a
Member-at-Large to serve until the completion of a project on which
they have participated. When filling any vacancies in the position of a
Member-at-Large arising other than by expiration of the term, the
appointing authority shall make such appointments for the remainder
of the unexpired term or otherwise to continue to provide for
alternating terms.
C. Ex officio members listed in § 12-35B(1) shall serve for such period(s) as
they hold their respective underlying positions and as specified therein.
In the case of a Town Manager's designee, such designee shall serve for
the period authorized by the Town Manager.
§ 12-35 DEDHAM CODE § 12-38
1:26
§ 12-38. Duties.
The SBRC shall be responsible for monitoring the Massachusetts School
Building Authority Grant Program application process and advise the
Eligible Applicant (as defined under G.L. c.70B, § 2) during the selection
and construction of the Approved Project, including but not limited to:
initiation and direction of engineering/architectural studies, subject to an
appropriation for such purposes, to determine the current physical
condition of Town School Department Buildings. Recommendations of the
SBRC shall be made to the Town in accordance with applicable law, and
after consideration of factors likely to maximize state reimbursement
available for school building construction and/or rehabilitation projects.
§ 12-39. Effective date.
This By-Law shall take effective on July 1, 2016, at which time the
appointment of the four Members-at-Large then in office shall be deemed
to have expired, and the size of the SBRC shall be reduced from 11 voting
members to seven voting members, and three ex officio members as set
forth herein.
§ 12-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-39
1:27

ARTICLE X
Human Rights Commission
[Adopted 11-13-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
§ 12-40. Purpose.
§ 12-41. Composition.
A. There is hereby established a municipal board to be known as the
"Human Rights Commission of the Town of Dedham" (hereinafter
referred to as the "Commission").
B. The establishment of the Commission is intended to affirm that Dedham
is a community that has as one of its core values the freedom from
bigotry and hatred, discrimination and disrespect. The establishment of
the Commission also represents the Town's commitment to uphold and
defend the rights of all persons in Dedham to enjoy the free and equal
exercise of their rights and privileges as secured by the Constitution
and Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and of the United
States. The Commission shall strive to ensure that residents of the Town
enjoy equal opportunity to participate in and enjoy life in the Town
regardless of their race, color, ancestry, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, age, religion, marital, family or military
status, socio-economic status, ex-offender status, and disability. The
Commission shall similarly support the human rights codified in the
Constitution and laws of the United States and of Massachusetts of
other groups and organizations against discrimination in housing,
employment, education, public accommodations, Town services,
insurance, banking, credit and health care.
A. The Commission shall consist of 13 members who shall be residents of
the Town.
B. All members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen as follows:
(1) Town Government Representatives:
(a) One member recommended by the Chief of Police from the
Police Department;
(b) One member recommended by the School Committee from the
Dedham Public Schools;
(c) One member recommended by the Council on Aging or its
director, and if an employee thereof, with the approval of the
Town Manager;
(d) One member recommended by the Commission on Disability;
(e) One member recommended by the Housing Authority or its
director; and
§ 12-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-41
1:29
§ 12-42. Procedures.
The Commission shall meet each January to organize and select from
amongst its members a chair, vice-chair, and clerk and decide on a
preliminary calendar of meetings for the year, said calendar to be posted
at Town Hall. A majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum, and a majority of those present and voting shall be sufficient for
any action taken by the Commission, unless otherwise required by law. The
Commission's meetings shall be governed by the requirements of the Open
Meeting Law.
§ 12-43. Duties.
(f) One member recommended by the Youth Commission or its
director, and if an employee, with the approval of the Town
Manager.
(2) Other members:
(a) One member shall be a Dedham resident who is a high school
student; and
(b) Six at-large members.
C. The members who are Town government representatives shall be
appointed for terms of two years, and, if an employee of the Town, for
such shorter period as they hold their underlying position, and may
serve no more than three consecutive terms. The high school member
shall be appointed for a term of one year.
D. The at-large members shall be appointed initially as follows and
thereafter for terms of three years: two for a three-year term, two for a
two-year term, and two for a one-year term. No at-large member of the
Commission may be appointed to serve for more than two consecutive
three-year terms, excluding partial terms to fill a vacancy, but may
again seek appointment after one year.
E. Any vacancy that occurs other than by the expiration of a term shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
F. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
G. So far as practicable, appointments shall be representative of the
demographics of the Town, including but not limited to race, color,
ancestry, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age,
religion, marital, family or military status, socioeconomic status, exoffender
status, and disability. Appointment to the Commission,
however, is at the Board of Selectmen's sole discretion.
A. The Commission shall have the following charge:
(1) Develop community awareness and education of human rights.
§ 12-41 DEDHAM CODE § 12-43
1:30
(2) Promote understanding of the diverse cultures within our Town and
surroundings through education, organization of community
events, summits, educational panels and celebrations and other
community action including maintaining a good working
relationship with Town media sources.
(3) Serve as a resource with respect to issues that challenge any
individual or group's enjoyment of their basic human rights in our
community.
(4) Promote cooperation of racial, religious, ethnic, civic, fraternal,
benevolent and private and public organizations and agencies to
cultivate and encourage an atmosphere of mutual understanding
and harmonious intergroup relationships.
(5) Annually, and more often as may be requested, provide written or
verbal reports to the Board of Selectmen on Commission activities.
B. The Commission shall not adjudicate or facilitate resolution of disputes
between individuals.
§ 12-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-43
1:31
Chapter 18
CEMETERIES
§ 18-1. Town Manager to have charge of cemeteries. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall be responsible for the care, superintendence and
management of public cemeteries in the Town, and may make such rules
and regulations with respect thereto as may be authorized by law. The
Town Manager shall have the expenditure of all funds appropriated for
the care, improvement or embellishment of said public cemeteries. The
Town Manager shall have such powers and duties as may be conferred or
imposed upon cemetery commissioners by the laws of the Commonwealth
and by these by-laws and shall be responsible to the Board of Selectmen for
the efficient administration and management of said cemeteries; provided,
however, that the Manager may authorize the Commissioner of Public
Works or the Cemetery Superintendent to exercise any power or perform
any function or duty which is assigned to the Manager under this section.
§ 18-2. Free public burial to be available; cemetery to be laid out,
maintained. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall keep set apart and reserved a sufficient portion of
Brookdale Cemetery as a public burial place for the use of the inhabitants
of Dedham, free of charge. The Town Manager may also lay out any other
portion of said Brookdale Cemetery in suitable lots or other subdivisions for
family or other burial places, with all the necessary paths and avenues, in
conformity with the plans adopted by the Town; may plant and embellish
the same with trees, shrubs and flowers, and other rural ornaments; shall
keep the said cemetery suitably enclosed by a wall or fence; shall maintain
in good repair a receiving tomb; and may cause to be erected such other
structure as may be necessary or convenient for the use of the cemetery.
§ 18-3. Town Manager authorized to sell cemetery lots. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall have authority to grant and convey to any person
or persons, by deeds or certificates duly executed in the name of the
Town of Dedham, the sole and exclusive right of burial, and of erecting
tombs, cenotaphs and other monuments in any of the designated lots or
subdivisions of Brookdale Cemetery, upon such terms and conditions as
the Town Manager by the rules and regulations prescribes. Such deeds or
certificates shall be recorded by the Town Clerk in a book kept for that
purpose in the Clerk's office.
§ 12-43 DEDHAM CODE § 18-4
1:32
§ 18-4. Proceeds from sale of lots and graves to be reserved for
appropriation.
The proceeds from sales of lots or rights of burial, or of any property
in said Brookdale Cemetery, shall be paid to the Treasurer-Collector, to
be kept separate and apart from other funds of the Town, and subject
to appropriation by Town Meeting. Notwithstanding the terms of such
appropriation, such proceeds shall be used solely for the care, improvement
and embellishment, or the enlargement of the Town cemeteries.
§ 18-5. Gifts for care of cemeteries.
The Treasurer-Collector shall receive such gifts of money as shall be paid
into the Town Treasury by any person holding, occupying or interested in a
lot in either of the public Cemeteries of the Town, for the preservation and
care of such cemeteries.
§ 18-6. Gifts to be deposited in perpetual care fund. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Treasurer-Collector shall invest or deposit all fees for perpetual care
and all gifts received pursuant to § 18-5 in a "Perpetual Care Fund" and pay
the income therefrom on the warrants of the Selectmen for the preservation
and care of the public cemeteries of the Town and in keeping such
cemeteries in repair, in cutting the grass at such time and in such manner as
the Town Manager shall deem to be for the best interests of the cemeteries,
or in accordance with such other stipulations relating to such preservation
and care as the Town Manager shall approve, which shall be made at the
time of the deposit of the money.
§ 18-7. Cemetery Advisory Committee established. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager may appoint a Cemetery Advisory Committee which
shall consist of five residents of the Town. The regular term of a member
shall be three years, but when the committee is first established, the terms
of the members shall be for one, two or three years and so arranged that
the terms of approximately one third of the members will expire each year,
and their successors shall be appointed for a term of three years each. Any
member of the committee so appointed may, pursuant to Section 6-15 of the
Dedham Home Rule Charter, be removed for cause by the Town Manager. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 18-8. Cemetery Committee duties. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
The Cemetery Advisory Committee shall advise and make recommendations
to the Town Manager for the purpose of improving the operation of the
Town cemeteries and the services offered to the inhabitants of Dedham.
The Committee shall annually review and, with the approval of the Town
§ 18-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-8
1:33
Manager, make and publish the rules and regulations for the use of the
Town cemeteries; shall annually review the operations of the cemetery and
make recommendations regarding both the operating budget and capital
improvements; shall no less often than annually make recommendations
regarding cemetery fees; and shall make such other recommendations
regarding land acquisition and utilization and cemetery management as will
assure the Town's ability to provide suitable burial places for the interment
of persons dying within its limits. To this end the Committee shall conduct
such studies and hold such conferences and meetings as are necessary. The
Committee shall submit an annual report as directed by § 78-3.
Chapter 24
DEPARTMENTS
§ 18-8 DEDHAM CODE § 18-8
1:34
ARTICLE I
Department of Public Works
[Adopted as Ch. 12, Sec. 10, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 24-1. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Public Works responsible for the
performance of all on-going public works operations of the Town.
§ 24-2. Director of Public Works. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art.
18]
The Department of Public Works shall be under the direct control and
supervision of a Director of Public Works who shall be appointed by and
who shall be responsible to the Town Manager. The Director of Public
Works shall serve for an indefinite term. The Director of Public Works
shall be a person especially fitted by education, experience and training
to perform the duties of said office. The Director of Public Works shall
be responsible for the supervision and coordination of all activities of the
Department of Public Works in accordance with state statutes, Town bylaws,
administrative code and rules and regulations.
§ 24-3. Responsibilities of Board of Selectmen. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Board of Selectmen, acting through the Town Manager, shall be
responsible for the overall supervision of the Department of Public Works
and for the establishment of priorities and policies to govern the operation
of the department. The Board of Selectmen shall establish and set the fees
or charges for all services provided by the Department of Public Works.
§ 24-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3
1:35

ARTICLE II
Department of Infrastructure Engineering
[Adopted as Ch. 12, Sec. 11, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 24-4. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Infrastructure Engineering responsible
for the engineering, construction, development and oversight of the
improvement, reconstruction and repair of the capital infrastructure of the
Town, including without limitation roads and bridges, drainage and sewers.
§ 24-5. Director of Department. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art.
18]
The Department of Infrastructure Engineering shall be under the direct
control and supervision of a Director, who shall be appointed by and who
shall be responsible to the Town Manager. The Director shall serve for
an indefinite term. The Director shall possess the appropriate education,
skills and credentials to lead the department and to perform the duties
of said office. The Director shall be responsible for the supervision and
coordination of all activities of the department in accordance with state
statutes, Town by-laws, administrative code and rules and regulations and
shall be responsible for hiring all employees of the department, subject only
to final approval by the Town Manager.
§ 24-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5
1:37
Chapter 30
EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 24-5 DEDHAM CODE § 24-5
1:38
ARTICLE I
Police and Fire Department Radio System
[Adopted 5-19-2008 ATM by Art. 32]
§ 30-1. General.
The Superintendent of Fire Alarm or department Marshall under Dedham
Police with a fire alarm order has the authority to waive the "Department
communication system" and substitute a radio communications system to
achieve effective Fire Department radio communications throughout the
protected premise. Voluntary adoption of this alternative is subject to the
specifications contained within this document.
§ 30-2. Radio coverage.
For purpose of this section, adequate radio coverage shall include all of the
following:
§ 30-3. Amplification system allowed.
Buildings and structures shall be equipped with any of the following, in
order to achieve the required radio coverage: a radiating cable system or
an internal multiple antenna system with FCC Type Accepted Bi-Directional
UHF Amplifiers as needed to encompass Dedham frequencies Channels.
The system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/
or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without external
power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence
of external power input. There shall be no connectivity between the
amplification system and fire alarm system.
§ 30-4. Acceptance test procedures.
A. A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm available in 95% of the area of
each floor when transmitted from the Dedham Fire Department.
B. A minimum signal strength of -95 dBm received at the Fire Department
System from 95% of the area of each floor of the building.
A. Acceptance testing for an in-building radio amplification system is
required, upon completion of installation. It is the building owner's
responsibility to have the radio system tested to ensure that two-way
coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of 95%. Each floor
of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal
areas.
B. A maximum of one area will be allowed to fail the test per floor. A spot
located approximately in the center of a grid area will be selected for
the test. Once the spot has been selected, prospecting for a better spot
within the grid area will not be permitted: Field strength testing
instruments are to be recently calibrated (one year) and of the
frequency selective type incorporating a flexible antenna similar to the
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:39
§ 30-5. Annual tests.
When an in-building radio system is installed, the building owner shall test
all active components of the system, including but not limited to amplifier,
power supplies, and back-up batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months.
Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon
initial installation and acceptance. Back-up batteries and power supplies
shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will
operate during an actual power outage. All other active components shall
be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturers
specifications for the intended purpose.
§ 30-6. Five-year test.
In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a radio
coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the radio
system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance. The
procedure set forth above shall apply to such tests.
§ 30-7. Qualifications of testing personnel.
All tests shall be conducted, documented and signed by a person in
possession of a current FCC General Radiotelephone Operator License. All
test records shall be retained at the inspected premises by the building
owner and a copy submitted to the Dedham Fire Department.
§ 30-8. Fire Department inspections.
Fire Department Radio personnel, after providing reasonable notice to
the owner or his representative, shall have the right to enter onto the
property to conduct field testing to be certain that the required level of
radio coverage is present.
§ 30-9. Property owner letter.
At final acceptance, the applicant shall supply a letter to the Superintendent
of Fire Alarm, Dedham, MA 02026, accepting the property owner's
responsibilities. These responsibilities are as follows: upgrades to system
ones used on the hand held transceivers. All compliance testing to be
done with 50 ohm loads in place of the antenna to avoid interference
to Fire Alarm. The Town is to be notified prior to any testing. Talk back
testing will be conducted by radio personnel during sample testing of
the accuracy of the compliance test report. All test results and as-built
drawings to be supplied at the time the sample testing is requested.
C. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept
on file with the building owner so that the measurements can be
verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the
measurement results become lost, the building owner will be required
to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values.
§ 30-4 DEDHAM CODE § 30-9
1:40
as directed by the Dedham Fire Department, maintenance contract in place
with name of contractor, who will provide a twenty-four-hour by sevenday
emergency response within two hours after notification, and contact
personnel with phone numbers. This letter is to be on company letterhead
signed by the property owner or a legal representative.
§ 30-10. Request for waiver.
§ 30-11. Required forms.
All required forms can be obtained from the Dedham Fire Department or
Police Department.
§ 30-12. Cabinet.
The cabinet shall be a NEMA four painted steel cabinet. The color will be
fire engine red and bear the lettering as follows: Dedham Fire Department
radio in bright yellow. The maintenance vendor telephone number will be
marked on the cabinet. The cabinet will have a lock mechanism to keep the
unit secure.
§ 30-13. Primary power.
Connection to primary power can be done in two manners. The first, a cord
set with twist lock plug and receptacle or with metallic conduit. Each bidirectional
amplifier shall be powered by its own twenty-ampere circuit.
§ 30-14. System monitoring alarm.
Each amplifier unit will have a monitoring system that monitors amplifier
operations and primary power. A failure will activate an audible device and
white strobe light. The audible signal may be silenced but the strobe light
will be located in a public space authorized by the DFD Radio Supervisor. A
sign will be located at the strobe light with the name and telephone number
of the equipment maintenance contractor. The Fire Department is to be
A. A waiver from the Superintendent of Fire Alarm or Dedham Fire
Department Fire Marshall is required for radio equipment usage in lieu
of a telephone system in high rise occupancies. The applicant shall
make a formal request in writing to the Superintendent of Fire Alarm,
Dedham, MA 02026. The request shall state address of property,
property owner (responsible party), radio equipment vendor, contract
personnel with telephone numbers, radio system drawings with
technical parameters, and equipment specifications shall accompany
the waiver request. Applicants will receive a written reply within 30
days. This waiver is the initial step in this procedure and required
before proceeding.
B. Voluntary adoption of this specification for buildings not covered by
Dedham Fire Department, Fire Alarm Order 93-1 also requires a waiver.
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-14
1:41
notified of any failures that extend past the two-hour time limit. All rules
apply for Police and Fire Departments.
§ 30-14 DEDHAM CODE § 30-14
1:42
ARTICLE II
Police Services
[Adopted 5-18-2009 ATM by Art. 30]
§ 30-15. Determination of need; costs.
The Chief of Police shall possess the discretion to determine the appropriate
level of police service in the Town to ensure public safety. If the Chief of
Police in the exercise of his discretion, determines that a paid detail is
needed for any work to be done on or within the limits of or impacting traffic
on a public way or road or a private way that is open to or is otherwise used
for public vehicular travel within the Town, or for any related construction,
maintenance or related work or at any public function in the Town, the
Chief shall possess the authority to require the presence of a sworn police
officer or officers on a paid detail basis. All costs incurred will be the
sole responsibility of the party engaged in the work, construction and/or
maintenance or host of the public function that created the public safety
need for a sworn police officer on a paid detail basis except as may be
preempted by state law with respect to state public works projects. The
Chief shall have the further discretion to determine the number of officers
assigned in any such instance necessary to maintain public safety. The Chief
or his designee shall review all situations which may require details on
a case by case basis and shall confer with the authorized representative
designated by the Town to implement a public works project prior to
exercising his discretion with respect to such project. When the Chief or
his designee decides that a paid detail is required, the detail shall first be
offered to members of the Dedham Police Association and Dedham Police
Patrolmen's Association.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:43
Chapter 34
ENDICOTT ESTATE
§ 34-1. Preamble.
§ 34-2. Estate to be used by residents for recreation and education.
Those parts of the Endicott Estate which are not devoted, pursuant to Town
Meeting action, to specific public purposes and under the supervision and
control of other Town Boards or Committees, may be used by residents of
the Town for light recreational use or educational use. These uses shall
include, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, outdoor activities
of individuals or groups such as Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Campfire Girls and
church, social or educational groups or societies and outdoor classes and
the like. These uses shall not include organized athletic events nor shall
any fields or other areas necessary in connection with the conduct of such
events be laid out without the specific approval of the Town Meeting.
§ 34-3. Town Manager to have responsibility for estate. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall have responsibility, general supervision and care
of the buildings and facilities of the Endicott Estate and shall have full
jurisdiction over the rental and use of such buildings and facilities. The
grounds shall be kept well groomed and clean at all times.
A. The land bounded by Mt. Vernon Street, Sanderson Avenue, East Street
and Walnut Street (hereinafter sometime referred to as the "Endicott
Estate") was left to the Town under the will of the late Katherine
Endicott, to be used for public educational purposes, public
recreational purposes or other exclusively public purposes. Following
its conveyance, at the suggestion and with the agreement of the Town,
to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for a governor's mansion and
the finding by the Commonwealth that such use was economically
impracticable, the property was reconveyed to the Town in accordance
with Chapter 471 of the Acts of 1969. The Town hereby formally
appropriates this land for public educational purposes, public
recreational purposes and other exclusively public purposes in
accordance with the terms of said will, but expressly refrains from
appropriating the same for public park uses as that term is defined and
used under G.L. c.45 and in the common law of this Commonwealth.
B. This chapter is adopted to provide for the preservation and
maintenance and the use by the residents of the Town of that part of the
property not being used for such specific purposes. In this way, until all
of the property is devoted to specific uses (including "public park" use if
that is so desired) by Town Meeting action, the residents of the Town
will not be denied the limited use of part of the property.
§ 30-15 DEDHAM CODE § 34-4
1:44
§ 34-4. Endicott Estate Commission established. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
There shall be an Endicott Estate Commission appointed by the Town
Manager, which shall consist of five voters of the Town.
§ 34-5. Terms of Commissioners set; Commission to organize.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
Initially, one member of the Commission shall be appointed for a term
of one year, two members for terms of two years and two members for
terms of three years. Upon the expiration of original terms the members
of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of three years (except for
a member appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term) and may
be reappointed; provided, however, that a member shall remain in office
until a successor has been duly appointed. If any member moves from the
Town, the member's position shall become vacant. The Town Manager shall
fill any vacancy which may occur for any reason. Members shall serve
without pay and may be appointed to more than one term. The members
of the Commission shall choose a chairman and a clerk and shall hold such
meetings as may be necessary to carry out the duties entrusted to them
hereunder.
§ 34-6. Commission to make rules and regulations for use of estate.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Commission shall, with the consent of the Town Manager, make rules
and regulations for the use of the land and buildings that are not being used
for specific purposes and under the supervision and control of other Town
Boards or Committees. Such rules and regulations shall, as enacted from
time to time, be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall also be posted
conspicuously at the Endicott Estate. They shall be consistent with the
general purposes expressed in the will of Katherine Endicott and in § 34-2
hereof and shall not allow for the interference with any specific uses of any
part of the Endicott Estate under the supervision and control of any other
Board or Committee. The rules and regulations may include provisions with
respect to the necessity for permits for the use of the property, to be issued
through the office of the Town Manager, and the charging of reasonable fees
therefor.
§ 34-7. Commission to make recommendations on uses of estate.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
It shall also be the duty of the Endicott Estate Commission to advise and
to make recommendations to the Town Manager with respect to specific
public recreational, public educational and other public uses. To this end
the Commission shall conduct such studies and hold such conferences and
meetings as are necessary. Upon reasonable request, the Commission shall
meet and consult with those having specific proposals for the use of all or
§ 34-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-7
1:45
any part of the Endicott Estate. The Commission shall submit an annual
report as directed by § 78-3.
§ 34-8. Estate manager. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager may appoint an estate manager to be responsible to
the Town Manager for the direct control and supervision of the Endicott
Estate. The estate manager shall be a person especially fitted by education,
experience and training to perform the duties of the office. When appointed,
the estate manager shall be responsible for the supervision and
coordination of all activities of the Endicott Estate in accordance with state
statutes, Town by-laws, administrative code and rule and regulations.
Chapter 39
FINANCES
§ 34-7 DEDHAM CODE § 34-8
1:46
ARTICLE I
Finance and Warrant Committee
[Adopted as Ch. 3, Secs. 1 through 4, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
in its entirety 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 39-1. Finance and Warrant Committee to be appointed.
There shall be a Finance and Warrant Committee, appointed by the
Moderator as hereinafter provided, which shall consist of one legal voter
from each district in the Town and two from the Town at large where there
is an odd number of Districts, and three from the Town at large when
there is an even number of Districts. No more than two members shall be
appointed from any one district. No elective or appointive Town officer or
Town employee shall be eligible to serve on said Committee.
§ 39-2. Term of Finance and Warrant Committee members.
[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 28]
The terms of the members of the Finance and Warrant Committee shall
be for three years, the term of each member expiring at the dissolution
of the third Spring Annual Town Meeting after his appointment except a
member appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired term. As soon as
practicable after each Spring Annual Town Meeting the Moderator shall
appoint members to succeed the members whose terms have expired. A
member may be appointed to succeed himself. Said committee shall choose
its own officers and shall serve without pay.
§ 39-3. Finance and Warrant Committee to keep records.
The Finance and Warrant Committee shall cause to be kept a true record of
its proceedings. Said committee shall appoint a secretary who shall not be
a member thereof nor have a vote therein.
§ 39-4. Finance and Warrant Committee vacancies.
Any member of the Finance and Warrant Committee, other than a member
appointed at large, who removes from one district to another, or is so
removed by a revision of districts, shall thereupon cease to be a member
of said committee. The Moderator shall fill any vacancy which may occur
in the membership of said committee, as a result of the death, resignation,
removal from the Town, removal from a district, or any other cause, and
shall send an attested copy of such appointment to the Town Clerk and
to the secretary of said Committee. If any member is absent from five
consecutive meetings of said committee, except in the case of illness, the
Chairman of the Committee shall give notice thereof to the Town Clerk, and
upon the giving of such notice the position shall become vacant, and the
Moderator shall appoint another member to complete the unexpired term.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:47

ARTICLE II
Budget Preparation
[Adopted as Ch. 3, Secs. 5-12, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 39-5. Town meeting articles to be referred to Finance and Warrant
Committee for hearing and report. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
All articles which are to be considered at the business session of an Annual
Town Meeting or at any Special Town Meeting shall be referred to the
Finance and Warrant Committee for its consideration. The Selectmen, after
drawing any such warrant, shall transmit immediately a copy thereof to
each member of said committee. A public hearing shall be held at least
one month before the business session of an Annual Town Meeting and two
weeks before a Special Town Meeting upon all articles to be considered
at such meeting, except budget articles and articles upon which a public
hearing by some other tribunal is required by law, and notice of such
hearing shall be given by posting in one or more public places in each
district and by publishing the same at least once in a newspaper having
a general circulation in the Town. Said committee shall, after due
consideration of the subject matter of such articles, report thereon in
writing as provided in § 85-6, such recommendations as it deems best for
the interests of the Town and its citizens.
§ 39-6. Finance and Warrant Committee to make recommendation
on appropriations. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
It shall be the duty of the Finance and Warrant Committee annually to
consider the expenditures in previous years and the estimated requirements
for the ensuing year of the several boards, officers and committees
prescribed by said committee. The said committee shall add to such
statement of expenditures and estimates another column, giving the
amounts which in its opinion shall be appropriated for the ensuing year, and
shall further add thereto such explanations and suggestions relating to the
proposed appropriations as it may deem expedient, and shall report thereon
as provided in § 39-5 above.
§ 39-7. Finance and Warrant Committee to have access to records.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
Said committee shall have free access to all books of record and accounts,
bills and vouchers on which money has been or may be paid from the
Town Treasury. Officers, boards and committees of the Town shall upon
request furnish said committee with facts, figures and any other information
pertaining to their several activities.
§ 39-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-8
1:49
§ 39-8. Capital budget process; definitions.
For the purposes of this bylaw, a "Capital Improvement" is defined as
a physical betterment, including, but not limited to, the construction of
new buildings or facilities, the alteration of buildings or facilities now
or hereafter existing, and the purchase of land, or items of equipment,
provided that any such physical betterment shall have a cost of at least
$10,000. Capital Improvements include both "Operating Capital
Expenditures" and "Debt Capital."
An "Operating Capital Expenditure" is defined as a physical betterment of
items or equipment costing at least $10,000 with a useful life of at least
three years. Operating capital expenditures that are recurring, such as
department vehicles, should be financed from the respective department
operating budget in a separate line item.
"Debt Capital" includes but is not limited to the construction of new
buildings or facilities now and hereafter existing, the purchase of land, or
items of equipment, provided that it has a cost of at least $100,000 with a
useful life of at least five years. On an annual basis, detailed estimates of
the expenditures necessary for Debt Capital should be identified by each
department for the ensuing five years and such projects should be financed
as a separate capital expense of the Town annually in a capital expenditure
warrant article.
§ 39-9. Capital budget process; procedures. [Amended 11-17-2014
ATM by Art. 18]
A. There shall be a Capital Expenditures Committee which shall perform
the duties set forth in this section and be governed by the provisions
thereof and shall advise and make recommendations to the Finance and
Warrant Committee on all matters relating to expenditures for capital
improvements in the Town. Said committee shall consist at all times of
five legal voters of the Town and shall be appointed as provided in this
section. Except as hereinafter specifically provided, no person, other
than a Town Representative, holding an elective or appointive office in
the Town nor any permanent member of a Town Department shall serve
on such committee. The members of the committee shall serve without
compensation and may employ clerical or other assistance subject to
available appropriation. The Committee shall choose its own officers.
B. The Moderator shall appoint three of the original members of said
committee, who shall serve terms of one, two and three years
respectively, as the Moderator shall designate; and annually thereafter,
immediately following the dissolution of the business session of the
Annual Town Meeting, the Moderator shall appoint one new member to
said committee who shall succeed the member appointed by him whose
term then shall have expired and who shall serve for a term of three
years.
§ 39-8 DEDHAM CODE § 39-9
1:50
§ 39-10. Departments to submit budgets to Director of Finance.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
All officers, boards, departments and committees of the Town authorized to
expend money shall annually prepare a detailed statement of the amounts
estimated to be necessary for the proper maintenance of the respective
departments, boards or committees for the ensuing year, including
estimates of the salaries for officers of the respective boards or
departments, with the same purpose during the preceding year; estimates
of the amounts necessary for capital outlays for permanent improvements;
C. One member of said committee shall be appointed annually by the
Chairman of the Finance and Warrant Committee and such member
may but need not be a member of the Finance and Warrant Committee;
and one member shall be appointed annually by the Chairman of the
Planning Board and such member may but need not be a member of the
Planning Board. Members so appointed shall serve terms of one year
from the time of the Annual Town Meeting at which they are appointed.
D. Whenever any vacancy shall occur in the office of the committee,
whether by reason of death, resignation, removal from the Town,
appointment or election to Town office or other cause, such vacancy
shall be filled by the appointing authority which appointed the member
whose position shall have become vacant. A copy of such appointment
shall be sent by the appointing authority to the Town Clerk and to the
Secretary of the Committee. Any person so appointed to fill that
vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the person whom he
succeeds.
It shall be the duty of the committee to ascertain annually what
expenditures for capital improvements, as herein defined, will be
required by the Town during the ensuring five years, and in making its
determination shall confer with the Finance and Warrant Committee
and the Director of Finance, any Town boards, commissions,
committees, officers, employees, and other agencies and departments
of the Town involved in making expenditures for capital improvements
in the Town, all of which shall co-operate with the committee; and
all such agencies and departments or other authorities of the Town
authorized by law to make such expenditures shall furnish to the
committee on the second Friday in September in each year detailed
estimates of the expenditures necessary for capital improvements
under their jurisdiction for the ensuing five years. The committee
shall prepare annually a recommendation of expenditures for capital
improvements, including recommendations for the scheduling of such
expenditures to the Town Manager by the first Friday in January.
In conjunction with the submission of the annual budget message,
the Town Manager shall propose a financing plan for such capital
improvements and the probable impact of such improvements on the
tax rate of the Town and shall furnish such report and
recommendations to the Finance and Warrant Committee.
§ 39-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-10
1:51
estimates of the income to be received in connection with the Town business
or property entrusted to their respective appropriations of which they have
the expenditure and which remain unpaid, showing the amount thereof, to
whom due and for what due. Such statements shall be submitted to the
Director of Finance for the Finance and Warrant Committee in accordance
with a schedule annually determined by the Town Manager but in no event
later than 90 days prior to the start of the Annual Town Meeting or on such
other date as may be established from time to time pursuant to the Town
Charter.
§ 39-11. Parks and playgrounds construction plans to be submitted.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Parks and Recreation Department shall provide plans of parks or
playgrounds proposed for construction or reconstruction in conjunction
with any request for funding to the Finance and Warrant Committee and
said plans shall indicate property lines as well as any proposed removal
or addition of trees and other physical barriers (i.e. walls, retaining walls,
guard rails, etc.).
§ 39-12. Budget submission dates. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
For the purpose of the Dedham Home Rule Charter, the Town Manager
shall submit a proposed Town operating budget to the Finance and Warrant
Committee not less than 75 days prior to the date on which the Annual
Town Meeting is to convene in its initial business session of the annual Town
meeting, and the School Committee shall submit its proposed operating
budget to the Town Manager at least 90 days prior to the date on which
the Town meeting is to convene in its initial business session of the Annual
Town meeting or on such other date as may be established from time to time
pursuant to the Town Charter.
§ 39-10 DEDHAM CODE § 39-12
1:52
ARTICLE III
Audits, Expenditures and Collections
[Adopted as Ch. 4 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM by
Art. 16]
§ 39-13. Audit to be made annually. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
§ 39-14. Warrants for payment to be signed by Director of Finance,
Manager and Selectmen. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
No monies shall be paid from the Town Treasury except in payment of
taxes due the County and the Commonwealth and of notes and interest
due thereon without a warrant on the Treasurer-Collector to pay the same,
signed by the Director of Finance and the Town Manager and countersigned
by at least a majority of the Board of Selectmen or as may otherwise be
authorized by the Town Charter.
§ 39-15. Bills to be approved for expenditure and submitted to
Director of Finance.
All officers, boards, departments and committees authorized to expend
Town money shall, on or before the 15th day of each month, approve and
transmit to the Director of Finance all correctly presented bills, demands,
drafts, orders and accounts chargeable to the respective appropriations of
which they have the expenditure. Each bill, demand, draft, order or account
so approved shall be consecutively numbered and approval shall consist of
such number, the date and the signatures of at least two members (or three
members where three or more would constitute a majority) of the board,
department or committee, or, in the case of a department having but one
head or directing officer, the signature of such department head or officer.
A. The Board of Selectmen, through the Town Manager, shall annually
provide for an audit of all financial books and records of each
department of the Town, or whenever the Selectmen deem an audit of
the whole Town or of any particular Town agency to be necessary, under
the supervision of the state division of accounts, as provided in G.L.
c.44, § 35. The audit shall be conducted by a certified public
accountant, or firm of such accountants, having no interest, direct or
indirect, in the affairs of the Town. The annual audit shall be completed
within six months after the end of the subject fiscal year.
B. Immediately following the dissolution of the Annual Town Meeting, the
Town Manager shall select the accountant or firm of accountants to
conduct the annual Town audit; provided, however, that the Board of
Selectmen may contract with such accountant or firm for up to three
consecutive years of auditing services; provided, further, that no person
or firm may be selected to perform such audit for more than six years in
succession nor for more than six years out of every nine.
§ 39-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-15
1:53
Each board, department and committee shall have a separate designation
and series of numbers.
§ 39-16. Director of Finance to issue warrants for payments.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Director of Finance shall, on or before the 25th day of each month, draw
and issue a warrant on the Treasurer-Collector for the payment of each
bill, draft, demand, order or account which the Director of Finance finds
to be approved as hereinbefore provided. Each such warrant shall bear
the number, date and amount of the bill, demand, draft, order or account
presented for payment; the name of the creditor to whom such amount
is due; the board, department or committee to whose appropriation such
amount is chargeable; and shall be signed by the Director of Finance and
the Town Manager and countersigned by at least a majority of the Board of
Selectmen or as may otherwise be authorized by the Town Charter.
§ 39-17. Treasurer-Collector to honor all proper warrants.
The Treasurer-Collector shall, on or before the fifth day of each month,
honor all warrants presented to him which have been correctly issued
during the month next preceding as hereinabove provided.
§ 39-18. Town payroll may be paid weekly.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 39-15, 39-16 and 39-17 above, payrolls
of Town employees may be prepared, approved and transmitted to the
Director of Finance as often as once each week, and when so approved, the
Director of Finance may draw and issue warrants for the payment thereof
and payments may be made by the Treasurer-Collector.
§ 39-19. Petty cash accounts authorized.
At the first of any financial year, each department may draw on the Town
Treasury for a sum not in excess of $50 for use as an emergency fund
and petty cash payments. Whenever any part of this fund is expended, a
requisition with voucher numbered and attached shall be at once made on
the Director of Finance for an amount equal to the sum expended which
when collected by the department making the requisition, shall be placed
with such fund so that at all times the amount drawn for said fund will be
equal in cash or warrants to the amount originally drawn for said fund.
§ 39-20. All payments to be by check.
No money shall be paid from the Town Treasury except by a check made
payable to the creditor or order. The number of each warrant issued by the
Director of Finance shall be endorsed on the margin of the check issued in
payment thereof.
§ 39-15 DEDHAM CODE § 39-21
1:54
§ 39-21. All purchases to be by purchase order; Director of Finance
to give notice of liabilities in excess of appropriation. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
No officer, board, department or committee having the disbursement of an
appropriation shall make purchases of supplies or materials or contract
for services to be rendered the Town without issuing a written purchase
order therefor or prescribed form; provided, however, that the provisions
of this section shall not apply to the salaries or wages of officers and
persons regularly or temporarily employed by the Town. One copy of every
purchase order, which shall contain the amount of the expenditure, shall be
sent to the Director of Finance on the day the purchase order is delivered
to the vendor. Whenever any appropriation shall have been expended or
whenever, in the judgment of the Director of Finance, it appears that the
liabilities incurred against any appropriations may be in excess of the
unexpended balance of said appropriation, the Director of Finance shall
immediately give notice to the Town Manager and to the board, committee,
head of department, or official authorized to make expenditures from said
appropriation, and no claim against such appropriation shall be allowed
nor any further liability be incurred until the Town makes provision for the
payment of same.
§ 39-22. Director of Finance to distribute statement of expenditures
and balances. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Director of Finance shall at regular intervals and at least as often as
once each month send to the Town Manager and to each officer, board,
department and committee having the disbursement of an appropriation,
a statement of the amount of orders approved and warrants drawn on
behalf of said officer, board, department or committee during the preceding
month together with a statement of the unexpended balance of each such
appropriation.
§ 39-23. Expenditures to be made for appropriated purpose only;
unexpended balances to be transferred to excess and deficiency
account.
No money appropriated for a general or special purpose shall be applied to
any other use unless by a vote of the Town, and all unexpended balances of
annual appropriations in the Treasury on June 30th of each fiscal year shall
be transferred to an account designated the Excess and Deficiency Account.
All unexpended balances of special appropriations shall be transferred only
by vote of the Town.
§ 39-24. Treasurer-Collector to collect all accounts due Town.
The Treasurer-Collector shall collect all accounts due the Town except
interest and dividends on investments of trust funds, and the Town Collector
shall in the collection of such accounts, have the same powers of collection
as those granted by law to the Collector of Taxes. The Treasurer-Collector
§ 39-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-24
1:55
shall be authorized to use all means of collecting taxes which a Treasurer
may use when appointed a collector of taxes.
§ 39-25. Treasurer-Collector to assess interest on overdue accounts.
The Treasurer-Collector shall, in the collection of his accounts, assess
interest and other charges and fees permitted by G.L. c.60, § 15, on overdue
accounts for services rendered and licenses or permits issued by the Town.
§ 39-26. All accounts due to be committed to Treasurer-Collector.
All accounts coming due the Town shall forthwith be committed by the
several officers, boards, departments and committees of the Town to the
Treasurer-Collector, together with all available information in relation
thereto.
§ 39-26.1. Notice of tax deferral. [Added 5-15-2017 STM by Art. 2;
amended 11-13-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Treasurer-Collector shall serve Notice by certified mail and by first
class mail on all real property tax accounts deferred pursuant to G.L. c.
59, § 5, clause 41A, or similarly deferred tax accounts, upon notification of
the death of the taxpayer or the failure to annually apply for the continued
exemption. Said Notice shall include the statutory citation for the
exemption, total deferred amount due, interest accrued, and the current
rate of interest charged on all deferred amounts. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, failure to provide the notice as set forth hereunder shall not
relieve the taxpayer or the tax account of any obligations otherwise
required by law.
§ 39-27. Treasurer-Collector to recommend suits for collection of
accounts due.
If it shall seem advisable to the Treasurer-Collector that suit should be
instituted on behalf of the Town for the establishment or collection of any
account due the Town, he shall so notify the Selectmen, and he shall report
to them from time to time, as they may direct, upon all uncollected accounts
in his hands. The Selectmen shall take such action with respect to all such
accounts as they may deem expedient and consistent with the interests of
the Town.
§ 39-28. Treasurer-Collector and departments to pay over to
Treasury. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Treasurer-Collector shall forthwith upon receipt pay over to the Town
Treasury all money received by the Treasurer-Collector on every such
account, including any sums received as interest on money received by the
Treasurer-Collector on such accounts in any bank. Every other officer of
the Town shall pay into the Treasury of the Town all amounts received on
behalf of the Town, except as otherwise provided by law, and shall make
a true return thereof to the Director of Finance stating the accounts upon
§ 39-24 DEDHAM CODE § 39-28
1:56
which such amounts were received. The Treasurer-Collector shall furnish
such officer with a receipt for such amount so paid into the Treasury and
shall forward a duplicate thereof to the Town Manager. Notwithstanding
any prior provision of this section, Collection Fees, as described in G.L. c.60,
§ 15(10) and (11), shall be paid directly to the Deputy Tax Collector or other
collecting officer.
§ 39-29. Treasurer-Collector to have custody of documents of
ownership.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the Treasurer-Collector shall have
custody of all deeds, bonds, insurance policies, securities, evidences of
indebtedness and other similar documents owned by the Town, except that
bonds given to the Town by the Treasurer-Collector and the Town Clerk
shall be in the custody of the Selectmen. The Director of Finance shall have
custody of contracts of the Town where provided by law.
§ 39-30. Fees to be charged for use of Town property and other
services.
Fees to be charged for use of Town property and other services shall be set
in accordance with § 150-3.
§ 39-31. Contributory retirement system payments.
Payments due the Contributory Retirement System for pensions and
administration shall be paid on such schedule as the Contributory
Retirement System shall determine.
§ 39-32. Mitigation Funds Committee.
A. There shall be a Mitigation Funds Committee which shall advise and
make recommendations to the Finance and Warrant Committee and
Town Meeting as to expenditure of funds on deposit in a mitigation
stabilization fund. Said committee shall consist at all times of five voters
of the Town and shall be appointed as provided in this section. Except
as hereinafter specifically provided, no person, other than a Town
Representative, holding an elective or appointive office in the Town nor
any employee of the Town shall serve on such committee. The members
of the committee shall serve without compensation and may, with the
approval of the Town Manager, employ clerical or other assistance
subject to available appropriation. The Committee shall choose its own
officers. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
B. The Moderator shall appoint three of the original members of said
committee, who shall serve terms of one, two and three years
respectively, as the Moderator shall designate; and annually thereafter,
immediately following the dissolution of the business session of the
Annual Town Meeting, the Moderator shall appoint one new member to
said committee who shall succeed the member appointed by him whose
§ 39-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-32
1:57
term then shall have expired and who shall serve for a term of three
years.
C. One member of said committee shall be appointed annually by the
Board of Selectmen and such member may but need not be a member of
the Board of Selectmen; and one member shall be appointed annually
by the Planning Board and such member may but need not be a member
of the Planning Board. Members so appointed shall serve terms of one
year from the time of the Annual Town Meeting at which they are
appointed.
D. Whenever any vacancy shall occur in the office of the committee,
whether by reason of death, resignation, removal from the Town,
appointment or election to Town office, being hired as a Town
employee, or other cause, such vacancy shall be filled by the appointing
authority which appointed the member whose position shall have
become vacant for the remainder of the unexpired term. A copy of such
appointment shall be sent by the appointing authority to the Town Clerk
and to the Secretary of the Committee.
E. For the purposes of this section, a mitigation stabilization fund shall be
a special purpose stabilization fund established pursuant to G.L. c.40,
§ 5B into which are deposited payments made by developers or parties
to an agreement with the Town for a particular purpose or for
unrestricted use, including mitigation payments, infrastructure charges
or other payments made by a private party in connection with a
regulatory activity or a municipal contract, permit application, or bylaw.
It shall be the duty of the committee to confer with the Finance and
Warrant Committee and the Director of Finance to determine the
amount and availability of mitigation stabilization funds and to confer
with Town boards, commissions, committees, officers, employees, and
other agencies and departments of the Town, all of which shall
cooperate with the committee in arriving at recommendations for
expenditure of such funds for the purposes designated in the grant of
such funds or, if unrestricted, for general municipal purposes; and all
such agencies and departments or other authorities of the Town shall
furnish to the committee no later than the fourth Friday in October in
each year in which mitigation stabilization funds are available detailed
estimates of the expenditures necessary for improvements under their
jurisdiction for the ensuing five years. The committee shall prepare, in
each year in which mitigation stabilization funds are available, a
recommendation of expenditures for mitigation stabilization funds,
including recommendations for the scheduling of such expenditures, to
the Town Manager, Board of Selectmen and Planning Board by the last
Friday in January. In conjunction with the submission of the annual
budget message, the Town Manager shall propose a plan for the
expenditure of such mitigation stabilization funds and the probable
impact of such expenditures on the tax rate of the Town and shall
furnish such report and recommendations to the Finance and Warrant
Committee. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 39-32 DEDHAM CODE § 39-32
1:58
ARTICLE IV
Shuttleworth Fund
[Adopted as Ch. 10 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 39-33. Fund to be kept separate; principal not to be expended.
The fund devised to the Town by the will of Hannah Shuttleworth shall be
kept separate and apart from all other public funds of the Town, and no part
of the principal shall ever be expended for any purposes, but the amount
received under said will shall remain as a permanent fund, and shall be
known as the "Shuttleworth Fund" as expressed in said will.
§ 39-34. Fund investment to be approved by Commissioners of trust
funds.
Investments of said fund shall be made in the name of the Town, with
proper recitals identifying the same as part of the Shuttleworth Fund, but
no investment of any of said fund shall be made except upon the approval in
writing of the Commissioners of Trust Funds; which approval shall be filed
with the securities, after which an order on the Treasurer-Collector may be
drawn by the Commissioners of Trust Funds for the amount to be invested.
§ 39-35. Treasurer-Collector to have custody of fund; Shuttleworth
Committee to have expenditure of fund.
The Treasurer-Collector shall have the custody of said fund, and of all the
securities in which the same may from time to time be invested. He shall
collect and receive all the interest and income accruing therefrom and shall
pay such interest and income only upon the written order of a majority of
the Shuttleworth Committee to expend the same. He shall keep an accurate
account of said fund and of amounts received and paid out therefrom. He
shall annually, at the close of the financial year, make a written statement
of the condition of said fund, and state in detail the amounts of interest and
income which have been received and expended therefrom during the year,
and this statement shall be annually printed in the Town Report.
§ 39-36. The Shuttleworth Committee.
The Board of Selectmen shall act as Overseers of the Poor for purposes of
delegating the investment of the Shuttleworth Fund and carrying out the
other functions of the Overseers of the Poor with respect to such fund as set
forth in the Last Will and Testament of Hannah Shuttleworth and, to that
end, shall annually appoint the Shuttleworth Committee, to be composed of
three to five persons, who shall be suitable persons, either men or women,
as may be interested in giving both aid and employment to the worthy poor.
The Shuttleworth Committee shall have the expenditure of the interest and
income of the Fund pursuant to the terms of the Last Will and Testament of
Hannah Shuttleworth.
§ 39-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-37
1:59
§ 39-37. Fund transactions to be done by Treasurer-Collector.
Mortgages in which said fund may be invested, on payment thereof, shall
be discharged by the Treasurer-Collector in the name of the Town; all
transfers of mortgages, bonds, or other securities in which said fund may
be invested, and all conveyances of real estate held under foreclosure of
such mortgages, shall be made by the Treasurer-Collector in the name of
the Town, and countersigned by a majority of the Commissioners of Trust
Funds.
§ 39-37 DEDHAM CODE § 39-37
1:60
ARTICLE V
Financial Policies
[Adopted 5-19-2014 ATM by Art. 31]
§ 39-38. Policies established.
A. Recognizing the importance of sound financial policies and continuity in
their application, the policy makers and senior management of the
Town of Dedham have adopted broad policies. Although the basic
principles that were previously adopted still guide the Town's financial
management, policies continue to be evaluated based upon our
experience and changes in law, the economy and market conditions.
The codification of these principles demonstrates our resolve to affirm
to Town Meeting and the taxpayers that Dedham will continue to
conduct business on a fiscally responsible basis. The policies that have
been established are:
(1) Overall Financial Policy.
(2) Debt Management Policy.
(3) Investment Policy.
(4) Capital Policy and Process.
B. These policies will be reviewed and updated every five years or as
required and will be endorsed by the Town Manager, Town Treasurer,
Finance Director, Superintendent of Schools, Board of Selectman,
Finance and Warrant Committee and School Committee. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 39-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-38
1:61

ARTICLE VI
Departmental Revolving Funds
[Adopted 5-15-2017 ATM by Art. 14]
§ 39-39. Revolving funds eastablished. [Amended 11-21-2018 ATM
by Art. 15]
There are hereby established in the Town of Dedham, pursuant to the
provisions of G.L. c. 44, § 53E1/2, the following Revolving Funds:
Program or Purpose Department Receipts
Representative or
Board Authorized to
Spend
Pool Fund (Operation
and maintenance of
Dedham Pool)
Pool User Fees Park and Recreation
Director
Firearms Fee Fund
(Pay share of State
fees/Balance to be
expended for needs of
Police Department)
Firearms Permits Police Chief
Police Cruiser Fee
Fund (Police cruiser
maintenance, repairs
and fuel)
Fees for police cruisers
used at private details
Police Chief
Surplus Vehicle and
Equipment Fund
(Paying costs and
expenses of surplus
sales and replacement
vehicles and
equipment)
Receipts from sale of
surplus vehicles and
equipment
Town Manager
Board of Health
Programs (Paying costs
and expenses
associated with health
clinics, educational
programs, and Tobacco
enforcement)
Various Health Clinics
and Tobacco Related
Fines
Health Director
Council on Aging
Programs (Paying costs
and expenses related to
said programs)
Fees from Various
Council on Aging
Programs
Council on Aging
Director
§ 39-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-39
1:63
Program or Purpose Department Receipts
Representative or
Board Authorized to
Spend
Recreation (Paying
costs and expenses
related to said
programs)
Receipts from
recreational programs,
including dog park
Park and Recreation
Director
Veterans' Fund (Paying
costs and expenses
related to said
programs)
Receipts from all
Veterans Programs
Veteran's Agent
Avery School (MBACC)
(Paying costs and
expenses related to
building maintenance)
Rental Income Town Manager
§ 39-40. Expenditure limitation.
A. Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject
to the limitation established by Town Meeting, or any increase therein,
all as may be authorized in accordance with G.L. c. 44, § 53E1/2.
B. Fiscal year spending limits for such revolving funds shall be set as
follows: [Amended 11-21-2018 ATM by Art. 15]
Program or Purpose FY Spending Limit
Pool Fund (Operation and maintenance of
Dedham Pool)
$225,000
Firearms Fee Fund (Pay share of State fees/
Balance to be expended for needs of Police
Department)
$5,000
Police Cruiser Fee Fund (Police cruiser
maintenance, repairs and fuel)
$20,000
Surplus Vehicle and Equipment Fund (Paying
costs and expenses of surplus sales and
replacement vehicles and equipment)
$75,000
Board of Health Programs (Paying costs and
expenses associated with health clinics,
educational programs, and Tobacco
enforcement)
$15,000
Council on Aging Programs (Paying costs and
expenses related to said programs)
$8,000
Recreation (Paying costs and expenses related
to said programs)
$190,000
§ 39-39 DEDHAM CODE § 39-40
1:64
Program or Purpose FY Spending Limit
Veterans' Fund (Paying costs and expenses
related to said programs)
$5,000
Avery School (MBACC) (Paying costs and
expenses related to building maintenance)
$2,500
§ 39-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-40
1:65
Chapter 42
FINGERPRINT-BASED CRIMINAL RECORD BACKGROUND
CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 110.
Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 204.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 225.
§ 42-1. Purpose and authorization.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town of Dedham, and as authorized by G.L. c.6, § 172B 1/2, this By-law shall
require (a) applicants for certain Town licenses permitting the conduct of
specific occupational activities within the Town as enumerated in Section
§ 42-2, below, to submit to fingerprinting by the Dedham Police Department,
(b) the Police Department to conduct criminal record background checks
based on such fingerprints, and (c) the Town to consider the results of such
background checks in determining whether or not to grant a license.
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, the Massachusetts
Department of Criminal Justice Information Systems (the "DCJIS") and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (the "FBI") as may be applicable to conduct
on behalf of the Town and its Police Department fingerprint-based state
and national criminal record background checks, including of FBI records,
consistent with this By-law. The Town authorizes the Police Department to
receive and utilize records of the State Police, the DCJIS and the FBI in
connection with such background checks, consistent with this By-law.
§ 42-2. Applicant’s Submission to Fingerprinting by the Police
Department.
Any applicant for a license to engage in any of the following occupational
activities within the Town shall submit a full set of fingerprints taken by
the Dedham Police Department within 10 days of the date of the application
for a license for the purpose of conducting a state and national criminal
record background check to determine the suitability of the applicant for
the license:
Hawker and Peddler
Liquor Licensee
Manager or Alternate Manager of a Liquor Licensee
Solicitors and Canvassers
Dealers in Junk, Second-Hand Articles and Antiques
Second-Hand Motor Vehicle Dealer
§ 39-40 DEDHAM CODE § 42-2
1:66
Hackney Carriage (Taxi) Operator
Ice Cream Truck Vendor
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify each
individual who is fingerprinted that his or her fingerprints will be used to
check such individual's FBI and state criminal history records.
§ 42-3. Police Department Processing of Fingerprint-Based
Criminal Record Background Checks and Communication of
Results.
The Police Department shall transmit fingerprints it has obtained pursuant
to § 42-2 of this Bylaw to the Identification Section of the Massachusetts
State Police, the DCJIS and/or the FBI as may be necessary for the purpose
of conducting fingerprint-based state and national criminal records
background checks of license applicants specified in the said section.
The Police Department shall provide the applicant with a copy of the results
of his or her fingerprint-based criminal record background check and
supply the applicant the opportunity to complete, or challenge the accuracy
of, the information contained in it, including in the FBI identification record.
The Police Department shall also supply applicants with information
regarding the procedures for obtaining a change, correction or updating
of a criminal record, including a copy of 28 CFR Part 16.34 pertaining to
FBI identification records. In no event shall the Police Department render
a suitability evaluation pursuant to the paragraph below until it has taken
the steps detailed in this paragraph and otherwise complied with any other
procedures required by any Town policy applicable to licensing-related
criminal record background checks. The Police Department shall
communicate the results of fingerprint-based criminal record background
checks to the applicable licensing authority within the Town. The Police
Department shall in addition render to the licensing authority its evaluation
of the applicant's suitability for the proposed occupational activity based
upon the results of the criminal records background check and any other
relevant information known to it. In rendering its evaluation, the Police
Department shall consider all applicable laws, regulations and Town
policies bearing on an applicant's suitability. The Police Department shall
indicate whether the applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending
indictment for, a crime that bears upon his or her suitability, or any felony
or misdemeanor that involved force or the threat of force, controlled
substances or a sex-related offense.
§ 42-4. Reliance on Results of Fingerprint-Based Criminal Record
Background Checks.
Licensing authorities of the Town shall utilize the results of fingerprintbased
criminal record background checks for the sole purpose of
determining the suitability of the subjects of the checks in connection
with the license applications specified in § 42-2, above. A Town licensing
authority may deny an application for a license on the basis of the results
§ 42-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-4
1:67
of a fingerprint-based criminal record background check if it determines
that the results of the check render the subject unsuitable for the proposed
occupational activity. The licensing authority shall consider all applicable
laws, regulations and Town policies bearing on an applicant's suitability in
making this determination. The licensing authority shall not deny a license
based on information in a criminal record unless the applicant has been
afforded a reasonable time to correct or complete the record or has declined
to do so.
§ 42-5. Compliance with Law, Regulation and Town Policy.
Implementation of this By-law and the conducting of fingerprint-based
criminal record background checks by the Town shall be in accordance with
all applicable laws, regulations and Town policies. The Board of Selectmen
is authorized to promulgate regulations for the implementation of this Bylaw.
The Town shall not disseminate criminal record information received
from the FBI to unauthorized persons or entities.
§ 42-6. Fees.
The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of conducting
fingerprint-based criminal record background checks shall be $50. A
portion of the fee, as specified in G.L. c.6, § 172B 1/2, shall be deposited
into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust Fund, and the
remainder of the fee may be retained by the Town for costs associated with
the administration of the fingerprinting system.
Chapter 57
LEGAL AFFAIRS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finances — See Ch. 39. Records and reports — See Ch. 78.
§ 57-1. Selectmen to be agents of Town.
The Selectmen shall be agents of the Town to institute, prosecute and
defend any claims, actions and proceedings to which the Town is a party or
in which the interests of the Town are or may be involved.
§ 57-2. Selectmen authorized to settle claims.
The Selectmen, or their designee, may at their discretion compromise or
settle any claim or suit to which the Town is a party within the amount of
any appropriation available therefore or as otherwise authorized by law.
§ 42-4 DEDHAM CODE § 57-3
1:68
§ 57-3. Town Counsel to report status of actions.
The Town Counsel shall, not later than 10 days after the close of each year,
report to the Selectmen what actions have been brought against and on
behalf of the Town and what cases have been compromised or settled, and
the Selectmen shall include such report in the Annual Town Report.
§ 57-4. Selectmen to appoint Town Counsel.
The Selectmen shall annually, as soon as practicable after final adjournment
of the Annual Town Meeting, appoint a competent lawyer and member of
the Bar of the Commonwealth in good standing to act as Town Counsel for
the term of one year, from the day of his appointment following and until
his successor is appointed and enters upon the performance of his duties,
and may at their pleasure remove him from office. They shall likewise
fill any vacancy in such office for the unexpired term and may employ
special counsel whenever, in their judgment, necessity therefor arises and
an appropriation is made or is available therefor.
§ 57-5. Qualifications for Town Counsel.
A. Town Counsel shall have a minimum of five years experience as a city
solicitor, Town counsel, or assistant Town counsel; in the case of a law
firm being retained by the Town as a Town counsel, only those attorneys
within the firm who have a minimum of five years experience as a city
solicitor, Town counsel, assistant city solicitor, or assistant Town
counsel shall represent the Town;
B. Town Counsel shall have substantial experience in litigation before trial
courts (both state and federal) and state administrative agencies and
should have a demonstrated record of success in major municipal
litigation;
C. Town Counsel shall have a demonstrated ability to provide suitable
back-up capacity during absence, illness or vacations;
D. Town Counsel shall have expertise in a variety of municipal law
specialty areas such as land use, environmental law, civil rights,
contracts, and municipal finance law;
E. Town Counsel shall not be eligible to participate in the Town's group
insurance program nor shall Town Counsel be eligible for retirement or
other benefits;
F. Town Counsel shall be a member in good standing of the Massachusetts
Bar; and
G. Town Counsel shall at all times maintain a professional liability
insurance policy in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.
§ 57-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-6
1:69
§ 57-6. Duties of Town Counsel.
It shall be the duty of the Town Counsel to conduct the prosecution of,
defense of, or compromise claims, actions and proceedings to which the
Town is a party, and the prosecution of actions or proceedings by or on
behalf of any Town Officer, Board or Committee as such; to conduct the
defense of any action or proceedings brought against any Town Officer,
Board or Committee as such when the Selectmen, having determined that
any right or interests of the Town are or may be involved therein, shall
so request; to conduct proceedings brought by or against the assessors
before the Appellate Tax Board; to assist in the prosecution of complaints
for violation of any by-law of the Town, when requested so to do by the
Board or Officer enforcing the same, with the approval of the Board of
Selectmen; to examine and report upon titles to all land to be acquired by
the Town; to prepare or approve contracts, bonds, deeds and other legal
instruments in which the Town is a party or in which any right or interest of
the Town is involved; and generally to advise and act for the Town, Officers,
Boards and Committees upon and in legal matters touching the duties of
their respective offices.
§ 57-7. Treasurer-Collector to execute deeds and transfers of
interests.
Any deed conveying land belonging to the Town shall be executed by
the Treasurer-Collector unless the Town shall have otherwise voted. All
transfers of mortgages, bonds, or other securities, all evidences of
indebtedness, and mortgage foreclosures shall be executed by the
Treasurer-Collector.
Chapter 61
LIBRARY
§ 61-1. Board of Trustees to have custody of library.
The Board of Trustees of the Dedham Public Library shall consist of five
members who shall have custody and management of the running of the
Library.
§ 61-2. Regular and special meetings.
Regular meetings of the Board shall be held on days designated by the
Trustees in April, June, September and December in each year, or at such
other times as the Trustees may vote. Special Meetings may be called at the
request of the Chairman of the Board of Trustees or of any two Trustees.
§ 61-3. Trustees to organize and appoint Library Director.
At the regular meeting in May, the Board of Trustees shall choose from their
number, by ballot, a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and a Secretary. The Board
§ 57-6 DEDHAM CODE § 61-3
1:70
of Trustees shall also appoint a Library Director who shall be responsible
for the management of the Library under the direction of the Trustees.
§ 61-4. Financial records, invest library fund and approve
expenditures. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Board of Trustees shall have charge of the Library's books of account,
and shall safely invest and reinvest all funds held for the use of the Library
in sound securities and vary investments according to their discretion;
provided, that said Board shall not invest the same in any securities not
generally considered acceptable by the Commonwealth for the investment
of funds by Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall also have charge of the
preparation of an annual budget for presentation to the Town Manager. All
orders on the Treasurer-Collector for payments for the Library purposes
shall be countersigned by at least three members of the Board of Trustees.
§ 61-5. Treasurer-Collector to have custody of library funds.
The Treasurer-Collector shall have custody of the securities and funds of
the Library and shall make payments from income thereof and from other
funds available for Library purposes according to appropriations made by
the Town for Library purposes.
§ 61-6. Financial transactions to be done by Treasurer-Collector.
Mortgages in which the Library Fund may have been invested shall, on
payment thereof, be discharged by the Treasurer-Collector in the name of
the Town, and transfers of mortgages, bonds, or other securities, and all
evidences of indebtedness, shall be made by the Treasurer-Collector, all as
provided in § 57-7 of these by-laws. All such transfers and conveyances shall
be countersigned by at least a majority of the Board of Library Trustees.
§ 61-7. Staffing. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Library Director shall be responsible for: hiring and termination of
Library staff, with the approval of the Town Manager, setting policy for staff
and for approving job descriptions.
§ 61-8. Trustees to submit annual report. [Amended 11-17-2014
ATM by Art. 18]
The Board of Trustees shall no later than 10 days after the close of each
fiscal year, at the request of the Town Manager, or on such other date
as may be required by statute, charter or by-laws, prepare, approve and
submit to the Selectmen a report and recommendations as required by
§§ 39-10 and 78-6 of these By-laws.
Chapter 65
MASTER PLAN
§ 61-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-1
1:71
§ 65-1. Planning Board to prepare Master Plan.
The Planning Board shall prepare a comprehensive Master Plan, including
an economic development supplement, in conformity with the requirements
of G.L. c.41, § 81D.
§ 65-2. Five-year review, revision and update.
The Planning Board shall review, revise and update the Master Plan on an
interim basis at least once every five years and publish the revised and
updated document on the Town of Dedham website.
§ 65-3. Ten-year comprehensive review.
The Planning Board shall undertake a comprehensive review of the Master
Plan and prepare revisions and updates thereto at least once every 10 years,
taking into account all elements required by G.L. c.41, § 81D, and data from
the most recent decennial census of the United States Census Bureau.
§ 65-4. Comparison with other plans and by-laws; proposal of
revisions.
In addition, at the time of the comprehensive review of the Master Plan as
contemplated in § 65-3 the Planning Board shall:
Chapter 70
A. Undertake a study of the then current Open Space Plan for the Town of
Dedham as is in effect in accordance with § 12-20(A) of these By-Laws
and evaluate whether the Open Space Plan is consistent with policies,
forecasts, and standards of the Master Plan.
B. Undertake a study of the then current Zoning By-Laws of the Town of
Dedham and evaluate whether the provisions of the Zoning By-Laws are
consistent with policies, forecasts, and standards of the Master Plan.
C. Undertake a study of the rules and regulations of all other Town
commissions and boards (including without limitation the Board of
Health, the Conservation Commission, and the Parks and Recreation
Commissions) and evaluate whether those rules and regulations are
consistent with policies, forecasts, and standards of the Master Plan.
D. In its discretion, propose to relevant Town commissions and boards
such changes and revisions to rules and regulations of those
commissions and boards, for the purpose of achieving consistency with
the policies, forecasts and standards of the Master Plan.
E. In its discretion, propose to Town Meeting such measures as will
promote the policies, forecasts and standards of the Master Plan and
consistency between and among the Master Plan, the Open Space Plan,
the Zoning By-Law and the rules and regulations of all other Town
commissions and boards.
§ 65-1 DEDHAM CODE § 65-4
1:72
PERSONNEL, WAGE AND SALARY ADMINISTRATION PLAN
§ 70-1. The Personnel, Wage and Salary Administration Plan.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Personnel, Wage and Salary Administration Plan shall be adopted and
amended pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.41, §§ 108A and 108C, as
amended, and shall be kept on file in the offices of the Town Manager and
Town Clerk.
Chapter 72
PUBLIC NOTICE
§ 72-1. Responsibilities of chairman.
The chairman of each multiple member body, or an appropriate Town
Employee assigned by the chairman, shall be responsible for:
Chapter 73
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Finances — See Ch. 39.
§ 73-1. Officers with financial interest not to participate in
contracts.
No officer, agent or employee of the Town shall in his official capacity make,
pass upon or participate in making or passing upon the borrowing of any
monies by or on behalf of the Town, or any purchase, sale, contract or
agreement, or the terms or amount of any payment for or on behalf of the
Town, or in which said borrowing, purchase, sale, contract or agreement the
A. Ensuring that their committee's webpage includes a list of members
and other key personnel and their contact information and email
addresses.
B. Posting meeting dates on the Town's website as soon as meetings are
scheduled.
C. Posting meeting agendas on the Town's website at least 48 hours prior
to the meeting.
D. Submitting to the Town Clerk and posting on the Town's website an
official version of meeting minutes within five days of the minutes being
approved.
§ 65-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-1
1:73
Town is interested in any way whatsoever if such officer, agent or employee
shall have any personal financial interest therein, directly or indirectly,
except as may be provided from time to time by G.L. c.268A.
§ 73-2. Chief Procurement Officer. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall be the Chief Procurement Officer (CPO) of the
Town pursuant to G.L. c.30B. The Town Manager may delegate CPO powers
and duties to one or more employees under his direction in accordance with
G.L. c.30B.
§ 73-3. Contracts to be in writing and authorized by Board or
Committee.
No contract involving an obligation of the Town, including a purchase order
for the procurement of goods or services in excess of $1,000 shall be
binding upon the Town unless it is in writing and is signed by the officer
or a majority of the Board or Committee duly authorized to expend the
appropriation against which such obligations is incurred, and the CPO; and
the CPO shall make a record of every such contract in a book which shall be
the property of the Town.
§ 73-4. Performance bond; security deposit.
Every contract exceeding $25,000 shall be accompanied by a suitable bond
for the performance of the same, or by the deposit of money or security to
the amount of such bond if so requested by the CPO.
§ 73-5. Contracts not to extend more than three years unless
authorized.
No board or officer shall make any contract on behalf of the Town, including
any renewal, extension or option, the execution of which shall necessarily
extend beyond three years from the date of execution, unless specific
authority to do so has been given by vote of the Town or as otherwise
provided by law.
§ 73-6. Competitive bidding required; procedures defined.
A. All contracts for the procurement of supplies, services, and real
property or for the disposal of supplies or real property awarded by the
Town shall be in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c.30B, to the
extent such provisions are applicable, and any procedures established
by the Chief Procurement Officer ("CPO").
B. All other contracts made by the Town shall comply with applicable
provisions of law; provided, however, that contracts for supplies and
services for amounts less than the statutory minimum established by
G.L. c.30B shall be awarded only after an informal competitive process,
§ 73-1 DEDHAM CODE § 73-6
1:74
§ 73-7. Disposal of surplus equipment.
Whenever in the judgment of any department head, tangible supply, as
defined by Chapter 30B, in the charge of that department with an estimated
net value of $5,000 or more, except motor vehicles to be replaced, is no
longer necessary or useful, and it is in the best interest of the Town to
dispose of such supply, such department head in writing shall so advise
the CPO, who may dispose of such supply in accordance with provisions of
Chapter 30B. Any tangible supply with an estimated net value of less than
$5,000 may be disposed of in accordance with procedures established by
the CPO.
§ 73-8. Borrowing for more than two years to require bids.
When authorized to raise a loan on behalf of the Town for a term of
more than two years, the Treasurer-Collector shall solicit bids thereon by
advertising or otherwise, in such manner as he shall deem appropriate, and
shall reserve to the Town the right to reject any or all such bids.
§ 73-9. Procedure governing the submission of competitive bids and
bid openings. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
In all cases where competitive bids are invited either by law or by-law,
all prospective bidders shall be advised, either in the posted notice, the
published advertisement, or letter of invitation to bid, (i) that all bids and
related materials shall be submitted to the Office of the Town Manager,
Town Hall, PO Box 306, Bryant Street, Dedham, MA 02027, and (ii) that all
bids shall be opened at the designated time and place under the supervision
of the CPO.
Chapter 78
RECORDS AND REPORTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town meetings — See Ch. 85.
§ 78-1. Town officers, board and committees to keep records open
to public.
All officers, boards and committees of the Town shall cause records of their
doings and accounts to be kept in suitable books, and all multiple member
bodies shall maintain accurate records of its meetings, said records to be
filed with the Town Clerk and made available to the public. Said books shall
be kept in their respective places in the Town offices and the libraries,
requiring, at a minimum, the solicitation and documentation of three
quotations.
§ 73-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-1
1:75
and shall not be removed therefrom. Said books shall, unless otherwise
provided by law, be open to public inspection at any reasonable time, but
shall remain during such inspection under the supervision of the officer,
board or committee having custody thereof.
§ 78-2. Director of Finance to keep records of insurance, bonds and
indebtedness.
The Director of Finance shall keep among the records of his office the
following:
§ 78-3. Departments to report on expenditures for Town report.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
All officers, boards, departments and committees of the Town authorized to
spend money shall annually report thereon in writing in such manner as to
give the citizens a fair understanding of the objects and methods of such
expenditures, referring, however, to the report of the Director of Finance
for detailed statements of receipts and expenditures. Such report shall be
submitted, through the Town Manager, to the Selectmen no later than 10
days after the close of each year for inclusion in the Annual Town Report,
and a copy thereof shall be submitted to the Finance Director.
§ 78-4. Report of Treasurer-Collector detailed.
The report of the Treasurer-Collector shall include a classified statement
of the Town indebtedness and business for which it was incurred, shall
specifically state the objects for which such indebtedness may have been
increased during the preceding year, a statement indicating the amounts
required for the payment of interest on the Town debt and for the payment
of such portions of the Town debt as may become due during the succeeding
year; and shall also set forth:
A. A detailed register of all insurance policies and surety bonds held by the
Town which shall show the property covered by insurance, the names
under bond, the names of the companies involved, the amount,
expiration date and premium of each bond and policy;
B. A detailed record of the Town indebtedness which shall show the
objects for which such indebtedness was incurred, the date incurred,
the date of maturity, the rate of interest thereon and the provisions for
payment thereof.
A. A list of all notes issued during the year and the purposes for which the
money was borrowed, giving the dates, amount, term, rate of interest,
time of maturity, the premium, if any received thereon, and the names
of the parties from whom the funds were borrowed;
B. A list of all notes paid during the year and a list of all outstanding notes
with the dates upon which they will mature;
§ 78-1 DEDHAM CODE § 78-4
1:76
§ 78-5. Report of Director of Finance detailed.
The Director of Finance shall, immediately after the close of each financial
year, prepare a detailed report of all receipts and expenditures of the Town
during the financial year next preceding, showing separately payments
made from the proceeds of loans as outlays for capital improvements,
including those of the funds managed for the Town by trustees or
commissioners and showing also the amount of each specific appropriation
and expenditures there from, the purposes for which expenditures have
been made, a statement of any change in the amount of the Town debt,
and a statement of all indebtedness incurred and not paid at the end of the
financial year next preceding.
§ 78-6. Selectmen to publish annual Town report; report detailed.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Selectmen shall each year cause to be printed as a Town document an
Annual Town Report for the fiscal year next preceding. The Annual Town
Report shall contain the annual reports of the Selectmen, the Finance and
Warrant Committee, the School Committee, the Treasurer-Collector, the
Director of Finance and of all officers, boards and committees of the Town
required by these by-laws and a list of the salaries of all Town employees;
statements of all funds belonging to the Town or held for the benefit of
its inhabitants; a statement of the liabilities of the Town on bonds, notes,
certificates of indebtedness or otherwise and all indebtedness authorized
but not incurred and the purposes thereof; a statement of transfers made
to or from any appropriation; a copy of the auditor's report of the annual
audit of the Town's financial books and records, including the financial
statement and management letter; abstracts of the records of the meetings
of the Town held since publication of the last Annual Town Report; a specific
statement of Town or County ways laid out during the preceding year; a
statement of what ways laid out or accepted remain to be constructed;
statement of damages assessed against and paid by the Town during the
preceding year; a statement of all outstanding claims against the Town; a
statement of what actions have been brought against and on behalf of the
Town, what cases have been compromised or settled and the current status
of all suits at law involving the Town or any of its interests; and such other
matters as the said report is required by law to contain or may be inserted
by the Selectmen under the discretion granted them by law.
C. A full exhibit of all monies, properties and securities which may be
placed in his charge by virtue of any statute or by-law or by virtue of any
gift, devise, bequest or deposit;
D. A statement of any amount received by the Town from sources other
than taxation during the preceding year.
§ 78-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-7
1:77
§ 78-7. By-laws, rules and regulations, assessors' evaluations to be
printed.
The Selectmen of the Town shall direct that the by-laws and standing votes
of the Town, the rules or regulations adopted by any officer, board or
committee of the Town, and each decennial assessors' evaluation list be
printed separately or as a part of the Annual Town Report.
§ 78-8. Annual Town report to be available, delivered to Town
representatives.
The Selectmen shall, subject to appropriation, cause a reasonable number
of copies of the Annual Town Report to be printed and made available
for distribution to the taxpayers of the Town; further, to the extent
technologically feasible, the Annual Town Report shall be posted on the
official Town website.
§ 78-9. Annual departmental reports to be filed with Town Clerk as
public records.
All written or printed reports required by these by-laws shall be filed with
the Town Clerk and so preserved by the Town Clerk in suitable files readily
accessible to citizens of the Town at all reasonable times.
§ 78-10. Use and dissemination of information regulated.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town that the inhabitants of the
Town have retained certain rights of privacy in the use and dissemination
of public records and that to safeguard those rights this section has been
adopted. No person employed by the Town or performing services for
the Town shall use or disseminate or allow access to any information
collected, acquired or created in the performance of official, contractual
or volunteer duties except for the purpose for which the information was
collected, acquired or created or for a purpose expressly provided for by
law; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall infringe or impair
public access to nor otherwise alter the status of any public record nor allow
or require the public disclosure of any information which is not a public
record; provided, further, that if the Board of Selectmen, after a public
hearing, finds that the public purpose clearly outweighs the inhabitant's
privacy interests, the Board may grant to the holder of the records a waiver
for a specific use, limited in scope and time, and for such purpose may
require that information contained in the records be made available only in
the aggregate and with full anonymity of individual records and may make
such other conditions as will protect the privacy interests of the inhabitants
of the Town.
§ 78-7 DEDHAM CODE § 78-10
1:78
Chapter 85
TOWN MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Records and reports — See Ch. 78.
§ 85-1. Annual Town Meeting date set.
The Annual Town Meeting for the election of Town Officers shall be held on
the second Saturday in April in each year.
§ 85-2. Annual Town Meeting business session date set.
All business of the Annual Town Meeting, except the election of such officers
and the determination of such matters as are required by law to be elected
or determined by ballot, shall be considered at an adjournment of such
meeting, referred to in these by-laws as the business session of the Annual
Town Meeting, which shall be held on the third Monday in May.
§ 85-3. Hours for polls set.
The polls shall be opened at 7:00 a.m. and shall remain open until 8:00 p.m.,
except as otherwise provided in the warrant for such meeting.
§ 85-3.1. Submission of articles. [Added 11-14-2014 ATM by Art.
151]
In addition to the individuals and bodies listed in Section 2-9(a) of the
Charter, articles for Town Meeting may be submitted by the Town Manager
or a department head.
§ 85-4. Inclusion of articles on Town Meeting warrants.
Whenever a special Town meeting is to be called the Board of Selectmen
shall give notice of such intention by such means as it shall establish by vote
or by rule and shall consider for inclusion on the warrant for such special
Town meeting the subject matter of all petitions which are received at its
office on or before the close of regular office hours on the second business
day following such publication; provided, however, that whenever a special
Town meeting is called by petition in accordance with the General Laws
the warrant therefor shall include all subjects the insertion of which shall
be requested by said petition; provided, further, that the warrant for any
special Town meeting shall include all subjects the insertion of which shall
be requested in writing by 100 voters.
1. Editor's Note: This article was adopted as § 85-3A, but was renumbered, with the
permission of the Town, to maintain the organization of the Code.
§ 78-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:79
§ 85-5. Notice of Town Meetings to be posted and published.
The warrant for all Town Meetings shall be directed to any appointed
constable of the Town, and notice of every Town Meeting shall be given by
posting attested copies of the warrant therefor in one or more public places
in each district in the Town not less than 14 days before the day fixed for
such meeting, and by publishing the same at least once in a newspaper
having a general circulation in the Town, the last publication to be not less
than 14 days before the day fixed for such meeting.
§ 85-6. Report of Finance and Warrant Committee to be distributed,
to include collective bargaining agreements. [Amended 11-17-2014
ATM by Art. 18]
At least 14 days before the day fixed in the warrant for the business
session of the Annual Town Meeting or the day fixed in the warrant for
any Special Town Meeting, the Finance and Warrant Committee shall cause
to be sent by mail to every Town Meeting representative at his or her
place of residence, a copy of the report of the Committee on articles to be
acted upon at the business session of an Annual Town Meeting or at such
Special Town Meeting, and shall make other printed copies of the report
available to the residents of the Town in the Town Hall, in the libraries, at
all Town Meetings or by mail if so requested. The report of the Committee
shall include such information relating to collective bargaining for Town
employees as the Committee deems advisable and shall include copies in
full of all collective bargaining agreements whose implementation depends
upon or involves any action by the Town Meeting, whether by appropriation,
amendment of the Personnel Wage and Salary Plan By-Law or any Schedule
therefor or otherwise.
§ 85-7. Notice of Town meetings to be mailed to representatives;
notice of special Town meeting to be given to Finance and Warrant
Committee. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
In addition to posting and publishing as hereinabove provided, notice of
the time and place fixed in the warrant for the business session of every
Annual Town Meeting and of the time and place fixed in the warrant for
every Special Town Meeting shall be sent by the Town Clerk to every
Town Representative by mail at least 14 days before the day fixed for
such meeting. Written notice of Special Town Meetings shall be given by
the Selectmen to the Chairman of the Finance and Warrant Committee
immediately upon drawing the warrant therefor.
§ 85-8. Notice of adjournment to be posted.
As soon as practicable after the adjournment of any Town Meeting on a vote
to adjourn to another day, the Town Clerk shall cause a brief statement of
the day and hour to which the adjournment was voted to be posted in the
Town Office building and in one or more public places in each district in the
Town.
§ 85-5 DEDHAM CODE § 85-9
1:80
§ 85-9. Town Clerk to keep verbatim record of Town Meeting.
The Town Clerk shall arrange for the creation of a permanent, verbatim
record of the proceedings of each Town Meeting, in such form as he or she
may deem appropriate.
§ 85-10. Town Meeting quorum.
One Hundred and Seventy Representatives shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business at any Town meeting, provided, however, that a
lesser number may organize temporarily and may from time to time adjourn
the same. This section shall not apply to such parts of meetings as are
devoted exclusively to the election of Town Officers or the determination of
such matters as are required by law to be determined by ballot.
§ 85-11. Articles to be taken up in order.
Articles of the warrant shall be acted upon in the order in which they appear
unless otherwise determined by vote of the meeting.
§ 85-12. Recommendation of Finance and Warrant Committee to be
original motion; amendments to be in writing; procedure for
omnibus adoption defined. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
A. The recommendation on any article of the warrant made by the Finance
and Warrant Committee will have the standing of the original motion on
the article, unless the article would adopt or amend a zoning by-law, in
which case the Planning Board’s recommendation shall be the original
motion. Substitute motions for and motions to amend any
recommendation in the Finance and Warrant Committee's report shall
be in writing unless otherwise directed by the Moderator. The
Moderator may require any other motion to be reduced to writing.
Unless otherwise voted by the Town Meeting body, substitute motions
shall be published to all members of the Town Meeting body present to
act on said substitute motion. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 29]
B. At any Town Meeting the Moderator may, and at any Annual Town
Meeting shall, read the numbers of the articles, and under any budget
article the number of each item, requiring any Town Representative
who wishes to discuss, amend or offer a substitute motion on any article
or item to ask when the number is read that the article or item be
passed, and the Moderator upon passage of an enabling vote adopting
the Finance and Warrant Committee's recommendation on all of the
articles and items not so reserved and not reserved by the Moderator,
shall declare such articles and items to have been adopted. The
Moderator shall reserve all articles and items on which a vote of more
than a simple majority of the members present and voting is required by
statute.
§ 85-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13
1:81
§ 85-13. Motions may be divided.
If 10 Town Representatives so request, any motion which is divisible shall
be divided and the question shall be put separately upon each part thereof.
§ 85-14. Precedence of motions.
When a question is before the meeting, the following motions namely: to
adjourn to another time or place or both; to lay on the table; to limit debate;
for the previous question; to postpone to a time certain; to commit, recommit
or refer; to amend; to postpone indefinitely; shall be received and
shall have precedence in the foregoing order; and the first four shall be
decided without debate.
§ 85-15. Higher money amounts to be voted first.
On proposed amendments involving sums of money, the larger or largest
amount shall be put to the question first, and an affirmative vote thereon
shall be a negative vote on a smaller amount.
§ 85-16. Spokesperson to disclose financial interest. [Amended
5-16-2016 ATM by Art. 30]
Any Town Representative or other speaker who speaks on any motion
at a Town Meeting in which the speaker or a member of the speaker's
immediate family has a financial interest shall first disclose such interest to
the Meeting. For the purposes of this section the term "immediate family"
shall mean the speaker's spouse, and their parents, children, brothers
and sisters. The term "financial interest" shall mean any financial interest,
whether large or small, positive or negative, provided that the interest is
reasonably foreseeable or direct as compared to remote and speculative.
§ 85-17. Voting to be by voice; standing count if voice vote doubted.
When a question is put, the sense of the meeting shall be determined by
the voices of the Town Representatives present at the Meeting, and the
Moderator shall declare the vote as it appears to him. If the Moderator is
unable to decide the vote by the sound of the voices or if his decision is
immediately questioned by seven or more Town Representatives rising in
their places for the purpose, the Moderator shall then request all persons in
the house to be seated and the question shall be distinctly stated, and those
voting in the affirmative and negative respectively shall rise and stand in
their places until they are counted by the Moderator or Tellers.
§ 85-18. Roll call may be requested.
If 15 or more Town Representatives request a roll call vote on any question,
a vote on such question shall be taken by a roll call of all Town
Representatives present at the meeting.
§ 85-13 DEDHAM CODE § 85-19
1:82
§ 85-19. Speaking more than once may be regulated.
Upon any article or item the body on motion or the Moderator may direct
that no person shall speak more than once on any question to the exclusion
of any other person who may desire to speak thereon.
§ 85-20. Duration of speaking may be limited.
Upon any article or item the body on motion or the Moderator may direct
that no person shall speak for more than 10 minutes on any question, unless
his time shall be extended by a vote of the body.
§ 85-21. Motion to terminate or limit debate to require two-thirds
vote.
Except as provided in §§ 85-19 and 85-20, a motion for the previous question
or any other motion to terminate or limit debate shall require a vote of at
least 2/3 of the Town Representatives present and voting for adoption.
§ 85-22. Voters and taxpayers have right to speak.
Any voter or taxpayer of the Town who is not a Town Representative
shall be entitled to speak at any Town Meeting subject to the same terms
as are applicable to Town Representatives, but a voter or taxpayer who
is not a Town Representative shall not be recognized when any Town
Representative seeks to be recognized except by leave of the body granted
upon the request of a Town Representative. A person who is not a voter
or taxpayer of the Town may be permitted to speak by leave of the body
granted upon the request of a Town Representative.
§ 85-23. Reconsideration of vote limited.
No vote of the meeting shall be reconsidered unless so decided (a) on a
motion made within one hour after passage of the vote to which such motion
relates, by vote of at least a majority of the Town Representatives present
and voting; or (b) on a motion made more than one hour after passage of
the vote to which such motion relates, by vote of at least 2/3 of the Town
Representatives present and voting. When a motion for reconsideration is
decided, that decision shall not be reconsidered, and no question shall be
reconsidered more than once, unless such reconsideration is voted by at
least 3/4 of the Town Representatives present and voting; nor shall any
vote be reconsidered on a motion to adjourn, to lay on the table or for the
previous question.
§ 85-24. Reconsideration of vote at adjourned meeting.
No motion for reconsideration shall be in order at an adjourned meeting on
a matter decided at the previous session of the same meeting except by a
vote of 2/3 of the Town Representatives present and voting.
§ 85-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-25
1:83
§ 85-25. Committee reports.
All committees shall report as directed by the Town. If no report is made to
the meeting at which the committee was directed to report, the committee
shall be discharged, unless the Town grants an extension of time.
§ 85-26. Town Meeting not to be dissolved until all articles acted
upon.
No motion, the effect of which would be to dissolve the meeting, shall be in
order until every article in the warrant therefor has been duly considered
and acted upon but this shall not preclude the postponement of
consideration of any article to an adjournment of the meeting at a stated
time and place.
§ 85-27. Certain appropriations to be considered and
recommended. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
Any grant or appropriation of a sum of money exceeding $500 shall be
reported to the Town Meeting either by the Finance and Warrant
Committee, the Town Manager, the School Committee, or other Town
Officers or by some committee specially appointed for the purpose pursuant
to a vote of the Town.
§ 85-28. Town Meeting to open with salute to flag.
All Town Meetings shall be opened with a salute to the flag of the United
States of America.
§ 85-29. Collective bargaining agreements to be included in report
of Finance and Warrant Committee. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
The Town Meeting shall not vote upon any action to implement a collective
bargaining agreement which has not been included in the report of the
Finance and Warrant Committee in accordance with the requirements of
§ 85-6 of this chapter, unless at least 14 days prior to the vote all Town
Meeting Members have been otherwise furnished a copy of the agreement
and of the recommendation of the Finance and Warrant Committee or of
any Town officer, board, department or committee responsible therefor as to
action by the Town Meeting. This provision may be waived in any instance
by a vote of at least 2/3 of the Town Meeting Members present and voting.
§ 85-30. Text of acts for acceptance to be included in report of
Finance and Warrant Committee. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art.
18]
The Town Meeting shall not vote to accept a section of an act of the General
Court or a section of the General Laws the full text of which has not been
included in the report of the Finance and Warrant Committee, unless at
least 14 days prior to the vote all Town Representatives shall have been
§ 85-25 DEDHAM CODE § 85-30
1:84
otherwise furnished a copy of the act or section and of the recommendation
of each standing committee to which the proposal has been referred as to
action by the Town Meeting. This provision may be waived in any instance
by a vote of at least 2/3 of the Town Representatives present and voting.
§ 85-31. Committee on by-laws established; duties set.
§ 85-32. Two-thirds vote.
When a two-thirds vote of Town Meeting is required by statute, the
Moderator shall make a public declaration of the vote and a count need
not be taken. If a vote, so declared, is immediately questioned by seven or
more Town Representatives, the Moderator shall certify it by calling for a
standing vote.
Chapter 88
TOWN PROPERTY
§ 88-1. Town offices to be leased only by vote of Town.
No space in any Town building or buildings shall be leased for any purpose
without being specially authorized by a vote of the Town and shall not be
A. There shall be a standing committee on by-laws, appointed by the
Moderator. The committee shall consist of no fewer than five voters of
the Town, one of whom shall be an attorney; provided, however, that a
majority of the committee shall be Town representatives. The term of
each member shall end upon the dissolution of the third Annual Town
Meeting after appointment, except for an appointment to fill a vacancy
for an unexpired term; provided, however, that initially members shall
serve staggered terms so as to cause as close to an equal number of
expirations each year as possible; provided, further, that each member
shall serve until a qualified successor is appointed. A member may be
reappointed to successive terms. The committee shall choose its own
officers and shall serve without pay. [Amended 11-21-2018 ATM by
Art. 19]
B. In accordance with section 2-9(c) of the Dedham Home Rule Charter, all
articles amending the by-laws of the Town except those which relate to
the Personnel, Wage and Salary Administration Plan, the compensation
and benefits for employees, planning, zoning, subdivision control and
any other matters relating to land use, shall before enactment be
referred by the Board of Selectmen to the committee on by-laws for its
report and recommendation. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
C. The committee may, with the concurrence of the Board of Selectmen,
also serve as the by-law review committee for purposes of section 7-2 of
the Dedham Home Rule Charter. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art.
18]
§ 85-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-1
1:85
used for any purpose for which a license by any Town officer or agency is
required, unless the same shall have been first duly licensed by such officer
or agency according to law.
§ 88-2. Police officer may be present for licensed use. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager may, for the purpose of enforcing order and obedience
to the laws of the Commonwealth, cause one or more police officers to be
present in any Town building when any part thereof is used under a license.
The expenses of such police officer shall be borne by the person or persons
using said space.
§ 88-3. Town buildings not to be used for forbidden purpose.
No space in any such building or buildings shall be used at any time for any
purpose forbidden by the statutes of the Commonwealth, and it shall be the
duty of the Selectmen forthwith to prosecute any violation of the statutes
which may occur therein.
§ 88-4. Town vehicles to be marked. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
All Town-owned vehicles and large, mobile departmental equipment shall
be marked with a color scheme that is consistent within each department
and shall permanently and prominently display on each side thereof the
Town seal, the Town name, the name of the department to which the
equipment is assigned and an identification number or title. The Town
Manager may grant exceptions only for specified equipment actively and
regularly engaged in traffic or investigatory law enforcement.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 102
ADVERTISING MATERIALS
§ 102-1. Posting of circulars on public ways and private premises
regulated.
No person, by himself, his agents, servants or employees, shall deposit or
place in or upon any street, square, park, common, lane, alleyway or other
public way in the Town any placard, handbill, flyer, circular or paper of any
kind whatsoever, without having first obtained permission so to do from the
Chief of Police, said permission to be on condition that the materials be
removed within a reasonable time. The Chief of Police shall determine such
reasonable period of time. No person, by himself, his agents, servants or
employees shall distribute, deposit or place any such material in or upon
or inscribe any figures, words or devices in or upon, any private premises
without permission of the owner; provided, however, that such material may
§ 88-1 DEDHAM CODE § 102-1
1:86
be placed within the doors, offices and business houses and at the doors of
residences.
§ 102-2. Posting of circulars on vehicles regulated.
No person, by himself or his agents, servants or employees shall deposit
or place in or upon any vehicle parked in any public way in the Town
any placard, handbill, flyer, advertisement, circular or paper of any kind
whatsoever without the permission of the owner of the vehicle.
Chapter 106
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency services — See Ch. 30. Noise — See Ch. 192.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices or a single
device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a 110 volt AC
line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention
and to which police are expected to respond. Fire Alarm Systems and
alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke, humidity or any other
condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion
into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises are specifically
excluded from the provisions of this section. The provisions of § 106-4 of this
chapter shall not be applicable to municipal, county and state agencies.
FALSE ALARM —
Means:
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or negligence of the user of an
alarm system or of his employees or agents, or
(1)
Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the Police
Department requesting or requiring, and resulting in, a response
on the part of the Police Department when in fact there has been no
unauthorized intrusion, robbery, or burglary, or attempted threat.
[Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 24]
(2)
A.
§ 102-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-1
1:87
§ 106-2. Controlling and curtailing alarm system signals.
Signals emitted by alarm systems shall be controlled and curtailed as
follows:
§ 106-3. False alarms; fines.
Notwithstanding Subsections A(1) and (2), for purposes of this
bylaw, the term “false alarm” shall not include situations where
the party requesting or requiring a police response in relation to
an alarm system activation subsequently cancels the request in
time for dispatch to recall the responding officer prior to arrival.
[Added 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 24]
(3)
For purposes of this definition activation of alarm systems by acts of
God, including but not limited to power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes,
earthquakes and similar weather or atmospheric disturbances shall not
be deemed to be a false alarm.
B.
A. Every alarm user shall submit to the Chief of Police the names and
telephone numbers of at least two persons who are authorized to
respond to an emergency transmitted by the alarm system, and who can
open the premises wherein the alarm system is installed.
B. All audible alarm systems installed after the effective date of this
section which use an audible horn or bell shall be equipped with a
device that will shut off such horn or bell within 10 minutes of the
activation of the alarm system.
C. Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for
more than 15 minutes which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed
due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons
designated under Subsection A of this section and which disturbs the
peace, comfort, or repose of a community, a neighborhood, or a number
of the inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is located, shall
constitute a public nuisance.
(1) Upon receiving complaint of such a continuous and uninterrupted
signal, the Chief of Police shall endeavor to contact the alarm user,
or members of the alarm user's family, or those persons designated
by the alarm user under Subsection A, in an effort to abate the
nuisance. If such efforts do not result in the silencing of the alarm
within 30 minutes of its activation, the Police Chief may, at the
expense of the owner, order its deactivation using whatever means
may be appropriate to the occasion.
(2) The Police Chief shall cause to be recorded the names and
addresses of all complainants, and the time of each complaint.
A. Upon receipt of three or more false alarms within a calendar year the
Police Chief may order the user to discontinue the use of the alarm.
[Amended 5-21-2018 ATM by Art. 24]
§ 106-1 DEDHAM CODE § 106-3
1:88
Chapter 110
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 136. Drugs and drug products — See Ch. 141.
B. Penalties shall be assessed for false alarm responses generated in a
calendar year as set forth in the following chart:
Number of False Alarms Fine
1-3 No penalty - Warning
4-6 $50 per alarm
7-10 $100 per alarm
11 or more $300 per alarm
§ 106-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-3
1:89

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 41, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 110-1. Consumption of intoxicating beverages.
No person shall, within the limits of any public way located within the Town,
whether that public way be a Town way, county highway, state highway,
or a private way open to the public, consume intoxicating beverages. This
section shall also be construed so as to prohibit the following: The
consumption of intoxicating beverages by any person while such person is
standing, sitting, walking, running or otherwise present within such way or
is within any vehicle, whether parked or moving, which is within the limits
of such public way.
§ 110-2. Prohibited activities.
Drunkenness, breach of the peace, profanity or other disorderly conduct
offensive to the general public are strictly forbidden. Possession of alcoholic
beverages in unsealed containers, or the drinking of alcoholic beverages in
any public building or on any public property, including parks, cemeteries,
school houses and school grounds, and public squares or public ways is
forbidden.
§ 110-3. Exception.
The foregoing §§ 110-1 and 110-2 shall not apply to any activity duly
licensed by the Board of Selectmen under the applicable provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 110-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town to arrest any person who
violates the provisions of §§ 110-1 and 110-2 and to cause such person to be
brought before a Justice of the District Court of Northern Norfolk, Dedham,
Massachusetts upon a complaint for violation thereof. Violations of §§ 110-1
and 110-2 may also be enforced in accordance with § 1-6 of these By-laws,
provided, that such violations shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first
offense, and $300 for the second and any subsequent violations.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:91

ARTICLE II
Adult Entertainment
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Secs. 55, 55A and 55B, of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 110-5. No liquor license to be held where sexual conduct
permitted.
The following acts of conduct in or on premises licensed in accordance with
G.L. c.140, §§ 181 or 183A are deemed contrary to the public need and to
the common good, and therefore no license shall be held for the sale of
alcoholic beverages to be served and drunk on the licensed premises where
such acts or conduct are permitted.
§ 110-6. Visual displays of sexual conduct prohibited.
It is forbidden to employ or permit any person in or on the licensed premises
to show motion picture films, television tape cassettes, still pictures or other
photographic reproductions depicting any of the acts, or any simulation of
any of the acts, prohibited in § 110-5.
§ 110-7. Violators of laws barred from licensed premises.
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no person duly licensed by the
Licensing Board for the Town under G.L. c.140, §§ 181 or 183A and/or G.L.
c.138, §§ 1, 12 or 23 shall employ, use the services of, or permit upon his
licensed premises any employee, entertainer or other person who by his or
A. It is forbidden to employ or permit any person in or on the licensed
premises which such person is unclothed or in such attire as to expose
to view any portion of the areola of the female breast or any portion of
the pubic hair, cleft of the buttocks, or genitals.
B. It is forbidden to employ or permit any hostess or other person to
mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed
or in such attire as described in Subsection A above.
C. It is forbidden to encourage or permit any person in or on the licensed
premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks or genitals of
any other person.
D. It is forbidden to employ or permit any person to wear or use any device
or covering exposed to view which simulates or stimulates the breasts,
buttocks, pubic hair or genitals or any portions thereof.
E. It is forbidden to employ or permit any person in or on the licensed
premises to perform an act or acts, or to simulate the act or acts, of:
(1) Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, flagellation or any
sexual acts prohibited by law;
(2) Touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks or genitals
of another.
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:93
her attire or conduct violates any General Laws, Special Act, or by-law of
the Town.
§ 110-7 DEDHAM CODE § 110-7
1:94
Chapter 114
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 183.
§ 114-1. Hours.
Unless otherwise restricted, no holder of a license issued by the Town of
Dedham, pursuant to G.L. c.140, §§ 177A, 181 and 183A, shall permit any
activity licensed thereunder to be conducted between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
Chapter 117
ANIMALS
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-1
1:95

ARTICLE I
Swine
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 19, of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 117-1. Keeping of swine regulated.
No person shall keep or maintain any swine within the limits of the Town of
Dedham, except in accordance with a permit from the Board of Health.
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-1
1:97

ARTICLE II
Slaughterhouses and Piggeries
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 20, of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 117-2. Slaughter houses, piggeries regulated.
No person shall keep or maintain within the limits of the Town of Dedham,
a slaughter house, piggery or any other structure which is dangerous to
the public health of the inhabitants, or injurious to their comfort or the
enjoyment of their estates, except in accordance with a permit from the
Board of Health.
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-2
1:99

ARTICLE III
Animal Control
[Adopted as Ch. 23 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 117-3. Duties of Animal Control Officer.
§ 117-4. Complaint of nuisance or dangerous dogs; investigation.
A. It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend any dog
found running at large in any street or public place, including parks,
playgrounds and cemeteries within the Town of Dedham in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter and/or the Massachusetts General
Laws relating to the keeping and licensing of animals, and to impound
such dog.
B. The Animal Control Officer, upon receiving any such dog, shall make a
complete registry, including: (1) the date and location of apprehension;
(2) a description of the animal (including breed, color and sex); (3)
place of detainment; (4) if tagged, the name and address of the owner;
(5) the name and address of a new owner, if any, including the date of
sale or transfer of the animal; (6) if the animal is euthanized, the
method and date of such euthanization and the name of the person who
euthanized the animal; and (7) the date, location and description of an
animal euthanized by gunshot in case of emergency, the disposition of
the animal remains and a description of the situation requiring gunshot.
C. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the owner, if known, as soon as
possible after the dog has been impounded. The owner of any dog so
impounded may reclaim such dog upon payment of the license fee, if
unpaid, and of all costs and charges incurred by the Town for
impounding and maintaining such dog as provided by law.
D. If such dog is not reclaimed within seven days, the dog may be put up
for adoption or euthanized in accordance with G.L. c.140, § 151A.
E. The Animal Control Officer, and/or designee, shall attend to all verbal
and written complaints or other matters pertaining to animals as
prescribed in the by-laws of the Town of Dedham and/or the
Massachusetts General Laws.
A. Any person may file a complaint in writing that a dog owned or kept in
the Town is a nuisance or dangerous dog as those terms are defined in
G.L. c.140, § 136A.
B. Such complaints shall be handled in accordance with G.L. c.140, § 157;
provided that the complaint shall be initially investigated by the Animal
Control Officer who shall report the findings to the Town Manager who
shall be the Hearing Authority for purposes of investigating and
disposing of such complaints. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art.
18]
§ 117-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:101
§ 117-5. Licensing.
§ 117-6. Restraint of dogs.
A. No person shall own or keep a dog in the Town of Dedham, which is not
duly licensed as required by G.L. c.140.
B. The License Period shall run from May 1 through April 30 of each
calendar year. All dogs six months of age or older must be licensed
during the month of April for the following License Period. Any
applicable license fee shall be paid in full prior to issuance of the
license.
C. Any dog which attains the age of six months during the License Period
or which is brought into the Town from another state or country during
the License Period must be licensed for the remainder of the License
Period within 30 days thereof.
D. Anyone who owned a dog, but does not now, shall notify the Town Clerk
immediately. When license fees for dogs are due in April of each year
and the dog is a spayed female or neutered male, the spaying or
neutering certificate must be presented at the time of license
application. All rabies shot papers must be shown before a new license
can be issued.
A. No person owning or keeping a dog shall suffer or allow it to run at
large in any street or public place in the Town of Dedham or allow it
upon the premises of anyone other than the owner or keeper of such
dog without the permission of the owner or occupant of such premises.
B. No person shall allow a dog owned or kept by him to be in or upon any
street or public place within the Town of Dedham unless effectively
restrained by a chain or leash, not exceeding 10 feet in length, which is
under the control of a person suitable to properly control its actions.
C. Any person who owns or keeps a dog within the Town, shall except as
provided in Subsection B above, keep said dog confined to the premises
of its owner or keeper by means of a chain, leash, fence or similar
restraint.
D. No person who owns or keeps a dog within the Town of Dedham shall
allow or permit said dog to defecate (1) on private property other than
that of its owner; (2) on a public sidewalk; or, (3) on other public places.
E. If said dog defecates on property as prohibited by the provisions of
§ 117-6(D), the owner or keeper shall be responsible for immediate
removal.
F. No person owning or in control of a dog shall permit the dog to enter
any Town park or playground, except service dogs performing a
function in accordance with G.L. c.272, § 98A.
§ 117-5 DEDHAM CODE § 117-6
1:102
§ 117-7. Penalties.
Violations of this article shall be enforced as provided in § 1-6 of these Bylaws.
G. Exceptions. Only by the request of the Town Manager from the School
Department and/or the Parks and Recreation Department, the Health
Department, the Endicott Commission, the Board of Health, the Police
Department and the Fire Department, dogs with handlers under the
guidance of the Dedham Dog Officer will be called in and allowed on
public lands, park land, school land, Endicott Estate land and any and
all public property as deemed necessary by either the Police, Fire and
Board of Health to chase off the flocks of geese and ducks that are
roaming over Public Land causing a health menace. These dogs shall be
monitored by their handlers so that the geese and ducks will not be
harmed but made to find a new home away from Dedham thus
eliminating the health hazards. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art.
18]
§ 117-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-7
1:103
Chapter 122
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
§ 117-7 DEDHAM CODE § 117-7
1:104
ARTICLE I
Stretch Energy Code
[Adopted 5-17-2010 ATM by Art. 39]
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Stretch Code is to provide a more energy efficient
alternative to the base energy code applicable to the relevant sections of
the building code for both new construction and existing buildings.
§ 122-2. Applicability.
The Stretch Code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings
not included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as
applicable.
§ 122-3. Stretch Code.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions,
amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into the
Town of Dedham General Bylaws.
The Stretch Code shall be enforced by the building commissioner or any
assistant inspector of buildings.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:105
Chapter 125
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
§ 125-1. Moving of buildings on public ways regulated.
The Selectmen, before granting a written permission to move a building in
any public street or way in the Town shall ascertain if the destruction or
injury of any shade or ornamental tree, shrub, or any fixture of ornament
or utility, standing in a street, way or enclosure adjoining the same, will be
caused thereby, and if in such case, in the opinion of the Selectmen, such
permission should be granted they may require the person applying to give
satisfactory security to any person owning such trees, shrubs, or fixtures
to indemnify him for any damage caused as aforesaid, before giving such
permission.
Chapter 129
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 122. Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
§ 129-1. Assigning numbers for buildings.
All dwelling houses, places of business, and other buildings located on or
near the lines of public ways, or private ways open to the public, in the Town
of Dedham, shall be sequentially numbered from one end of the street to the
other, the buildings on one side bearing even numbers and the buildings on
the opposite side bearing odd numbers.
§ 129-2. Assigning numbers for land.
A number shall be assigned to open and/or unoccupied land fronting on
public or private ways open to the public. A number shall be assigned
for each lot fronting on such street or way as defined and provided in
the Zoning By-Laws of the Town for the particular district in which the
street or way affected is located, and for any lots of lesser frontage upon
which buildings may be erected in accordance with such by-law under any
provision of law applicable thereto.
§ 129-3. Determination of number.
The number shall be determined by the location of the front door of the
building. Such numbering shall be done by and under the supervision of the
Board of Assessors or its designee. In the case of corner lots or other cases
of confusion or conflict, final determination will be made by the Chief of
§ 122-3 DEDHAM CODE § 129-3
1:106
Police, Fire Chief, or their designees. Such determination will be made in
the interest of public safety.
§ 129-4. Current numbering.
Wherever necessary, in the opinion of the Board or their designee, for the
proper implementation of the intent of this chapter, the numbers of the
present buildings will be changed, but otherwise, present numbering shall
remain the same.
§ 129-5. Numbering order.
The Board shall determine from which end of the street the numbering shall
begin.
§ 129-6. Notice of number change.
The Board shall send a written notice of a number change by ordinary
mail, or delivery, to the owners of all property upon determination of the
number to be assigned by them, to any building, premises, or property in
accordance with this chapter. The notice shall inform the owner of assigned
number, whether new or changed.
§ 129-7. Grace period.
No later than 10 days from the mailing or delivery of notice pursuant to
§ 129-6, the owners of the affected property shall post the assigned number
in a conspicuous manner, not on a door, so as to be clearly visible and
legible, both day and night, from both directions of the street or way on
which the property fronts. The number shall not be blocked from view by
any means or object, natural or artificial. The number shall be posted at the
access to the property if the building is not readily visible from the street.
§ 129-8. New buildings.
Any building hereafter erected shall bear the numbers previously assigned
under the provisions of this chapter to the particular lot upon which such
building is erected and shall not thereafter use or display any other number
therefor.
§ 129-9. Violation and penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating this chapter by failing to comply
with the provisions of § 129-7 hereof, after receiving the notice provided for
in § 129-6, or who removes, changes, or defaces such assigned number shall
be, subject to the procedure in § 129-10, be enforced in accordance with the
provisions of § 1-6 of these By-laws.
§ 129-10. Enforcement.
§ 129-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-10
1:107
Chapter 136
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 136-1. Indecent, disorderly conduct prohibited on public ways.
No person shall behave in any indecent or disorderly manner, or use
profane, indecent or insulting language in any public place or on any
sidewalk or street in the Town, to the annoyance or disturbance of any other
person there being or passing in a peaceable manner.
§ 136-2. Defacing, destroying lawful notice prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously deface or tear down any bill, placard
or notice, posted for a lawful purpose except the same be affixed to
premises owned by him or under his control.
§ 136-3. Indecent exposure, graffiti prohibited.
No person shall make any indecent figures or write any indecent or obscene
words upon any fence, building or structure in any public place, or wantonly
expose his naked person to the view of other persons then and there passing
or being in any street or public place, or in or near any dwelling house,
or commit a nuisance upon any sidewalk or against any tree, building or
structure adjoining the same.
§ 136-4. Evading taxi, bus fare prohibited.
No person shall evade the payment of a fare for the engagement of a vehicle
for hire.
§ 136-5. Trespassing, peeping toms prohibited.
No person shall enter upon the premises of another for the purpose of
committing any wanton or malicious act, nor for the purpose or with the
intention of invading the privacy of another by peeping into windows of a
house or spying upon any person or persons resident therein.
A. The Office of the Building Department, Code Enforcement Officer and/
or the Police and Fire Department representatives to the E911 team
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
B. Upon discovery of a violation of the terms of § 129-7, the offender shall
be issued a warning citation; if compliance has not been achieved
within 10 days of said warning, a second and final warning shall be
issued, with the option of requesting a hearing before the Town
Manager. If said hearing has not been requested or compliance
achieved within 10 days of the second warning, all further citations
shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-6 of
these By-laws. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 129-10 DEDHAM CODE § 136-5
1:108
Chapter 141
DRUGS AND DRUG PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 110.
§ 136-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-5
1:109

ARTICLE I
Public Consumption of Marijuana or Tetrahydrocannabinol
[Adopted 5-18-2009 ATM by Art. 31; amended 11-18-2013 STM by
Art. 16]
§ 141-1. Prohibited activities.
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in G.L. c.94C, § 1, as amended) in any
public place, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, public way,
footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation
area, boat landing, public building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery,
parking lot, or any area owned by or under the control of the Town, or
in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common
carrier; or in a motor vehicle while it is in, on, or upon any public way or any
way to which the public has a right of access as aforesaid or in any place
accessible to the public.
§ 141-2. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The fine for violation of this by-law shall be $300 per offense. Any penalty
imposed under this by-law shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed
under G.L. c.94C, § 32L.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-2
1:111
Chapter 146
USE OF TOPSOIL FROM CERTAIN WORK ON TOWN
PROPERTY
§ 146-1. Topsoil reuse or storage. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by
Art. 18]
With respect to any contract entered by the Town which involves the
removal of topsoil from a Town site, provision shall be made for storage
or re-use of said topsoil within the Town. The Director of Public Works or
his designee shall approve or determine the place and manner of any such
storage within the Town. The Director of Public Works, subject to the final
approval by the Town Manager, may waive the re-use or storage of said
topsoil if it is determined that it would not serve the best interests of the
Town.
§ 146-2. Contracts.
The provisions of this section shall be made a part of any contract entered
by the Town which involves the removal of topsoil from a Town site.
Chapter 150
FEES AND FINES
§ 141-2 DEDHAM CODE § 146-2
1:112
ARTICLE I
Charges, Fees, Fines and Penalties
[Adopted as Ch. 29 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 150-1. Principles governing establishment of charges, fees, fines,
and penalties.
§ 150-2. Changes in amounts of fines and penalties. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
From time to time, adjustments to amounts of fines and penalties may be
suggested by Department Heads, Town Officials, Town Boards, or others
to the Town Manager. Upon recommendation of the Town Manager, as
required by statute, by-law or other ordinance, such adjustments shall be
presented to the Annual Town Meeting for its approval.
§ 150-3. Fees. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
Other than as specifically set forth herein, any Town board or officer
empowered to issue a license, permit, certificate, or to render a service
or perform work for a person or class of persons, may, from time to time,
fix reasonable fees for all such licenses, permits, or certificates issued
pursuant to statutes or regulations wherein the entire proceeds of the
fee remain with the Town, and may fix reasonable charges to be paid for
any services rendered or work performed by the Town or any department
thereof, provided, however, that in the case of a board or officer appointed
by an elected board, the fixing of such fee shall be subject to the review and
approval of such elected board, and in the case of any other board or officer,
the fixing of such fee shall be subject to the review and approval of the Town
Manager or the Manager’s designee. No fee shall be imposed or increased
until a public hearing is held with respect thereto and such new or revised
fee is then posted at the office of the Town Clerk for at least two weeks
prior to the effective date thereof. All fees in effect immediately prior to the
effective date of this by-law shall continue to be applicable until revised as
provided hereunder. Fee schedules shall be posted in the office of the Town
Clerk and in the office of the officer or board imposing the fee.
§ 150-4. Authorization to establish and amend regulations.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to establish and from time to
time amend regulations, guidelines or policies for the granting of waivers,
where appropriate, for all local fees of any kind, including but not limited
A. Determination of amounts of charges and fees shall take into
consideration the actual costs to the Town of the service(s) provided.
B. Determination of amounts of fines and penalties shall take into
consideration the actual costs to the Town related to the situation, as
well as a balance between disincentive and excessiveness.
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-4
1:113
to fees established under the previous section and pursuant to G.L. c.40,
§ 22F, to the extent authorized therein, and also including but not limited to
Building Code fees, to the extent authorized under the State Building Code,
Title 780, including but not limited to 780 CMR sections 106.5, 114.0 and
114.3.1, and to grant waivers or delegate the grant of waivers consistent
with such regulations, guidelines and policies.
§ 150-4 DEDHAM CODE § 150-4
1:114
ARTICLE II
Fire and Police Details
[Adopted as Ch. 35 of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 150-5. Timely payment; interest.
Fees for fire and police details must be paid within 45 days after the
issuance of a bill. In the event that such charges remain unpaid after the
expiration of the 45 days, interest will accrue at a rate equivalent to that
assessed for unpaid taxes pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.59, § 57 as
said provisions may from time to time be amended.
§ 150-6. Board of Selectmen payment policy.
The Board of Selectmen may develop a policy assuring timely payment of
such fees, including but not limited to the requirement of a deposit or
escrow of funds sufficient to cover such obligations.
§ 150-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-6
1:115
Chapter 154
FIREWORKS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 192.
Parks and public places — See Ch. 199.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
§ 154-1. Firecrackers, discharge of firearms prohibited.
No person shall at any time fire India crackers, torpedoes, or other
explosive articles, or discharge any firearms, cannon or swivel in any street
or way, or near any dwelling house, except in performance of some legal
duty.
§ 154-2. Discharge of firearms regulated.
No person shall fire or discharge any gun, fowling-piece, or firearm within
200 feet of any street in the Town of Dedham or on any private grounds,
except with the consent of the owner thereof; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to the use of such weapons at any military exercise
or in the lawful defense of the person, family, or property of any citizen.
§ 154-3. Possession of toy pistols on public ways prohibited.
No person shall have in possession any toy pistol, cap pistol or device for
throwing missiles of any kind, with intent to use the same to the injury of
persons or property, nor display such so as to disturb the peace or endanger
the public health, safety or welfare upon any public way of the Town.
§ 154-4. Sale of imitation handguns regulated.
No firm or business shall sell or offer for sale, possess or use or attempt to
use or give away, any toy or imitation pistol or revolver which substantially
duplicates an actual pistol or revolver, unless said imitation or toy pistol
or revolver shall be colored in colors other than black, silver, blue or
aluminum, and further provided that the barrel of said toy or imitation shall
be closed with the same material of which imitation is made. It shall not be
a violation of this section to possess an imitation pistol or revolver for use
in a theatrical or television production.
§ 150-6 DEDHAM CODE § 154-4
1:116
Chapter 160
GARBAGE, REFUSE AND WASTE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 102.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 125.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
§ 160-1. Placing trash, chemicals upon public way prohibited.
§ 160-2. Trash collectors to be licensed; no land to be filled with
rubble.
§ 160-3. Leakage of liquids during transport on public ways
prohibited.
No person shall transport any liquid, substance or material of any kind in
any vehicle on any street within the Town in such a manner that such liquid,
A. No person shall throw, deposit, sweep or abandon upon any public way
or any property owned by or under the control of the Town any ashes,
dirt, rubbish, filth, refuse, chemicals or waste matter of any kind, nor
any animal or vegetable substance nor any noxious matter. No person
shall willfully tip over or upset the contents of any box or barrel
containing ashes, house dirt, or rubbish of any kind upon any public
way. Any violation of this paragraph shall be punishable by a fine of
$300.
B. No person shall rake leaves or other yard materials into any street or
way of the Town of Dedham, or cause such leaves or any other yard
materials to be placed in any such street or way. Any violation of this
paragraph shall be punishable by a fine of $50.
A. No person, unless properly licensed or pursuant to a contract with the
Town for rubbish removal, shall carry for hire in any vehicle through
any public street or way within the limits of Dedham, any ashes,
wastepaper, rubbish, house dirt, or other refuse material from dwelling
houses or other buildings. The fee for each license shall be as
determined by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the
provisions of § 150-3 and the duration thereof shall not exceed one year
from the date thereof, subject to revocation by the licensing authority at
any time.
B. The place of deposit of any material transported under such license
shall be designated by the Board of Health. No person shall fill any land
in the Town of Dedham with rubble or debris taken from demolished
buildings, whether or not said buildings have been demolished in
Dedham or elsewhere.
§ 154-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-3
1:117
substance or material leaks, overflows or falls from such vehicle onto such
streets.
§ 160-4. Dumpsters regulated.
All dumpsters placed within the Town of Dedham must be approved for
sanitary purposes by the Board of Health, and for location, construction
and fire rating of proper screening by the Inspector of Buildings. Screening
shall consist of a six-foot fence or other approved barrier surrounding the
dumpster(s). All dumpsters placed in the Town of Dedham shall require
a permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings, the fee for which shall
be determined by said Inspector in accordance with § 150-3. Dumpsters
placed within the Town for construction purposes shall not be affected
by this section. However, persons requiring construction site dumpsters
shall apply for a permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings for a period
not to exceed six months. This permit may be renewed upon payment of
the appropriate fee. The requirements of this section shall not apply to
dumpsters placed throughout the Town for the benefit of paper recycling
efforts so long as said dumpsters are located on municipal or nonprofit
institutional properties.
§ 160-5. Restaurant sewage disposal regulated.
Any restaurant or dining room to be constructed or altered, seating 50
persons or more, that is connected to a public sewer or sanitary disposal
works system, shall be required to install an outside grease trap as provided
in the State Sanitary Code, G.L. c.21A, § 13 and its implementing
regulations, 310 CMR 15.230, and no such restaurant or dining room shall
discharge into the public sewer system garbage in any form.
Chapter 168
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
§ 168-1. Name.
This chapter shall be known, and may be referred to, as the "Dedham
Historic Districts By-Laws".
§ 168-2. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter shall be to promote the educational,
cultural, economic, and general welfare of the public through the
preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings
and places significant in the history of Dedham or its architecture, through
the maintenance and improvement of the appearance and settings of such
buildings and places, and the encouragement of design and construction
compatible therewith.
§ 168-3. Historic Districts Commission.
§ 160-3 DEDHAM CODE § 168-3
1:118
§ 168-4. Commission powers.
A. There is hereby established under Chapter 40C of the General Laws
(the "Historic Districts Act" so-called), as amended by Chapter 359 of
the Acts of 1971, a Dedham Historic Districts Commission, with all the
powers and duties legally assigned thereunto.
B. Said Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Dedham Board of Selectmen, to be selected as follows:
(1) One member shall be selected, if possible, from two nominees
whose names are submitted by the Dedham Historical Society.
(2) One member shall be selected, if possible, from two nominees
whose names are submitted by the local Board of Realtors covering
the Town of Dedham.
(3) One member shall be selected, if possible, from two nominees
whose names are submitted by the Chapter of American Institute of
Architects covering the Town of Dedham.
(4) One member shall be selected, if possible, from two nominees
whose names are submitted by the Bar Association covering the
Town of Dedham.
(5) The remaining positions on the Commission (including vacancies
resulting from the failure of any of the organizations noted above to
submit names of nominees within 30 days of such request by the
Board of Selectmen) shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen at
their discretion.
(6) At any given time, three of the appointees serving upon the
Dedham Historic Districts Commission shall be property owners
within an Historic District in Dedham, established pursuant to the
Historic Districts Act.
C. When the Commission is first established, two members shall be
appointed for terms of one year, two shall be appointed for terms of two
years, and three shall be appointed for terms of three years. A
successor to a member shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in
the same manner as such member was appointed, except that his term
shall be for three years.
D. If an unscheduled vacancy occurs on the Commission, it shall be filled
for the unexpired term by the Board of Selectmen in the same manner
as the vacating member was appointed.
E. Each member shall serve without compensation and shall continue in
office after the expiration of his allotted term, until such time as his
successor is appointed.
A. The Historic Districts Commission established hereunder shall have all
of the powers and duties of an historic commission as delineated by the
§ 168-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-4
1:119
§ 168-5. Historic districts.
There are hereby established under the provisions of Chapter 40C of the
General Laws, as amended, the following Historic Districts:
Historic District Act, as amended, and said Commission may, in the
exercise of said powers and duties, accept money gifts and expend the
same, and, subject to appropriation or receipt of such gifts, contract
for and employ such clerical assistance or technical consultants or
assistance as the Commission may, at its discretion, find suitable.
B. The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations for the conduct
of its business as are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Historic
District Act, the General Laws, or other by-laws of the Town of Dedham.
C. The Commission may, pursuant to a vote of the Town, administer for the
Town of Dedham any designated properties or lesser interest which the
Town may own or acquire as gifts.
D. The Commission may carry out such other duties, authorities and
powers as may be delegated or assigned unto it by vote of Town
Meeting.
E. The Commission shall be empowered to propose, in accordance with
the provisions of the Historic District Act, such additional districts or
additions to existing districts as they may deem suitable, and, to that
end, said Commission may conduct such surveys, investigations and
dealings with the Massachusetts Historical Commission, the National
Register, the National Park Service, the National Trust for Historic
Preservation, the Society for the Preservation of New England
Antiquities or any similar governmental or private organization, as may
be deemed advisable.
A. The "Franklin Square-Court Street" District, also known as the Dedham
Village Historic District, delineated and bounded as shown on three
maps, entitled respectively "Dedham Historic District Study
Committee-Area One" drawn by David G. Dethlefs, Registered Architect
and "Area One — Franklin Square — Court Street Historic District,
including Village Avenue Cemetery Parcel" prepared by Vollmer
Associates LLP dated November 15, 2006, and "Historic Districts,
Revised March 2007, Town of Dedham, Norfolk County,
Massachusetts," prepared by the Town of Dedham Engineering
Department, including the areas identified as "Proposed," all of which
maps are on file with the office of the Town Clerk, Dedham,
Massachusetts,
B. The "Connecticut Corner" District, delineated and bounded as shown on
a map entitled "Dedham Historic District Study Committee — Area
Two" drawn by David G. Dethlefs, Registered Architect, and on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, Dedham, Mass.
§ 168-4 DEDHAM CODE § 168-5
1:120
Chapter 183
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fingerprint-based criminal record
background checks — See Ch. 42.
Amusements — See Ch. 114.
Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 204.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 225.
§ 168-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:121

ARTICLE I
Denial or Revocation for Nonpayment of Taxes
[Adopted as Ch. 16 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 183-1. Legislative authority.
This By-law is adopted pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.40, § 57.
§ 183-2. List of delinquent taxpayers. [Amended 5-15-2017 ATM by
Art. 34]
The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges,
hereinafter referred to as the tax collector, shall annually, and may
periodically, furnish to each department, board, commission or division,
hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or
permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation,
or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or other municipal charges for not less than a three-month period, and that
such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement
of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
§ 183-3. Denial, revocation or suspension of licenses or permits.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector or with
respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such
license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or
exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned
by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing
authority from the tax collector; provided, however, that written notice is
given to the party and the tax collector, as required by applicable provisions
of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than 14
days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial,
revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The tax
collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with
respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made
by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation
or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceedings
and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law,
except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension.
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section
shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a
certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with
respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other
municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of
said certificate.
§ 183-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-4
1:123
§ 183-4. Payment agreement; failure to comply.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 183-5. Waivers.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in section one of chapter 268A in the business or activity conducted
in or on said property.
§ 183-6. Exceptions.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open
burning; Section 13 of Chapter 48; bicycle permits; Section 11A of Chapter
85; sales of articles for charitable purposes, Section 33 of Chapter 101;
children work permits, Section 69 of Chapter 149; clubs, associations
dispensing food or beverage licenses, Section 21E of Chapter 140; dog
licenses, Section 137 of Chapter 140; fishing, hunting, trapping license,
Section 12 of Chapter 131; marriage licenses, Section 28 of Chapter 207
and theatrical events, public exhibition permits, Section 181 of Chapter
140.
§ 183-4 DEDHAM CODE § 183-6
1:124
Chapter 188
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 188-1. Marijuana-related businesses prohibited.
Consistent with G.L. c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of non-medical "marijuana
establishments" as defined in G.L. c. 94G, § 1, including marijuana
cultivators, independent testing laboratories, marijuana product
manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed
marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited within the Town of
Dedham.
Chapter 192
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 117.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 125.
Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 204.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 192-1. Definitions.
As used in this by-law, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound from a source regulated by this by-law
that can be detected above routine or normal ambient background noise by
unaided human hearing.
SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM — Any fixed or portable system to
operate or amplify sound, including, but not limited to, phonograph, radio,
television, stereo, record player, tape player, cassette player, compact disk
player, digital music player, "boom box," or loud speaker.
§ 192-2. Prohibited noise.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cause or allow any
noise which emanates from any building, boat, structure, vehicle,
premises, or any sound amplification system, which is plainly audible at
a distance of 150 feet from the property line of the lot on which any
such building, boat, structure, vehicle, premises or amplification
system is located. The fact that the noise is plainly audible at a distance
of 150 feet from said property line of any building, structure, vehicle,
boat, premises or amplification system from which it originates shall
constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. Each such
act, which constitutes a violation of this section, which either continues
or is reported more than 30 minutes after the issuance of a warning or
§ 183-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-2
1:125
§ 192-3. Procedure upon violation.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of this Town to order any person
or persons so acting as to violate the provisions of this by-law to cease any
prohibited activities which are specified in this by-law, and if the person or
persons so ordered does not forthwith obey, the officer may enforce this bylaw
in accordance with the provisions set forth in § 1-6 of these By-laws,
provided however that for purposes of non-criminal disposition, the initial
violation shall be subject to a fine of $100, and any subsequent violations
shall be subject to a fine of $300.
citation to cease said activities, shall be considered a separate offense
and shall be prosecuted as a separate offense.
B. For the purposes of this by-law, noises which disturb the reasonable
quiet, comfort, repose, or health of others shall include but not be
limited to the sound of construction or demolition equipment, loading or
unloading activities, use of power tools and equipment, use of lawn or
landscaping equipment, loud outcries, and other loud or boisterous
noises which are not specifically exempted by § 192-6 and which are
plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the property line of the lot
on which their source is located between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
Mondays through Fridays and 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 am. on Saturdays and
Sundays, except as otherwise indicated, as outlined in § 192-2(B).
(1) In no event shall construction activity of any kind commence before
7:00 a.m. or continue beyond 9:00 p.m. except in compliance with
the conditions of a valid permit issued by the Chief of Police
pursuant to G.L. c.136, §§ 7 or 15.
C. For the purposes of this by-law, noises which disturb the reasonable
quiet, comfort, repose, or health of others shall include but not be
limited to noises produced by the prolonged unattended sounding of
automobile burglar alarms for periods longer than 15 minutes,
construction and demolition equipment which characteristically emits
sound but which may be fitted and accommodated with equipment such
as enclosures to suppress sound or may be operated in a manner so as
to suppress sound, suppressible and preventable industrial and
commercial sources of sound and other man-made sounds which are
plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the property line on which
their source is located at any hour of the day or night.
A. If the person or persons responsible for violation(s) of this by-law
cannot be determined, then the person in lawful custody and/or control
of the premises where the violation(s) occurred, including but not
limited to the owner, lessee, manager, or occupant of the property, may
be deemed responsible for the violation(s).
B. The Town may enforce this by-law or enjoin violations thereof through
any lawful process, and the election of one remedy by the Town shall
not preclude enforcement through any other lawful means.
§ 192-2 DEDHAM CODE § 192-4
1:126
§ 192-4. Exemptions.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level
regulations:
A. Any law enforcement motor vehicle equipped with any communication
or signaling device necessary in the performance of law enforcement
duties.
B. Any fire apparatus, ambulance, rescue, public works or emergency
response vehicle in performance of their public safety responsibilities.
C. Any emergency vehicle equipped with any communication device
necessary in the performance of any emergency procedures.
D. Any highway maintenance, water department, or public utilities vehicle
utilizing an amplified communications system in the performance of
their responsibilities.
E. Announcing systems at sanctioned sporting or other authorized public
events.
F. Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief
valves during public emergencies.
G. Noises resulting from any authorized vehicle(s) responding to an
emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
H. Noises resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by
law and/or for which a license or permit has been granted by the Town.
I. Parades, music festivals, public gatherings, and events for which the
Selectmen have issued a permit provided that such parades, music
festivals, public gatherings and events in one city or town do not cause
or allow any noise to be plainly audible in another city or town.
J. Bells, chimes or carillons, or their amplified, recorded, or other
electronic substitution while being used for religious purposes, in
conjunction with religious services or to denote time intervals between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
K. Snow removal from public or private parking lots, drives, roadways,
driveways, sidewalks, and other vehicle- or pedestrian-traveled
surfaces.
L. Noises resulting from activities of a temporary duration being
conducted by a public utility company to repair/maintain public utility
infrastructure.
M. Noises for which the Board of Selectmen has granted a special permit.
N. Construction activity under a valid permit issued by the Chief of Police
pursuant to G.L. c.136, §§ 7 or 15.
§ 192-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-4
1:127
§ 192-5. Application for special permit.
§ 192-6. Severability clause.
If any part of this by-law is deemed to be contrary to state or federal law by
the Attorney General, that part can be severed without affecting any other
part of this by-law.
Chapter 195
NUISANCES
§ 195-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the Town's Home Rule powers under the Massachusetts
Constitution, and the specific powers granted by M.G.L. c.139, §§ 1-3A, this
by-law is adopted for the prevention of future nuisances and the removal
of existing nuisances within the Town that constitute a hazard or blight, or
adversely affect property values.
§ 195-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLIGHT — Any condition that seriously impairs the value, condition,
strength, durability, or appearance of real property, whether occupied or
vacant.
O. Police, fire, and civil, state and national defense official activities.
P. Noise associated with loading/unloading activities in designated
loading zones during approved hours as established by the Board of
Selectman, so long as conducted in a manner so as to suppress sounds
to as great an extent as is feasible, consistent with § 192-2(C). hereof.
A. Application for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this
by-law on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the Board of
Selectmen.
B. Any permit granted by the Selectmen shall set forth all conditions
pertaining to the specified noise and a reasonable time limit for its
abatement.
C. The holders of licenses to provide alcoholic beverages and/or
entertainment shall comply with any noise allowances and/or
restrictions imposed upon such licenses, and in the case of a conflict
between individual license allowances or restrictions and this by-law,
the terms of the license shall apply, and a violation of any such
allowances or restrictions shall also constitute a violation of this by-law.
§ 192-4 DEDHAM CODE § 195-2
1:128
DILAPIDATED — A condition of decay or partial ruin by reason of neglect,
misuse, or deterioration. The term includes, but is not limited to: property
with deteriorated roofs, foundations, or floors; broken or inadequately
secured windows or doors; and personal property that is broken, rusted,
worn, partially or wholly dismantled or otherwise due to deterioration is
unsuitable for the purpose for which designed.
NUISANCE — Any substantial interference with the common interest of
the general public in maintaining decent, safe, non-dilapidated and sanitary
Structures and neighborhoods, when such interference results from the
hazardous or Blighted condition of private property, land, or buildings. Any
substantial interference with any public place, street or private way to
include the placement of snow, ice, and any other debris that interferes with
safe passage on any public roadway or sidewalk. The fact that a particular
Structure or use may be permitted under the Zoning Bylaw does not create
an exemption from the application of this bylaw. The term includes but is
not limited to:
OCCUPANT — A person who occupies real property with the consent of the
owner as a lessee, tenant at will, licensee, or otherwise.
OWNER — Every person who alone or jointly or severally with others:
A. Burned structures not otherwise lawfully habitable or usable;
B. Dangerous or unsafe Structures or personal property;
C. Dilapidated Structures or property;
Overgrown vegetation which may harbor rats and vermin, conceal pools
of stagnant water or other threats to the public health, or which is
otherwise detrimental to neighboring properties or property values;
D.
E. Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, debris or trash;
Signs that block or obscure the line of sight for vehicular and/or
pedestrian traffic;
F.
Personal property that is exposed to the elements without protection
against deterioration, rust, or Dilapidation;
G.
Vehicles, machinery, or mechanical equipment or parts thereof that are
located on soil, grass, or other porous surfaces that may result in the
destruction of vegetation or contamination of soil.
H.
Has legal title to any building, Structure, or property subject to this
Bylaw; or
A.
Has care, custody, or control of any such building, Structure or property
in any capacity including but not limited to agent, executrix,
administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal
title; or
B.
C. Is a mortgagee in possession of such property; or
§ 195-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-2
1:129
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials, whether wholly or partially
level with, above, or below the surface of the ground, whether permanent
or temporary, assembled at a fixed location to give support, shelter, or
enclosure such as a building, framework, retaining wall, stand, platform,
bin, fence of a height at any point of six feet or greater above grade, parking
area sign, flagpole, mast for an antenna, or the like.
§ 195-3. Nuisances prohibited.
All property in the Town of Dedham, whether occupied or vacant, shall be
maintained in good repair and in a safe and sanitary condition. No owner,
or in the case of real property, Occupant, of property shall create, permit,
or maintain a condition or activity on their property that creates Blight or a
Nuisance as those terms are defined herein.
§ 195-4. Administration and enforcement.
Is an agent, trustee, or other person appointed by the courts and vested
with control of such property; or
D.
Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a
condominium.
E.
A. This bylaw may be enforced in accordance with Section 1-6 of the
General Bylaws, and the election of one remedy shall not preclude
enforcement through any other lawful means. Nothing herein shall
preclude the enforcing person from providing a warning or seeking to
resolve any violation informally.
B. Except in the case of an emergency posing an immediate threat to the
public health and safety or as otherwise provided herein, the enforcing
person shall seek to provide immediate notice in writing to the Owner
and Occupant of a property being maintained in violation of this Bylaw,
outlining such violation in general terms and providing a reasonable
deadline for taking corrective action ("Enforcement Order"). The
enforcing person may, if the Owner or Occupant fails to comply with
such Enforcement Order, seek to enforce such order as set forth herein.
C. If the Owner or Occupant fails to timely remedy the violation in
accordance with an Enforcement Order, the Town may cause the
Nuisance to be removed in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c.
139, §§ 1-3A or otherwise in accordance with a court order for such
purposes.
D. Persons who own or occupy property directly or diagonally across the
street, or who are abutters to abutters within 300 feet of the property
line, of a property being maintained in violation of this Bylaw may
submit a complaint to the enforcement person, and, if so submitted,
shall be provided with copies of any notices or written orders provided
to the Owner or Occupant of such property and of any pleadings filed in
court with respect thereto.
§ 195-2 DEDHAM CODE § 195-4
1:130
§ 195-5. Interaction with other laws.
This Bylaw is intended to further the objectives of and to act in concert
with any existing federal, state, or local laws concerning the maintenance
of property and the abatement of Nuisances, and nothing herein shall
be deemed to limit or restrict Town officials whatsoever from acting in
accordance with such laws.
§ 195-6. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause
of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section, provision, paragraph,
sentence, or clause thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or
determination that previously has been issued.
Chapter 199
PARKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 102.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 110, Art. I.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 136.
Garbage, refuse and waste materials — See
Ch. 160.
Noise — See Ch. 192.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
§ 199-1. Loitering on stoops, walls prohibited.
No person shall be or remain upon any doorstep, portico, or other projection
from any house or building or upon any wall or fence on or near any street
or public place after being requested by any occupant of the premises or by
any constable or police officer to remove therefrom.
§ 199-2. Sledding on public ways and places regulated.
No person shall coast upon any sled or sleds upon any sidewalk or any street
or public place except upon such streets or places as the Selectmen may by
public notice designate for such purposes.
E. The Building Inspector or other official specified by the Town Manager
shall file with the Town Manager every six months, or at such other
longer interval as the Town Manager shall require, a report that shall
include all complaints of Nuisance or enforcement actions initiated
under this bylaw during that period. Said report shall include the
location of the premises at issue, summary of the nature of the
complaint, the name(s) of the Owner and Occupant, and any action
taken.
§ 195-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-3
1:131
§ 199-3. Dangerous conduct on public ways prohibited.
No person shall kick a football, play ball, play at any game at which a
ball of any kind is used, fly kites or throw snowballs in any manner so as
to endanger the public health, safety or welfare on any public way of the
Town, nor shall any person throw stones, sticks or other dangerous missiles,
or shoot with bows and arrows or any air gun, or willfully frighten any
domestic animals on any public way of the Town.
§ 199-4. Parades, performances in public ways regulated.
No person shall play or perform on any musical instrument, or sing, parade
or march in any public way or public place, except in connection with a
funeral, without the written permit of the Selectmen.
§ 199-5. Bonfires in public ways regulated.
No person shall make a bonfire in any public way or public place without
first having obtained in writing the permission of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
§ 199-6. Fires, transport of inflammable materials on public ways
prohibited.
No person shall set fire to or burn, or cause to be moved through any way
or street of the Town, any waste material, paper, wood or any inflammable
substance on any wagon, cart, buggy, push-cart or on any vehicle, with the
intention of setting fire to or burning same on any way or street of the Town.
§ 199-7. Willful destruction of public property prohibited.
No person shall willfully deface or injure any public playground, planting
space, flower bed, grass, border, guidepost or guideboard, official sign,
post, or signaling device for the direction of traffic, lamp-post or lamp
or lantern, or any building, fence, or monument, or other thing situated,
erected or made for the use or ornament of the Town.
§ 199-8. Climbing trees in public ways and places regulated.
No person except an employee or sub-contractor of the Town or an
employee of a utility company shall climb any tree on any public way or in
any public place in the Town without having first obtained permission so to
do from the Chief of Police.
§ 199-9. Tampering with public drinking fountain prohibited.
No person shall place on or in any drinking fountain, trough or basin of
water set up or established in any public way or other public place for
the use of man or beast, any dirt, stone, ashes, rubbish, or other material;
nor shall any person unnecessarily waste or use the water in such drinking
fountain, trough or basin.
§ 199-3 DEDHAM CODE § 199-10
1:132
§ 199-10. Riding horse on sidewalk prohibited.
No person shall ride a horse upon any sidewalk of the Town.
§ 199-11. Obstruction of passage on public ways prohibited.
No person shall place or cause to be placed in any public way of the Town
any vehicle or anything whatsoever so as to obstruct a free passage of
travelers. No person shall allow any property for which he is responsible
to remain in any public way more than 24 hours after being notified by a
Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer to remove it, except that nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prevent the use of the streets and
sidewalks for building purposes upon obtaining a permit as provided in
applicable laws of the "Building Code".
§ 199-12. Throwing snow on cleared way prohibited.
No person shall lay, throw, or place, or cause to be laid, thrown or placed,
any ice or snow on that portion of any street within the Town which has
been cleared or ploughed for travel.
§ 199-13. Trespass upon parks after hours prohibited.
§ 199-14. Strings of lights.
Outdoor strings or series of lights, accessory to any commercial use,
comprising no message and not permanently mounted on a structure, are
prohibited; provided, however, that such lights may be permitted by the
Building Commissioner up to three times per year for periods of not more
than 30 consecutive days as part of a temporary holiday decoration.
§ 199-15. Regulation of news boxes.
For the purposes of this section, 'news box' shall mean a vending machine
used for the sale and/or distribution of newspapers or similar printed
material. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit or interfere with
the dissemination of information protected under the United States or
State constitutions, but simply to ensure that the location of news boxes
A. No person shall trespass upon any park, playground, reservation or
other area under the control of the Parks and Recreation Commission
between the hours set by the Commission.
B. No person shall trespass upon properties of the Parks and Recreation
Commission known as Memorial Park. Condon Park, Fairbanks Park,
Paul Park, or Churchill Park between sunset and sunrise; if, on any
given evening, an activity, sanctioned by the Commission is in progress
under the lights at Memorial or Condon Park, the presence of any
individual on the property will constitute trespass beginning 15 minutes
after "lights out." Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine
of $100.
§ 199-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-15
1:133
protects the public safety of the Town of Dedham; supports pedestrian and
driving safety and convenience; provides reasonable access for the use
and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signals, hydrants, and mailboxes;
avoids visual blight; and maintains community aesthetics and the values of
surrounding properties.
A. No person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, trust, or other
type of entity shall place, install, use, or maintain any news box on any
public property or public way without obtaining a written permit
therefore from the Board of Selectmen.
(1) The application for the permit shall fully and specifically describe
the news box by setting forth its size by height, depth, and width or
any other relevant dimensions if varying in height, depth and
width, the name and business address of the applicant, the exact
date or dates said news box will be in place or operation, the exact
place where said news box will be located, the manner by which
said news box shall be affixed or held in place, and the description
of any object to which said news box shall be affixed. Further
reasonable information which may affect the public safety, health,
or order in the community may be requested from the applicant. An
annual application fee, the amount of which will be determined
upon passage of this By-law and annually thereafter by the Board of
Selectmen, which fee will be reasonably related to the costs of
processing said application, shall be paid for each news box
licensed.
(2) Within 20 days of receipt of such completed application, the Board
of Selectmen shall grant a permit or shall order a hearing within an
additional 10 days, giving at least five days written notice to the
applicant.
(3) Within 10 days next following the close of the hearing, the Board of
Selectmen shall grant such permit if the proposed news box will
meet the conditions of this by-law and other applicable laws or shall
deny such application upon a finding that the proposed news box
would violate one or more conditions of this by-law or other
applicable laws. Failure to act upon an application within 40 days
shall constitute constructive grant of a permit.
(4) Notice of the denial of an application for permit shall be in writing
and accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefore. The
Board of Selectmen may impose conditions upon the permit but
said conditions may only relate to compliance with applicable laws
or to public safety, health or order, or to steps required to be taken
to guard against creation of a nuisance or to insure adequate safety
and security for the public. Subject to rights of appeal provided by
law, no applicant having been denied a permit as aforesaid shall
submit the same or similar application within one year of said
denial without including in said new application facts showing that
§ 199-15 DEDHAM CODE § 199-15
1:134
the circumstances upon which the original denial was based have
substantially changed.
B. Location.
(1) News boxes located within a public way must be placed parallel to
the curb and not more than six inches from the wall of the building.
(2) No news box shall be located within 100 feet of any school bus stop.
(3) No news box shall be located within three feet ahead or 15 feet to
the rear of any designated commercial or public bus stop (other
than a school bus stop), taxi stand or place marked for handicapped
parking.
(4) No news box shall be located within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or
within 10 feet of any fire or police alarm box or other emergency
facility.
(5) No news box shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to
property owned or maintained by the Town of Dedham.
(6) No news box shall be located within five feet of any driveway, public
or private;
(7) No news box shall be located within three feet of any crosswalk.
(8) No news box shall be located so as to interfere with any bus bench
or shelter.
(9) No news box shall be placed at any location whereby the clear
space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than
four feet.
(10)No news box shall be located on a public way on which parking is
prohibited.
C. No news box shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that which is essential to identify on no more than two sides
of the news box the printed matter offered for sale therein. No letter
thereon shall exceed two square inches in size.
D. Each news box shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in
good repair at all times, and it shall be of one color that does not
unnecessarily contrast with the immediate surroundings except that
the lettering may contrast with such one color. No reflectorized paint,
day-glo, fluorescent, or scotchlite reflective materials or materials of
like nature may be used on such news box.
E. The owner who places or maintains such news box shall have his name
or Massachusetts agent's name, address, and telephone number affixed
thereto in a place where such information may easily be seen.
§ 199-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-15
1:135
Chapter 204
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fingerprint-based criminal record
background checks — See Ch. 42.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 183.
Noise — See Ch. 192.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 225.
F. All persons who have placed or intend to place news boxes in the Town
of Dedham shall within 30 days from passage of the within by-law by the
Town Meeting and approval by the Attorney General, or such additional
time as the Board of Selectmen may allow in their discretion, comply
with the said provisions.
G. Any violation of this by-law or any permit granted hereunder shall be
subject to a fine of $200. Any such violation shall be cause for
cancellation, suspension, revocation or modification, after hearing,
upon three days written notice, sent registered or certified mail, to the
name and address set forth in the permit application or the name and
address affixed to said news box. If, after hearing, the applicant fails to
comply with the order of the Board of Selectmen, said Selectmen may
order the removal of said news box and place it in storage in a secure
place. The cost of removal and storage shall be paid by the permit
holder.
H. Any news box which remains empty and unused as a news box for more
than 60 days shall be removed by the owner thereof or person who
places or maintains such news box upon written notice by addressing
the same to the name and address set forth in the permit or affixed to
said news box. If said news box is not removed within 10 days of said
notice, the Town may remove same. If no name and address is available
on an application for a permit or affixed to a news box which has
remained empty and unused as a news box for more than 60 days, the
Town may post notice on said news box and remove same after 10 days
from the posting of said notice.
I. Any news box which has been removed pursuant to this by-law and not
claimed within 60 days thereof may be disposed of by the Town.
§ 199-15 DEDHAM CODE § 199-15
1:136
ARTICLE I
Door-to-Door Solicitation and Canvassing
[Adopted 11-15-2010 STM by Art. 10 (Ch. 13, Sec. 32, of the 1996
By-laws); amended 11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 204-1. Purpose.
This article, adopted pursuant to G.L. c.43B, § 13 and Article 89 of the
Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
establishes registration requirements and specific operation requirements
for persons intending to engage in door-to-door canvassing or solicitation
in the Town of Dedham in order to protect its citizens from disruption of
the peaceful enjoyment of their residences and from the perpetration of
fraud or other crimes; and, to allow for reasonable access to residents in
their homes by persons or organizations who wish to communicate either
commercial or non-commercial messages.
§ 204-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this By-law, the following definitions shall apply:
CANVASSING — Includes any one or more of the following door-to-door
activities:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION, PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR AND
COMMERCIAL COVENTURER — Shall be defined as set forth in G.L. c.68,
§ 18.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR — Any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration from the Town as required by this By-law.
RESIDENCE — Includes every individual dwelling unit occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons.
SOLICITING — Includes any one or more of the following door-to-door
activities:
Person-to-person distribution of literature, periodicals, or other printed
materials for commercial purposes, but shall not include placing or
dropping off printed materials on the premises.
A.
Seeking to enlist membership in any organization for commercial
purposes;
B.
Seeking to present, in person, organizational information for
commercial purposes.
C.
Selling, or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods or
services, including advertising in any type of publication, for any kind
of consideration whatsoever;
A.
Selling, or seeking to obtain prospective customers for application for
purchase of insurance of any kind;
B.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-2
1:137
§ 204-3. Registration.
Every person or organization intending to engage in soliciting or canvassing
door-to-door in the Town of Dedham must apply for a permit with the
Chief of Police at least 14 business days in advance by filing a registration
application form with the Chief of Police.
Selling, or seeking to sell subscriptions to books, magazines,
periodicals, newspapers or any other type of publication;
C.
Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, or any valuable thing
for the support or benefit of any association, organization, corporation
or project wholly or in part for commercial purposes or by a
professional solicitor or commercial co-venturer for a charitable or
other non-commercial organization;
D.
Seeking to obtain information on the background, occupation,
economic status, political affiliation, attitudes, viewpoints, or the like of
the occupants of a residence for the purpose of selling or using such
data, wholly, or in part, for commercial purposes.
E.
A. Organization application forms shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the organization applying for registration,
and the names and addresses of the organizations' principal
officers.
(a) If the organization is a charitable organization, a copy of the
Annual Registration Statement filed with the Attorney
General's Division of Public Charities must be provided with
this application. Failure to include a copy of the Annual
Registration Statement under such circumstances will render
the application incomplete and no action will be taken thereon.
(b) If the organization is a professional solicitor or a commercial
coventurer for a charitable organization, a copy of the contract
with the charitable organization must be provided with this
application. Failure to include a copy of the contract with the
charitable organization under such circumstances will render
the application incomplete and no action will be taken thereon.
(2) The name, title and phone number, IRS or Social Security (optional)
number and photo identification of the persons filing the
application form.
(3) The names and addresses of the person(s), if any, who will be
directly supervising the solicitation or canvassing operation in the
Town of Dedham.
(4) A list of the names, addresses, dates of birth of all individuals who
will be employed in solicitation or canvassing by the applicant.
§ 204-2 DEDHAM CODE § 204-3
1:138
(5) Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed (note:
no certificate may be granted for longer than a ninety-day period).
(6) Names of the last three communities (if any) in which the
organization has conducted a solicitation or canvassing operation,
complete with the date issued and date expired.
(7) Insurance information and license, if applicable.
B. Individual registration forms shall be required for all individuals,
including those who are affiliated with an organization registered under
Subsection A hereof. Individual registration forms shall contain the
following information:
(1) Name and address of the present place of residence and length of
residence at that address; if less than three years residence at
present address, the address of residence(s) during the past three
years.
(2) Date of birth.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
whom the applicant represents and the length of time the applicant
has been associated with or employed by that person or
organization. If the individual is a professional solicitor or a
commercial co-venturer for a charitable organization, a copy of the
contract, if any, with the charitable organization must be provided
with this application. Failure to include a copy of the contract with
the charitable organization under such circumstances will render
the application incomplete and no action will be taken thereon.
(4) Name and address of employer during the past three years if other
than listed in Subsection A hereof.
(5) Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed (note:
no certificate may be granted for longer than a ninety-day period).
(6) Name of the last three communities (if any) in which the applicant
has solicited or canvassed door-to-door, complete with the date of
issue and expiration date.
(7) Social Security number. (Optional).
(8) Photo identification and recent passport-sized photograph of the
applicant to be affixed to registration card.
(9) Make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be used by
the applicant while soliciting or canvassing.
§ 204-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-4
1:139
§ 204-4. Registration fee.
The fee for registration or re-registration, and for the registration card shall
be established by the Police Chief in accordance with the provisions of
§ 150-3 of these By-laws.
§ 204-5. Registration cards.
§ 204-6. Exceptions.
A. The Police Chief, after a review, but in no event more than 14 business
days after receipt of a fully-completed application, shall furnish each
person with a registration card which shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name of the person.
(2) A recent photograph of the person.
(3) The name of the organization (if any) which the person represents.
(4) A statement that the individual has been registered with the Town
of Dedham Police Department but that registration is not an
endorsement of any individual or organization.
(5) Specific dates or period of time covered by the registration.
B. Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing as defined in this by-law
must carry the registration card at all times and present the card to any
person solicited or upon the request of any police officer.
C. Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or time period
specified thereon and in no case for longer than 90 days.
D. The Police Chief shall refuse to register an organization or individual
whose registration has been revoked for violation of this by-law within
the previous two-year period, or who has been convicted of murder/
manslaughter, rape, robbery, arson, burglary/breaking and entering,
assault, larceny, as such persons pose a substantial degree of
dangerousness to minors and other persons vulnerable to becoming
victims of the violent crimes so listed. The Police Chief shall also refuse
to register a person who is a sex offender required to register with the
Sex Offenders Registry Board and who is finally classified as Level 2 or
Level 3 Sex Offender, as such persons have been found to have a
moderate to high risk of re-offense and pose a substantial degree of
dangerousness to minors' and other persons vulnerable to becoming
victims of sex crimes.
A. Registration shall not be required for officers or employees of the Town,
County, State or Federal governments when on official business.
§ 204-4 DEDHAM CODE § 204-6
1:140
§ 204-7. Duties of persons going door-to-door.
§ 204-8. Restrictions on methods of solicitation, canvassing, or
other door-to-door activities.
It shall be unlawful for a solicitor, canvasser or other person to do any of the
following:
B. Individual registration shall not be required for minors under the age of
18 except in connection with canvassing or soliciting on behalf of a
profit organization, newspaper carriers excepted.
A. Upon going into any residential premises in the Town of Dedham, every
solicitor, canvasser or other person must first examine any notice that
may be posted prohibiting solicitation or other activities. If such a
notice is posted, the solicitor, canvasser or other person shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
B. Any solicitor, canvasser or other person who has gained entrance to any
residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
C. Immediately upon gaining entrance to any residence, each solicitor or
canvasser as defined in this by-law must do the following:
(1) Present his registration card for inspection by the occupant.
(2) Request that the occupant read the registration card.
(3) Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and purpose of
his business and, if he is representing an organization, the name
and nature of that organization.
(4) It shall be the duty of every organization employing solicitors or
canvassers within the definition of this by-law to notify the Police
Department daily as to what area(s) of the Town they will be
operating in.
A. Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that the solicitation,
canvassing or other activity is being done on behalf of a governmental
organization, or on behalf of any municipal employee or elected official.
B. Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence where
there is a posted sign prohibiting the same, without express prior
permission of an occupant.
C. Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence without
express prior permission of an occupant, before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00
p.m. where there is no sign posted otherwise limiting solicitation or the
hours of solicitation or such other activities.
D. To utilize any form of endorsement from any department head currently
employed or serving the Town of Dedham.
§ 204-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-8
1:141
§ 204-9. Penalty.
In addition to enforcement under § 1-6, any person or organization who for
himself, itself, or through its agents, servants or employees shall violate any
provision of § 204-7 or 204-8 of this by-law, or any applicable state or federal
laws governing soliciting or canvassing, including but not limited to M.G.L.
c. 68, or who knowingly provides false information on the registration
application, or who is found, after investigation by a police officer, to have
conducted himself or itself in a threatening, abusive or illegal fashion, shall
have his, her, or its registration revoked by the Chief of Police by written
notice delivered to the holder of the registration in person, or sent to the
holder by certified mail at the address set forth in the application.
§ 204-10. Appeals.
Any person or organization who is denied registration or whose registration
has been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be filed within five days after receipt
of the notice of denial or revocation. The Board of Selectmen shall hear the
appeal at its next scheduled meeting after the filing of the written notice of
appeal, provided, however, that if the Board of Selectmen fails to make a
determination within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, the registration
shall be deemed granted or reinstated as the case may be.
§ 204-11. Severability.
Invalidity of any individual provision of this section shall not affect the
validity of the by-law as a whole.
E. Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence in a
threatening, abusive, or illegal fashion.
§ 204-8 DEDHAM CODE § 204-11
1:142
ARTICLE II
Regulation of Other Types of Sales
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Secs. 33, 42, 42A, 46, 54, and 58 of the 1996
By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 204-12. Sales booths in public ways and places regulated.
No person shall place or keep any table, stall, booth, cart or other structure
in any public way or other public place in the Town or upon any sidewalk,
for the sale of food, fruit, merchandise or other thing, without permission
first being obtained from the Chief of Police.
§ 204-13. Retail sale of alcoholic beverages regulated.
§ 204-14. Hours of retail sales regulated.
A. No person shall sell at retail between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. any alcoholic beverages. The term "alcoholic beverages" as
used in this section shall include alcoholic beverages to be consumed on
or off the premises at which they are sold, unless any other law or
permit or license granted to the seller of such beverages shall
otherwise provide.
B. This section shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages to be
consumed on the premises on which they are sold when such sale is by
a licensed common victualler primarily engaged in the sale of food to be
consumed on such premises. Persons found guilty of violating this
section shall pay a fine as set forth in Chapter 150, Article I. For
purposes of this section each separate sale shall be deemed a separate
offense. In the event of sale of several items or articles at one time to
one customer, only one sale shall be deemed to have taken place.
A. No store or place of business engaged in the retail sale of any
commodity except fuel products shall be open for the transaction of
retail business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
B. This section shall not apply to the sale of food or alcoholic beverages to
be consumed on the premises at which they are sold or to be consumed
off the premises on which they are sold when such sale is by a licensed
common victualler primarily engaged in the sale of food to be consumed
on such premises. This section shall not apply to the sale of food,
exclusive of alcoholic beverages, to be consumed off premises.
C. The Board of Selectmen may, upon application by the owner or manager
of a store or place of business engaged in the retail sale of any
commodity, grant a one-day permit to remain open for the transaction
of retail business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. as
part of a special event, upon such terms and conditions as the Board of
Selectmen shall determine as necessary for the public health and safety.
No store or place of business may be granted a permit under this
provision for more than 12 days in any calendar year.
§ 204-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-14
1:143
§ 204-15. Retail promotional events regulated.
No person shall cause or allow to be held in the Town of Dedham any
retail promotional event involving musical, media or personal appearances
of celebrities or other personalities without first having secured a permit
for said retail promotional event from the Chief of Police. For purposes of
this by-law, a "retail promotional event involving musical, media or personal
appearances of celebrities or other personalities" shall mean any event
conducted at the site of an establishment customarily engaged in retail
commercial sales which is designed to draw spectators or participants
to such site by the presence of persons of general or local interest or
by the conduct of activities unrelated to the usual business of the retail
establishment. The application for such a license shall be in writing and
shall fully and specifically describe the conditions of the proposed retail
promotional event and the premises upon which the proposed retail
promotional event is to take place, to the extent that such conditions or
premises would affect the public safety, health or order and shall provide
such further information as the Chief of Police may require in order to
assess actions to be taken to prevent danger to the public safety, health
or order. Within 30 days following receipt of such application, the Chief of
Police shall grant a license or shall order a hearing preceded by at least 10
days written notice to the applicant. Within 45 days next following the close
of such hearing, the Chief of Police shall grant such license or shall deny
such license upon a finding that issuance of such a license would lead to the
creation of a nuisance or would endanger the public health, safety or order
by (a) unreasonably increasing pedestrian traffic in the area in which the
premises are located or (b) increasing the incidence of disruptive conduct
in the area in which the premises are located or (c) unreasonably increasing
the level of noise in the area in which the premises are located. The
Chief of Police may impose conditions upon a license to protect the public
safety, health or order, to guard against creation of a nuisance or to insure
adequate safety and security for patrons or the affected public. The fee
for such permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 150, Article I. This section
shall not apply to paid appearances or performances by such persons at
schools, restaurants, theaters, churches, or other places of public assembly
for purposes other than retail promotion.
D. This section shall not be deemed to repeal or replace § 204-13 of the
Revised By-Laws and each by-law shall be deemed separately
enforceable. An adjudication that § 204-13 or this section of the Revised
By-Laws or any part of either such section is unconstitutional or invalid
shall not operate to affect the constitutionality or validity of the other
by-law or any part thereof which can be given effect without the
provision deemed unconstitutional or invalid.
E. This section shall not apply to a retail drugstore dispensing prescription
medication provided that said business obtains a Special Permit
granted by a majority of the Board of Selectmen after a public hearing,
upon a showing of public need and public good.
§ 204-14 DEDHAM CODE § 204-16
1:144
§ 204-16. Selling and soliciting money upon or abutting public ways
regulated.
No person shall sell any commodity whatsoever or solicit monies for any
purpose whatsoever upon any public way or upon land abutting any public
way in the Town of Dedham, unless:
§ 204-17. Sales of novelties prohibited.
No business or individual shall offer for sale within the Town of Dedham any
device or commodity which shall constitute a "stink bomb," "smoke bomb,"
or "silly string" — however such device or commodity may be titled or under
whatever name it may be marketed.
A. Said party has been duly licensed, at least 10 days in advance of the
date(s) of such sale or solicitation, by the Board of Selectmen; under the
provisions of M.G.L., Chapter 101 Sections 17 and 22. The Selectmen
may impose such restrictions as to location, hours, etc. as they may
deem appropriate, and in appropriate cases may impose a license fee;
or
B. Said sale or solicitation is conducted by a person who has a legitimate
place of business, legally situated, in the Town, and said sale or
solicitation is conducted upon the property appurtenant to that place of
business or the public way adjoining, if approved in writing by the Chief
of Police (see Article I of this chapter and § 204-12, above); or
C. Said sale constitutes a "yard sale" or "garage sale" so-called, and is
conducted on residential premises by the legal owner thereof for no
more than three sale days in any calendar year, with each day,
consecutive or not, constituting a sale day; any sale days in excess of
three in any year shall fall under the licensing provisions of Subsection
A above; or
D. Said solicitation is conducted by a bona-fide non-commercial entity,
including but not limited to a charitable, nonprofit or public service
agency, which has given written notice to the Board of Selectmen of the
dates of such solicitation, and registered all its agents and workers with
the Chief of Police; such agencies or organizations which are
legitimately and permanently headquartered in the Town of Dedham
need only give notice to the Board of Selectmen.
§ 204-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-17
1:145
Chapter 206
PERMANENT PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
§ 204-17 DEDHAM CODE § 204-17
1:146
ARTICLE I
Notification of Impacted Parties
[Adopted 11-13-2017 ATM by Art. 11]
§ 206-1. Notice of intention to install new permanent public
infrastructure.
A. Notice of intention to install new permanent public infrastructure,
including but not limited to signaling, lighting, or buildings or other
structures, shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to abutters, owners
of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and
abutters to abutters within 300 feet of such infrastructure. Said notice
shall also be posted on the Town's website to the extent technologically
feasible.
B. The notice required by this section shall, to the extent practicable, be
provided by the Department of Public Works at least two weeks prior to
any hearing relating to such new permanent public infrastructure or, if
no hearing is required, at least two weeks prior to the installation of
such new permanent public infrastructure.
C. The notice shall contain a description of the area or premises or street
address, if any, or other adequate identification of the location that is
subject to the installation of the new permanent public infrastructure,
the nature of the new permanent public infrastructure, the date of the
hearing relating to such infrastructure, or, if no hearing is required, the
date of the expected installation of such infrastructure.
D. This section shall not apply to road repair or reconstruction projects, or
in the case of emergency threatening the public health or safety.
E. While recognizing the importance of providing the notice required by
this section, failure to provide such notice shall not impede the
permanent public infrastructure project.
§ 206-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-1
1:147
Chapter 210
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 106.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 129.
Garbage, refuse and waste materials — See
Ch. 160.
Recycling — See Ch. 216.
§ 206-1 DEDHAM CODE § 206-1
1:148
ARTICLE I
Construction Site Fencing
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 63, of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 210-1. Commercial construction site fencing regulated.
All commercial construction sites must be secured by fencing during nonconstruction
hours; said fencing must be a minimum of six feet in height and
must be constructed of chain link material or stronger; said fencing must be
approved by the Building Commissioner or his designee.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-1
1:149

ARTICLE II
Defacement of Property
[Adopted 5-17-2010 ATM by Art. 36; amended 11-18-2013 STM by
Art. 16]
§ 210-2. Tagging; graffiti.
The defacement of property includes the intentional, willful, malicious, or
wanton painting, spraying, marking, scratching, etching, placing a sticker
upon, marring or other forms of defacement or destruction of the real or
personal property of another including but not limited to a wall, fence,
building, sign, rock, monument, gravestone, tablet or other object or thing
on a public way or adjoined to it, or in public view, or on private property
visible or capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-ofway,
including conduct known or commonly known as "tagging" and the
application of markings known or commonly known as "graffiti."
§ 210-3. Removal of defacement.
Any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises
shall remove from such premises any condition commonly referred to as
graffiti or any other condition resulting from the defacement of property
described in § 210-2.
§ 210-4. Notice to remove.
A. Whenever a condition described in § 210-2 exists on any structure,
improvement or other property within the Town, the owner or person in
charge of said structure or improvement, shall be issued a Notice to
Remove. Such notice shall be in writing, signed by the enforcing
authority, and shall have substantially the following form:
NOTICE TO REMOVE UNSIGHTLY CONDITION FROM
STRUCTURES OR IMPROVEMENTS
FROM STRUCTURES OR IMPROVEMENTS
To the Owner, Agent of the Owner, Lessee, Occupant, or Person in
Possession of the Property Hereinafter Described
YOUR ATTENTION IS HEREBY DIRECTED to the provisions of
Chapter 210, Article II, of the Revised By-Laws of the Town of Dedham,
on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
Pursuant to the provisions of said section, you are hereby notified that
a certain unsightly condition exists on premises specifically described
as __________ which injures neighboring property and the public health,
safety, and welfare. You are therefore notified at once, and in any event
within 30 days from the date of this notice, to remove said unsightly
condition from the property and thereafter to keep said property free
therefrom.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:151
§ 210-5. Failure to remove defacement; Town to remove; costs.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
If the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in possession
of property upon which a notice to remove a condition described in § 210-2
has been given pursuant to this by-law and in which this determination has
not been reversed on appeal to the Town Manager fails to remove the said
condition within the time specified by the Notice to Remove or decision of
Town Manager, the Town may thereafter remove said condition, and such
person shall be liable for the costs of such removal. The Town shall prepare
a statement of the expense incurred in removing such unsightly condition.
In the event you fail to complete such work within the time
hereinabove mentioned, the Town shall cause the same to be removed
and you will be responsible for the cost of removal of the condition
from the property.
Dated at Dedham, Massachusetts, this _____ day of _______________,
_____
By: ______________________________, ______________________________
B. For purposes of this section, the enforcing authority shall be the
Dedham Police Department.
C. Such notice shall be given to the owner or owner's agent, and if the
owner is not in possession of the property, such notice shall also be
given to the lessee, occupant or person in possession of the premises
described in the notice. Such notice shall be personally delivered or
shall be deposited in the United States mail at the Town, postage
prepaid, addressed to the person designated at his last known address
and if no address is known or made known to the Town, to general
delivery in the Town, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the structure or improvement. In the absence
of fraud, no error or mistake in the sending of the notices or any of them
and no failure on the part of any property owner or any other person to
receive the notices shall in any way affect the validity of the
proceedings, provided the person mailing or posting such notice files an
affidavit of mailing or posting.
D. Within 10 days after the date of posting, publishing, serving, or mailing
such notice, whichever shall be later, the owner or any person affected
by such notice may appeal the order of removal to the Town Manager.
Such appeal shall be in writing, shall specifically state the objections,
and shall be filed with the Town Manager and the Town Clerk. The Town
Manager, upon not less than five days' notice to the appellant, shall
conduct a hearing on the appeal, and notwithstanding any other section
of this by-law, the decision of the Town Manager shall be final.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 210-4 DEDHAM CODE § 210-6
1:152
§ 210-6. Right of entry; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent of the owner, lessor, or
anyone in possession of any premises within the Town to refuse to allow
the Town or its agents or employees to enter upon the premises at any
time during the hours of daylight for the purpose of removing, pursuant
to § 210-5 any condition described in § 210-2 or to interfere in any way
whatsoever with the Town or its agents or employees in any work that the
Town may undertake under this by-law. Any violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine of $300.
§ 210-7. Enforcement; recovery of costs.
The Town may bring suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce
this by-law and to recover the costs of removal of any condition described
in § 210-2.
§ 210-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-7
1:153
Chapter 216
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, refuse and waste materials — See
Ch. 160.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
§ 210-7 DEDHAM CODE § 210-7
1:154
ARTICLE I
Residential Condominiums and Apartment Complexes
[Adopted as Ch. 33 of the 1996 By-laws; amended 11-18-2013 STM
by Art. 16]
§ 216-1. Complex Manager to supply containers.
Any person, firm, corporation or any other entity responsible for the
management of a residential condominium/apartment complex, as the term
"manager" is defined in G.L. c.183A, § 1, shall be responsible for supplying
and maintaining recycling containers suitable for the recyclable materials
being collected by the Town.
§ 216-2. Dumpsters to comply with by-laws.
Any dumpster used to satisfy the requirements of this by-law shall meet all
requirements set forth in § 160-4 of the Revised By-Laws of the Town.
§ 216-3. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with the terms of this by-law shall result in a written
warning.
§ 216-4. Penalties.
Any violation of this by-law that follows the issuance of a written warning
shall be subject to enforcement under the provisions of § 1-6 of these Bylaws.
§ 216-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-4
1:155
Chapter 225
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fingerprint-based criminal record
background checks — See Ch. 42.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 183.
Peddling, soliciting and sales — See Ch. 204.
§ 225-1. Legislative authority.
Per G.L. c.140, § 54, the Board of Selectmen may license suitable persons
to be collectors of, dealers in, or keepers of shops for the purchase, sale,
or barter of junk, old metals or second hand articles. The selectmen may
make rules and regulations relative to their business, and may provide for
the supervision thereof. Said licensing board may make additional rules,
regulations, and restrictions which shall be expressed in all licenses.
Second hand clothing shall not be subject to the provisions of this Article.
§ 225-2. Records.
Every such shopkeeper licensed pursuant to this Section shall keep a bound
book, in which shall be legibly written, in the English language, at the
time of every transaction of any such article, a description thereof, and the
name, date of birth, telephone number and residence of the person from
whom, and the day and the hour when, such article was acquired; and the
Chief of Police or his designee, may at any time, enter upon any premise
used by a licensed dealer to ascertain how he conducts his business, and
examine any or all articles taken in trade or kept or stored in or upon
said premises and all books, records and inventories relating thereto, and
all such articles, books, records and inventories shall be exhibited to any
such person upon demand. Every such shopkeeper licensed pursuant to
this Section who conducts transaction involving jewelry, including precious
metals and precious gems, shall photograph at the time of sale all such
jewelry and precious metals and precious gems and maintain these
photographs with their records. For the purpose of this Article, the term
"precious metals" shall include any precious metal, such as gold, silver or
platinum, without regard to the form or amount of such precious metal or
whether or not such precious metal is an incidental or minor component of
some other article such as jewelry, bric-a-brac, statue or the like.
§ 225-3. Posting of license.
Every person licensed pursuant to this Section shall post his license in some
suitable and conspicuous place upon the licensed premises.
§ 216-4 DEDHAM CODE § 225-4
1:156
§ 225-4. Holding articles for certain time periods before sale.
No such shopkeeper holding a license from the Board of Selectmen as a
dealer in secondhand articles shall permit any article purchased or received
by him to be sold or altered in any way until at least 30 days after its receipt.
Nor shall any dealer in, or keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter,
of junk or old metals or antique furniture permit to be sold or altered any
junk or old metal or antique furniture purchased or received by him for at
least seven days after its receipt.
§ 225-5. Purchasing from or selling to minors.
No person licensed pursuant to this Section shall, directly of indirectly,
either purchase or receive any article from a minor knowing or having
reason to believe him to be such.
§ 225-6. Allowed hours of operation; location.
No person keeping a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk or old
metals, or second hand articles shall purchase or receive, either directly
or indirectly, any of the aforementioned articles or have in his shop open
for the transaction of business except between 8:00 a.m. in the morning
and 10:00 p.m. in the evening. No such license shall directly or indirectly
purchase or receive any such articles at any other than the address
displayed on the license unless specifically invited into the residence of a
potential customer or at a bona fide trade show.
§ 225-7. Identification requirements.
Any person offering for sale any article shall furnish to any shopkeeper
licensed pursuant to this Section positive identification at the time of the
sale. A Massachusetts Drivers License, Massachusetts Identification Card
or other government issued photo identification cards are good examples
of positive identification. Shopkeepers shall photocopy and maintain with
their records the positive identification cards presented to them by anyone
selling any articles. No person offering any article for sale shall give a
wrong name or address or fictitious information pertaining to his identity.
No person holding a license pursuant to this Section shall knowingly write a
false name or address of a person offering an article for sale, or knowingly
permit the entry of such wrong or false name or address into the bound
book as defined in § 225-2 hereof. Any police officer taking cognizance of
any such violation may request the offender to state his true name and
address.
§ 225-8. Report to Chief of Police.
Every person keeping a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old
metals, or secondhand articles shall make out, or cause to be made out,
and deliver, either electronically or in person or by messenger, or by United
States mail every week to the Chief of Police, or more often if required by
the Chief of Police, in a format prescribed by the Chief of Police, a legible
§ 225-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-8
1:157
and correct list, in the English language, containing an accurate description
of all articles either purchased or received, directly or indirectly, during
the preceding week. This list shall also contain all identifying information
of the persons from whom all articles were purchased. All lists shall be
submitted on or before the close of business Fridays. if submitted via United
States mail it shall be postmarked not later than the Saturday immediately
following.
§ 225-9. Severability.
The provisions of this section are severable, and if any of its provisions
are held unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
the decision of said court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions.
§ 225-10. Penalties.
In addition to enforcement under § 1-6 of these By-laws, the licensing
authority may revoke said license for any violation of the preceding
sections.
Chapter 229
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storm drains — See Ch. 242. Stormwater management — See Ch. 246.
§ 229-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this by-law is to protect Public Health and the Natural
Environment within the Town of Dedham by regulating the types and
quantities of materials that enter the Town's sanitary sewer system and
the methods used to repair and install sanitary sewer structures, and also
to ensure that the Town has the authority to comply with all applicable
federal and state laws, regulations, and permit requirements relative to the
sewerage system.
§ 229-2. Administration.
A. The Town Manager shall have and exercise all the powers vested in the
Town by the Massachusetts General Laws or special acts pertaining to
sewer systems. The Town Manager or the Town Manager's designee
may appoint such officers, agents and assistants as shall be necessary
to accomplish the administration of the sewerage systems. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 225-8 DEDHAM CODE § 229-2
1:158
§ 229-3. Penalties.
B. The Town Manager shall have the authority and the duty to adopt, issue
and administer rules and regulations for the administration and
operations of the sewer functions and services, and all subjects related
to the functioning of the sewerage system. [Amended 11-17-2014
ATM by Art. 18]
C. Unless otherwise stated herein the sewer functions and services,
including maintenance of the public sewers and sewerage system shall
be performed by the Department of Public Works and the Engineering
Department in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Massachusetts Water Resources Authority including, but not limited to,
the requirements of 360 CMR 10 and regulations in amendment
thereof. As designated by the Town Manager, the Director of Public
Works shall carry out the day to day operation and maintenance of the
sanitary sewer system. As designated by the Town Manager, the Town
Engineer shall administer the Town of Dedham Drainlayer's License
and Sewer Design and Construction Regulations, including the issuance
of all related permits. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
D. The Drainlayer's License and Sewer Design and Construction
Regulations and the Sewer Use Regulations provide additional
information regarding administration, operation, maintenance, and
construction of the Town's sewerage system.
A. Whenever on the basis of information available to it, the Town finds any
person to be violating any provision of these by-laws, a regulation
adopted hereunder, or regulations issued pursuant to G.L. c.83, § 10,
the Town may take any or all of the following actions:
(1) Issue an order to cease and desist any such violation;
(2) Issue an implementation schedule ordering specific actions to be
taken and time schedule;
(3) Bring a civil or criminal action as provided by law; and
(4) Take any action available to it under federal, state, or local laws or
regulations.
B. In addition to enforcement under § 1-6 of these By-laws, violations of
this by-law may result in the revocation of Town licenses.
C. In addition, and not in lieu of a fine, any person violating any of the
provisions of a regulation enacted under the authority of G.L. c.83, § 10
shall be subject to a civil penalty up to $5,000 for each violation, as
provided by G.L. c.83, § 10. Each day a violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
D. Any person violating the provisions of these by-laws, a regulation
adopted hereunder, or a regulation issued pursuant to G.L. c.83, § 10
§ 229-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-3
1:159
§ 229-4. Assessment of sewer betterments, user charges, and fees.
shall become liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage
incurred by the Town by reasons of such violation, including but not
limited to any fines, charges, or assessments made or imposed on the
Town by federal, state, or local agency.
A. The Board of Selectmen shall establish just and equitable annual
charges for the use of common sewers in accordance with G.L. c.83,
§ 16 which shall be paid by every person who enters his particular
sewer therein.
B. Assessment of sewer betterments shall be in accordance with G.L. c.80
and 83.
C. Sewer system administrative fees, application fees, and mitigation fees,
suitable for processing and inspecting sewer projects, and removing I/I
from the collection system, shall be set and may be amended from time
to time after a public hearing, held in accordance with applicable law,
by the Town Manager. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
D. Users residing in the Town of Dedham and nonresident users metered
to the Dedham-Westwood Water District shall be assessed user charges
in accordance with water usage as measured by Dedham-Westwood
Water District.
E. Users not metered in the Dedham-Westwood Water District shall be
assessed user fees as measured by water usage provided by the Town of
Needham Water Department or the City of Boston Water Department, if
applicable, or if not connected to any public water system, then such
measurement shall be made by estimation of the average of five
comparable users.
F. All Town Departments and all county, state and municipal buildings
shall be responsible for payment of users fees assessed in accordance
with water usage.
G. Users of Town property including tenants and lessees shall be
responsible for payment of users fees assessed in accordance with
water usage.
H. Any Town Department or user of Town property aggrieved by reason of
sewer user fees which may otherwise be indirectly included in leases,
or may result in the duplication of appropriations by the Dedham Town
Meeting, may be abated by the Town Manager provided a finding is
made that such sewer user fee either is a duplication of charges or
would require a Town Department to receive an additional
appropriation by the Town Meeting for payment of the fee. [Amended
11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
I. Any person billed for sewer use fees may apply to the Town Manager for
abatement during the year following such billing, upon a written
§ 229-3 DEDHAM CODE § 229-4
1:160
§ 229-5. Validity.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provisions of these bylaws
shall not affect the validity of any other part of these by-laws which can
be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 229-6. Appeals. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Town Manager shall make the final decision regarding any
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this by-law.
Chapter 233
(RESERVED)
Chapter 237
representation that some or all of the water usage on which the fees
were based did not enter the Town sewer system. Upon review of
the application, the Town Manager may certify such abatement as the
Commissioner deems consistent with this section, provided however,
that no application shall be granted if the usage applied for is less
than 500 cubic feet, nor shall the billed charges be abated to less
than the minimum quarterly fee established by the Board of Selectmen.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
J. Notwithstanding the above, if the Town Engineer certifies that the
property for which the usage was billed is not connected to the Town
sewer system, the Town Manager shall abate all sewer use fees charged
to the applicant. If all the fees so charged cannot be determined exactly
from the existing records of the Town, the Town Manager may
determine the abatement from an extrapolation of the applicant's
known usage. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
K. Any person billed for water usage may apply to the Town Manager for
abatement during the year following such billing, upon a written claim
that an incorrect rate was applied to such usage. Upon review of the
application, which may in the Town Manager's discretion include a
hearing with the applicant, the Town Manager may certify abatement of
so much of the charges as were incorrectly billed. During such review,
the Town Manager may presume that the rate is correct if the subject
property's most recent tax classification in the records of the Board of
Assessors matches the rate classification set by the Board of Selectmen.
Such presumption may be rebutted by the applicant upon a showing
that the use or configuration of the property has changed since the tax
classification date. [Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
L. This paragraph shall not apply to any sewer use fees that have been
added to tax pursuant to G.L. c.83, §§ 16A to 16F.
§ 229-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-6
1:161
SIGNS
§ 229-6 DEDHAM CODE § 229-6
1:162
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 237-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the
design, construction, installation, and maintenance of all exterior signs in
the Town of Dedham in order to:
§ 237-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.93 and G.L.
c.43B.
§ 237-3. Applicability and effect.
A. Encourage the use of signs as an effective means of communication, to
promote public access and awareness of goods and services and to
improve the Town's ability to attract sources of economic development
and growth;
B. Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment by promoting visual
order and clarity on Town streets and appropriate relationship between
signs and the buildings and environment to which they relate;
C. Promote pedestrian and traffic safety by controlling the location,
design, and placement of signs on Town streets;
D. Protect property values by ensuring the appropriate location, size,
number and use of signs in neighborhoods and business districts.
A. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or
maintained in the Town only in conformance with the standards,
procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter.
B. The effect of this chapter as more specifically set forth herein is:
(1) To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs
subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter.
(2) To allow signs that are not expressly prohibited by this chapter; and
[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
(3) To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3
1:163

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 237-4. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth
in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in
Massachusetts Building Code shall be given the meanings set forth therein.
ANIMATED OR FLASHING SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change
of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
APPLIED LETTERING — A sign or informative text which is created by
applying each letter individually, adhering them directly to a wall or the
surface of a window, without any contrasting background material.
AWNING — An awning or canopy is any device, fixed or retractable, made
of canvas or duck cloth, which extends over or otherwise cover a sidewalk,
courtyard, walkway, eating area, driveway, or other area or space, whether
that area or space is intended for pedestrians, vehicles or other purposes.
(see Table 1 Footnote #1, for controls2)
AWNING SIGN — Any and every sign displayed on an awning or canopy.
An awning or canopy on which the only commercial message is a maximum
of six inches in height shall not be considered a sign for purposes of this
chapter.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
BACK-LIGHTED SIGN — Any wall mounted sign which is illuminated by a
diffused light source providing so-called 'halo effect' to allow light to extend
beyond the actual limits of the sign panel or individual letters. Any such
illumination shall be by steady, white, non-neon lighting.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state,
or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered
Banners.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source or
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BILLBOARD — A freestanding off-premises sign larger than 100 square feet
of sign panel area, or a sign affixed to a building covering more than 20% of
the wall area to which it is affixed.[Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
BOARD — Zoning Board of Appeals.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art.
33]
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building, date
of construction or other incidental information about its construction or
history.
BUILDING SIGN — Any wall sign, projecting sign, suspended sign, or any
sign attached to any exterior part of a building.
2. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 237-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-4
1:165
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign identifying or directing
attention to the name of the building, development, business, product,
activity or service sold, provided, or offered upon the lot.
CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign identifying only the name and
location of an entire planned commercial, office or industrial complex
developed or managed under one ownership or single control.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed without altering the face or the
surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight
times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable
copy sign for the purposes of this chapter. A sign on which the only copy that
changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature
shall be considered a time and temperature portion of a sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the Town or a designee
of the Commissioner.3
DESIGN REVIEW ADVISORY BOARD (DRAB) — [Added 5-18-2015 ATM
by Art. 33]
DIGITAL DISPLAY SIGN — A sign utilizing a digital display. This sign type
utilizes a light source derived from LCD, LED or other display technologies,
featuring changeable graphics and streaming video. A digital display is
effective at close viewing range. Freestanding digital display signs shall
be allowed only in Planned Commercial (PC) Developments; provided the
message on same is not legible from a public way. This sign type is not
considered an animated or flashing sign for purposes of this Chapter,
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign located at or near the entrance of a multi-tenant
building, lot, park or campus, the sole purpose of which is to provide a
listing of the names of the individual tenants or users located therein.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign which is lighted from a source
which is outside of the sign panel, with the light source mounted on the
building face, the sign structure, or on the ground.
FLAG — Any fabric, containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used
as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, business corporation or
other entity on a pole or suspended from a building.[Amended 5-18-2015
ATM by Art. 33]
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
3. Editor's Note: The former definition of "department," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33.
§ 237-4 DEDHAM CODE § 237-4
1:166
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located such as 'no parking',
'entrance', 'loading only' or similar directives. No sign with a commercial
message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall
be considered incidental.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is lighted by a source
concealed behind a translucent sign panel.
LED ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is illuminated from a light emitting
diode.[Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
LOT — An area of land in single ownership with definite boundaries,
established by a recorded plan or deed, including a lot created by combining
several previously recorded lots, and used or available for use as the site
of one or more buildings or for any other purpose.[Amended 5-18-2015
ATM by Art. 33]
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MONUMENT SIGN — Any detached sign whose sign surface is attached
to a proportionate base or structural frame, the width of which shall be a
minimum of 1/2 the width of the widest part of the sign face. Said base
shall not exceed a height of three feet above the average finished grade. An
enclosed or solid sign base shall not be required if the sign face is within
one foot of the average finished grade.
MULTI-TENANT LOT — Any lot with more than one business or more than
one use with exterior signs.
NEON SIGN — A sign comprised of any electric discharge tubing filled with
various inert gases.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
NONCONFORMING SIGN, PRE-EXISTING — Any sign that does not comply
with the requirements of this Chapter, and which was either erected on
a date prior to April 8, 1996 the effective date of this Chapter or which
conformed to the provisions of this Chapter in effect on the date of the
erection of the sign.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
NORMAL GRADE — Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (i)
existing grade prior to construction or (ii) the newly established grade after
construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating
solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal
grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on
the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign
is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street
or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure
on the lot, whichever is lower.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign pertaining to products, accommodations,
services, or activities not located on the premises.[Added 5-18-2015 ATM
by Art. 33]
§ 237-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-4
1:167
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign pertaining exclusively to the premises on
which it is located or to the products, accommodations, services, or
activities on the premises.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string.
POLE OR PYLON SIGN — Any sign that is supported by uprights, braces,
columns, poles, or other vertical members which are not attached to a
building and where the bottom edge of the sign face is located three feet or
more above the normal grade at the base of the sign.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
some type of permanent structure; a sign designed to be transported by
means of wheels; a sign converted to or located on A- or T-frames; other
than a sandwich board sign with a sign permit; an inflatable sign or tethered
balloon; and a sign attached to or painted on a vehicle parked and visible
from the public right-of-way, unless such vehicle is used in the normal dayto-
day operations of the business.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses may
have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other
clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
PRINCIPAL FACADE — Any facade that constitutes the primary visual and
functional orientation of the building or tenant space, characterized by a
combination of such features as principal entry, storefront, and visibility
from streets or parking areas.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond the
surface of the building or wall. A projecting sign may be either
perpendicular or parallel to a wall and may have a message on more than
one face.
REAL ESTATE OPEN HOUSE SIGN — Any Real Estate sign advertising
an open house showing may be displayed in the front yard of the subject
property provided that such sign location does not block passage on the
sidewalk and complies with the size specified in the Sign Code and further
that such sign is installed and removed on the day of the open
house.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign for residential uses that contains no
commercial message except advertising for goods and services offered on
the premises where the sign is located, provided that offering such goods
or services conforms with all requirements of applicable zoning and Town
regulations.
ROOF SIGN — A sign which is located above, or projected above, the lowest
point of the eaves or the top of the parapet wall of any building, or which is
painted on or fastened to the roof.
§ 237-4 DEDHAM CODE § 237-4
1:168
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A non-illuminated, free-standing sign located
on an A- or T-frame support, which advertises goods or services sold or
available at adjacent premises.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
SETBACK — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
SIGN — Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose
of, or identify a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind
to the public.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
SIGN HEIGHT — The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance
from the base of the sign at the normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
SIGN PACKAGE — An optional master sign plan for an entire lot and/or
multi-tenant building that includes drawings, material, color specifications,
number of signs, types of signs and locations, as recommended by
DRAB.[Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
SIGN PANEL — The area of a sign face (which is also called the sign area
of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means
of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof
that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representations,
emblem, or other display for applied lettering, together with any material
or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used
to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it
is placed for all other signs, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise
meets all applicable regulations and is clearly incidental to the display
itself.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
STREET FRONTAGE — A linear measurement of the distance between side
lot lines along the street where the signage will be viewed.[Amended
5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by that surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is not permanently mounted, except for
a window sign, that is in place for a period of not more 30 days.
WAIVER APPLICATION PACKET — A completed Waiver Application for
Hearings, Application for Abutters List, Dedham Times Legal Ad Form,
Letter of Authorization from the property owner and additional materials in
support of the waiver request.[Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
WALL AREA — The area of a wall within a single plane.
WALL SIGN — Any sign parallel and attached to a wall, painted on the wall
surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of
any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and
displays only one sign surface.
§ 237-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-4
1:169
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed within a window or upon
the interior face of a window pane or glass, including lettering applied to
the window surface and a sign panel hung within or mounted close to the
transparent portion of a window so as to be visible from the exterior of the
window.[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
§ 237-4 DEDHAM CODE § 237-4
1:170
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 237-5. Permits; review by Design Review Advisory Board required.
[Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
No sign shall be erected, enlarged, redesigned, structurally altered, or used
without the review of the DRAB and a sign permit issued by the Building
Commissioner, except as provided for elsewhere in this chapter. Permits
shall be issued only for signs in conformance with this chapter.
§ 237-6. Applications; issuance of permits; notification of denial.
A. Application fee shall be established and revised from time to time by
DRAB at a level not exceeding that sufficient to defray the estimated
cost of administering this article.
B. All applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Board Office. The DRAB at their December meeting shall vote
on the upcoming year submittal deadline and meeting schedule. The
thirty-day review process starts on submittal deadline and meeting
schedule that is posted.
C. The Planning Director and Building Commissioner shall review all sign
permit applications for completeness and compliance with the Sign
Code. Once an application is deemed complete it will be placed on the
next available agenda of DRAB. In cases where an application does not
comply with the Sign Code, the applicant will be notified by the
Planning and Zoning Board Office that a waiver needed for whatever
element of a sign does not comply with the Sign Code.
D. DRAB shall hold a meeting within 30 days of submittal of a sign permit
application to review the application and provide a recommendation
letter. The recommendation letter may recommend in favor or against
the applications, or may recommend in favor on condition of specified
modifications. Upon the written assent of the applicant the review
period may be extended to provide additional time for review of the
application. DRAB shall provide a written recommendation to the
Building Commissioner and the applicant within 10 business days after
the recommendation is so voted. The failure of DRAB to provide a
recommendation within 10 business days shall be deemed a favorable
recommendation.
E. Once the recommendation letter is issued the applicant may apply for a
sign permit with the Building Department. Cases where a sign waiver is
needed, an applicant may not apply for sign permit until the waiver is
granted by the Board.
§ 237-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-7
1:171
§ 237-7. Inspection; certificate of compliance; notice of
deficiencies.
During the sixth month after the issuance of a permit or at such earlier date
as the applicant may request, the Commissioner shall cause an inspection
of the lot for which each such permit for a new sign or for modification
of an existing sign has been issued. If the construction is complete and in
full compliance with this chapter and with the building and electrical codes,
the Commissioner shall issue a certificate of compliance. If construction is
not substantially complete or not in full compliance with this chapter and
applicable codes, the Commissioner shall give the owner or applicant notice
of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of
inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not
corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If construction is completed
within said 30 days and the deficiencies corrected, the Commissioner shall
issue a certificate of compliance.
§ 237-8. Replacing signs shown on sign package. [Amended
5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
Where the owner of a property has a recommended Sign Package on file
with DRAB, the Building Department shall issue a sign permit for a sign that
conforms to a Sign Package.
§ 237-7 DEDHAM CODE § 237-8
1:172
ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 237-9. Permits required.
Signs identified as "P" on Table 14 shall be erected, installed, or created
only in conformance with a duly issued and valid sign permit. Such permits
shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and
procedures.
§ 237-10. Public right-of-way signs.
No sign shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except as follows and in
conformance with the following conditions:
§ 237-11. Town-owned property — temporary signs.
Temporary signs promoting events, programs or functions sponsored by
charitable, cultural, educational or religious organizations based in Dedham
are permitted on Town-owned property upon 15 days notice to the Town
agency with jurisdiction for the property, subject to space availability at
places designated by the agency; provided, however, that an organization
may at each location place a single sign not to exceed nine square feet;
provided, further, that such signs may be installed only during the period
from 30 days prior to the event to three days subsequent to the event. For
the purposes of this section multi-day events occurring at least once per
week may be treated as a single event.
A. Permanent bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
B. Permanent informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles,
lines, pipes, or facilities;
C. Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public rightof-
way in conformance with all other regulations of this chapter.
D. Temporary emergency warning signs erected by a governmental
agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or
permitted work within the public right-of-way.
E. Sandwich Board Signs in conformance with all other regulations of this
chapter.
F. Banner signs including signs with commercial message approved by the
Board of Selectmen. [Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
4. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 237-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-12
1:173
§ 237-12. Town-owned property — sponsorship signs. [Amended
5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
Notwithstanding the prohibition of roof signs and commercial signs
attached to fences cited in § 237-15, sponsorship signs supporting
municipal recreational facilities and activities are permitted on Town-owned
property subject to the approval of the Town agency with the jurisdiction for
such property, provided in the case of roof signs that such signs be limited
to 40 square feet in size and shall be limited to the following locations,
with no more than one sign allowed at each such location: Memorial Field,
Condon Park, Rustcraft Road and Stone Park.
§ 237-13. Exempt signs.
The following do not require a permit under this chapter:
§ 237-14. Private property — exempt signs.
The following signs are allowed on private property without sign permits:
A. Any sign erected or required by public agencies pursuant to federal,
state, or local law.
B. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post
legal notices, to identify public property, to convey public information,
and to direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
C. Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not
visible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
lot or parcel on which such sign is located.
D. On-premises traffic control devices on private property, the faces of
which meet Department of Transportation standards and which
additionally contain only the name or logo of the business.
A. On all residential properties, one sign, either attached or freestanding,
indicating only the name of the owner or occupant, street number, and
permitted uses or occupations engaged in thereon, not to exceed two
square feet in area.
B. On all residential properties, one temporary, unlighted, on-premises
sign announcing or identifying occasional sale, such as a yard or garage
sale or an institutional or school fair, provided that such sign shall not
exceed nine square feet. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
C. In any location, one temporary unlighted real estate sign advertising
the sale, rental, or lease of the premises or subdivision on which it is
erected, such sign not to be larger than nine square feet.
D. In any location, one temporary unlighted sign not larger than nine
square feet indicating the name and address of the parties involved in
construction on the premises. Said sign shall not be installed until the
§ 237-12 DEDHAM CODE § 237-14
1:174
§ 237-15. Prohibited sign types. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art.
33]
The following are prohibited:
Animated or flashing signs
Beacons
Billboards
Commercial signs attached to fences or rocks
Digital Display Sign except for Planned Commercial Development
Neon signs
Pennants
Portable commercial signs other than sandwich board signs in Districts LB,
GB and CB, with sign permit
Roof signs
Signs having red or green lights erected within sight of a traffic signal
unless approved as non-hazardous by the Chief of Police
Signs which obscure or tend to block a clear view of traffic, warning and
control signs or signals, pedestrian crosswalks, or handicapped access
ramps, or any sign that the Commissioner determines may endanger public
safety.
Wind-driven, whirling, turning, or spinning signs.
construction work commences on the property and shall be removed
immediately upon completion of the project.
E. In any location, unlighted non-commercial signs, provided that each
such sign shall not exceed nine square feet.
F. In any location within the SC District, lighted or unlighted signs visible
from a position outside of the SC District, provided that each such sign
shall not exceed 15 square feet. Such signs shall not be included in a
determination of Maximum Total Sign Area for a lot within the SC
District. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
G. In any location, one temporary unlighted real estate open house sign
may be displayed in the front yard of the subject property, provided that
such sign location does not block passage on the sidewalk and complies
with the size limitations specified in this chapter and further that such
sign is both installed and removed on the day of the open house.
§ 237-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-15
1:175

ARTICLE V
Special Regulations
§ 237-16. Central Business District.
These regulations shall be in addition to existing relevant general
regulations contained in this chapter.
§ 237-17. Design guidelines. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
In reviewing sign applications DRAB shall apply design guidelines in
"Building Better: A Design Manual for Building Improvements and Design
Bulletins" by RBA Group adopted on April 11, 2013.
§ 237-18. Illumination. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
A. Signs
(1) Location. Any wall sign installed on a building with an architectural
sign band shall be located within that sign band which is the
horizontal plane of the facade of the building defined by
architectural details such as cornices, lintels, pediments, pilasters
and windows.
(2) Design. Sign design shall conform to the materials specified in the
Design Guidelines incorporated in Appendix A.
B. Awnings.
(1) Location. The awning location on the building shall not obscure or
cover the architectural sign band of the building.
(2) Design. The shape of the awnings may be triangular as viewed from
the side and may contain a valance with sufficient area for
lettering. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
(3) Colors. The color of the awning shall be consistent with the overall
design scheme for the building and the Central Business District.
The color of the awning material shall be selected from the range of
colors provided for in Appendix A.
A. No sign shall be lighted except by a steady, stationary, non-neon light,
shielded and directed at the sign.
B. External illumination shall be by white, steady, stationary, non-neon
light, shielded and directed at the sign. The foregoing is also applicable
to permanent interior signs which are designed to be visible through a
door or window.
C. Internal illumination shall be by whiter steady, stationary, non-neon
light, directed on translucent materials to illuminate the sign. No more
than four colors shall be used. Black and white shall not be considered
colors.
§ 237-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-18
1:177
§ 237-19. Computation of sign area and height. [Amended
5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and
height:
D. Times of illumination. No sign shall be illuminated in any district
beyond the business hours of the establishment to which it pertains nor
between 12:00 a.m. midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless allowable business
hours extend into such period.
E. No internally illuminated signs shall be permitted in any residential
districts, Limited Manufacturing, Central Business, General Business,
or Local Business districts.
F. No illumination shall be permitted which casts light or glare beyond the
perimeter of the property on which the sign is located.
G. No illumination shall be permitted which casts light or glare onto any
residential premises or onto any portion of a way as to create a traffic
hazard.
H. No pylon, pole, or sign-supporting structure shall be illuminated, except
as required by other applicable state or federal law.
A. The sign area of a sign with more than one face shall be computed by
adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point.
When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces
cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such faces
are part of the same sign structure, the sign area shall be computed by
the measurement of one of the faces.
B. The permitted sum of all individual signs on a lot shall be computed by
applying the formula contained in Table 25 for Maximum Total Sign
Panel area to the lot frontage for the district in which the lot is located.
Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign
area for each street frontage. However, the total Sign Panal area that is
oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the
lot's sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building, or wall
area frontage on that street. The computation of frontage shall only
include the actual, physical frontage of a lot on a street.
C. If not located in a larger landscaped area, all freestanding signs shall be
located within a curbed, landscaped area extending a minimum of three
feet on all sides of the sign base.
D. A sign projecting more than 12 inches from the face of a building shall
be at least 8 feet above ground level and its upper edge no more than 14
feet above ground level. Such sign shall be located only as allowed
elsewhere in this chapter.
5. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 237-18 DEDHAM CODE § 237-19
1:178
§ 237-20. Construction and maintenance standards.
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following standards:
E. No wall sign, except window signs which identify a business occupying
space in a level above the ground floor level, shall extend higher than
the lowest of (i) 25 feet above grade; or (ii) below the second floor
window frame; or (iii) the lowest point of the roof.
A. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the state building
code, General By-Laws, and the electrical code of the Town at all times.
B. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, all
signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be
permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by
direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
§ 237-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-20
1:179

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Signs and Signs without Permits
§ 237-21. Removal of nonconforming existing sign; permit for
conforming sign.
The owner or person in control of any lot or other premises on which exists
a sign that does not conform with the requirements of this chapter and for
which there is no current and valid permit, shall remove such sign. The
owner or person in control of any lot or other premises on which exists
a sign without a permit but which or would otherwise comply with this
chapter shall apply for a permit.
§ 237-22. Continuation of certain existing signs. [Amended
5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
A sign that would be permitted under this chapter only with a sign permit,
but which was lawfully in existence on the 17th of June 1996 and which was
constructed in accordance with the by-laws and other applicable laws in
effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its size, height,
location, design, or construction does not conform to the requirements of
this chapter may remain in place and be repaired and maintained, but not
expand in size or in degree of nonconformity. A change in the information on
the face of a Pre-existing Nonconforming Sign is allowed by replacing the
Sign Panel in an existing frame or repainting the information on an existing
Sign Panel with review by DRAB and a sign permit. Maintenance shall be
limited to cleaning and refinishing existing sign frames and supports, but
shall not include any modifications to the frames and, in the case of a
free-standing or monument sign, shall not include any modification to the
support structure.
§ 237-23. Requirements for sign modification. [Amended 5-18-2015
ATM by Art. 33]
A sign permit shall lapse and become void whenever there are modifications
to a preexisting nonconforming sign other than as described in § 237-22.
Upon notification by the Building Commissioner of such modification, the
owner shall, within 45 days, make the sign conform to the prior permit,
remove the sign, or re-apply for a new sign with review by DRAB and a sign
permit.
§ 237-24. Removal of sign when business is discontinued. [Amended
5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
A sign permit shall lapse and become void when there has been a
discontinuance of the activities, business, goods or services described on
the sign. The owner shall remove a sign within 30 days of discontinuance
of the activities, business, goods or services described on the sign. A
Freestanding Pre-existing Non-conforming Sign structure shall be removed
after 365 days have elapsed where all signage on said structure has been
§ 237-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-24
1:181
or is required to be removed for discontinuance of the activities, business,
goods or services.
§ 237-25. Previously nonconforming sign still in violation.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make permissible a preexisting
sign which was constructed or displayed in violation of this chapter or any
predecessor to this chapter and which continues not to be in conformance
with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 237-26. Sign area; setback. [Amended 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, a pre-existing
nonconforming sign with a sign area greater than allowable under this
chapter and/or with a setback from a public way less than allowable under
this chapter may be replaced with a sign erected on the same lot with a
sign area greater than allowable under this chapter and/or a setback less
than allowable under this chapter upon the issuance of a waiver by the
Board; provided, that the maximum sign area of any sign waived under
this paragraph shall be no greater than 70% of the sign area of the
nonconforming sign being replaced and the minimum setback of any sign
erected under this paragraph shall be no less than the current setback of
the nonconforming sign being replaced.
§ 237-24 DEDHAM CODE § 237-26
1:182
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 237-27. Violations.
§ 237-28. Enforcement and remedies.
§ 237-29. Waiver from requirements. [Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art.
336]
A. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this
chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this chapter.
B. Each such day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate
violation when applying the penalty portions of this chapter.
A. The Commissioner may enforce the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with § 1-6 of these By-laws; provided however, that except
where he determines that public safety requires immediate abatement
of any violation, the Commissioner shall, prior to initiating
enforcement, for purposes of a warning, give written notice to abate the
violation of this chapter by delivery of same to the premises where said
violation is or has occurred, or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the owner, resident or person in charge of the
premises.
B. All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and shall not
impair the authority of the Commissioner to take any action authorized
or required by the State Building Code or other local, state or federal
law.
A. No waiver may be granted by the Board from § 237-15, Prohibited sign
Types.
B. A waiver request shall be submitted on a Board application, together
with a Waiver Application Packet. The application must identify each
section or sections of the Sign Code where a waiver is being sought and
include a statement explaining the reasoning why a waiver is being
sought. Applicants shall apply to DRAB first for sign review in order for
DRAB to make a recommendation on the waiver request. The Board
cannot act on any waiver unless DRAB has made a recommendation
that has been forwarded to the Board prior to the hearing.
C. Seven copies of the Waiver Application Packet shall be filed with the
Town Clerk with DRAB's recommendation. In cases where an applicant
simultaneously applies to DRAB for sign review which requires a sign
waiver the Planning and Zoning Office will forward DRAB's
recommendation letter to the Board prior to the hearing.
6. Editor's Note: This article also repealed former § 237-29, Appeals. See now § 237-31.
§ 237-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-29
1:183
§ 237-30. Waiver criteria. [Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 337]
The Board may grant a waiver upon making a written finding that:
§ 237-31. Appeal. [Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
Any person aggrieved by the Commissioner's action or failure to act may file
an appeal within 30 days with the Town Clerk. An appeal from the provisions
of the Sign Code is heard by the Board. A hearing for any appeal shall be
held within 65 days from the date of filing with the Town Clerk. A decision
shall be made 100 days from the date of filing. The Board shall cause notice
of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation and
said notice sent to applicant, abutters and abutters to abutters within 300
feet of the property line of the application parties of interest within 300
feet of the property line of the application as they appear on the most
recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any such owner
is located in another city or town.
§ 237-32. Severability. [Added 5-18-2015 ATM by Art. 33]
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, shall be held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, or application thereof,
of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby
declared to be severable.
D. A hearing for any waiver request shall be held within 65 days from the
date of filing with the Town Clerk. A decision shall be made within 100
days from the date of filing. The Board shall cause notice of such
hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation and said
notice shall be sent to the applicant, abutters and abutters to abutters
within 300 feet of the property line of the application as they appear on
the most recent applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any
such owner is located in another city or town.
E. The Board may by an affirmative vote of four of its members grant
waivers from the provisions of this chapter.
A. Literal compliance with the provisions of this chapter is not practical or
is unfeasible or
B. Such waivers are recommended by the DRAB, and
provided that in all cases the desired relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or
substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of the by-law.
7. Editor's Note: This article also repealed former § 237-30, Severability. See now § 237-32.
§ 237-29 DEDHAM CODE § 237-32
1:184
Chapter 242
STORM DRAINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 229. Stormwater management — See Ch. 246.
§ 237-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-32
1:185

ARTICLE I
Illicit Discharges and Connections
[Adopted 11-13-2007 STM by Art. 11; amended 11-18-2013 STM by
Art. 16]
§ 242-1. Purpose.
§ 242-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this by-law, the following shall mean:
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the waters of the United States or Commonwealth from any source.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance,
which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system,
including without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and
any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether
A. Increased volumes of stormwater and contaminated stormwater runoff
are major causes of: (1) impairment of water quality and flow in lakes,
ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater; (2) contamination of
drinking water supplies; (3) alteration or destruction of aquatic and
wildlife habitat; and (4) flooding. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency has identified land disturbance and polluted
stormwater as major sources of water pollution. Regulation of illicit
connections and discharges to the municipal storm drain system is
necessary for the protection of the Town of Dedham's water bodies and
groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the
natural resources of the Town.
B. The objectives of this by-law are:
(1) To prevent pollutants from entering the Town of Dedham's
municipal storm drain system;
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
Town;
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
(4) To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
(5) To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this by-law through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement;
§ 242-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-2
1:187
said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the
effective date of this by-law.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
exempted in § 242-8. The term does not include a discharge in compliance
with an NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit or a Surface Water Discharge
Permit, or resulting from fire fighting activities exempted pursuant to
§ 242-8A(1) of this by-law.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious
surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks,
and rooftops.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM OR MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM
SEWER SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Dedham.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the State that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter
whether originating at a point or non-point source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
F.
§ 242-2 DEDHAM CODE § 242-2
1:188
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through
the soil.
STORMWATER — Runoff from precipitation or snow melt.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material, which
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately
or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment.
Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
alkali, and any substance defined as Toxic or Hazardous under G.L. Ch.21C
and Ch.21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste
product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the Commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, costal waters, and
groundwater.
§ 242-3. Applicability.
This by-law shall apply to flows entering the municipal storm drainage
system.
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. And noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 242-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-4
1:189
§ 242-4. Authority.
This by-law is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule
Procedures Act, and pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water
Act found at 40 CFR 122.34, and the Phase II ruling from the Environmental
Protection Agency found in the December 8, 1999 Federal Register.
§ 242-5. Responsibility for administration.
The Department of Public Works shall administer, implement and enforce
this by-law. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Department
of Public Works may be delegated in writing by the Department of Public
Works to its employees or agents.
§ 242-6. Regulations.
The Department of Public Works may promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purposes of this by-Law. Failure by the Department of Public
Works to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of
suspending or invalidating this by-law.
§ 242-7. Prohibited activities.
Prohibited activities are as follows:
§ 242-8. Exemptions.
A. Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be
discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the
municipal storm drain system, into a watercourse, or into the waters of
the Commonwealth.
B. Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable
law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
C. Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct
or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the
municipal storm drain system without prior written approval from the
Department of Public Works.
A. Exemptions from the by-law are as follows:
(1) Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities.
(2) Discharge or flow that results from conditions that require
immediate action and occurs during a state of emergency declared
by any agency of the Federal or State Government, or by the
Dedham Town Manager, Board or Selectmen or Board of Health.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
§ 242-4 DEDHAM CODE § 242-8
1:190
B. The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from the
prohibition of non-stormwater provided that the source is not a
significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain
system:
(1) Waterline flushing;
(2) Flow from potable water sources;
(3) Springs;
(4) Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(5) Diverted stream flow;
(6) Rising groundwater;
(7) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(8) Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or
air conditioning condensation;
(9) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(10)Water from individual residential car washing;
(11) Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine) provided test data is submitted to the Town
substantiating that the water meets the one ppm standard and the
pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance or public
safety issue, and complies with all applicable Town by-laws;
(12) Discharge from street sweeping;
(13) Dye testing;
(14) Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a
Surface Water Discharge Permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
administered under the authority of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of
Environmental Protection, provided that the discharge is in full
compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and applicable laws and regulations; and
(15) Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from
the Conservation Commission and the Department of Public Works
as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the
environment.
§ 242-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-9
1:191
§ 242-9. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
The Department of Public Works may suspend municipal storm drain system
access to any person or property without prior written notice when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of
pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an
emergency suspension order, the Department of Public Works may take all
reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment.
§ 242-10. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in
or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage
system or waters of the Commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a
release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify
the municipal Fire and Police Departments, the Conservation Commission
and the Department of Public Works. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
material, the reporting person shall notify the Conservation
Commission and the Department of Public Works no later than the next
business day. The reporting person shall provide to the Conservation
Commission and the Department of Public Works written confirmation of
all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days
thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or
industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain
on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 242-11. Enforcement.
A. Authorized agents. The Department of Public Works, or an authorized
agent of the Department of Public Works, shall enforce this by-law,
regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may
pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
B. Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this by-law, regulations,
permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Department of Public
Works may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
C. Orders. The Department of Public Works, or an authorized agent of the
Department of Public Works, may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions of this by-law or the regulations thereunder, which may
include: (a) elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the
§ 242-9 DEDHAM CODE § 242-11
1:192
municipal separate storm sewer system; (b) performance of monitoring,
analyses, and reporting; (c) that unlawful discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist; and (d) remediation of contamination
in connection therewith.
D. If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which
such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall
further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate
or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town of
Dedham may, at its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof
shall be charged to the violator.
E. Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate the
violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property
owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town, including
administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a written
protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the Department of
Public Works within 30 days of receipt of the notification of the costs
incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time
in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a decision of the
Department of Public Works affirming or reducing the costs, or from a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall
become a special assessment against the property owner and shall
constitute a lien on the owner's property for the amount of said costs.
Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate
provided in G.L. Ch. 59, S. 57 after the 31st day at which the costs first
become due.
F. Enforcement. The penalty for violations of any provision of this by-law,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be $300.
G. Entry to perform duties under this by-law. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the Department of Public Works, its agents, officers, and
employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of
performing their duties under this by-law and regulations and may
make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as
the Department of Public Works deems reasonably necessary.
H. Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Department of Public Works
shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
I. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this by-law are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
§ 242-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-12
1:193
§ 242-12. Severability.
The provisions of this by-law are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this by-law or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this bylaw.
§ 242-12 DEDHAM CODE § 242-12
1:194
Chapter 246
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storm drains — See Ch. 242. Wetlands protection — See Ch. 271.
§ 246-1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this by-law is to protect, maintain and enhance the
public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the Town by
establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the
adverse effects of soil erosion and sedimentation, construction site
runoff, increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint
source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment.
It has been determined that proper management of stormwater runoff
will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure,
safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of
the public, protect water and aquatic resources, protect and enhance
wildlife habitat, and promote groundwater recharge to protect surface
and groundwater drinking supplies. This by-law seeks to meet that
purpose through the following objectives:
(1) Establish a mechanism by which the Town can monitor and ensure
compliance with requirements of its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems
(MS4) and other applicable State and Federal mandates.
(2) Establish decision-making processes surrounding land
development activities to reduce and eliminate impairments of the
Charles and Neponset Rivers and to preserve the health of the
Town's groundwater resources.
(3) Establish minimum construction and post-construction stormwater
management standards and design criteria for the regulation and
control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality.
(4) Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management,
better site design practices or "low-impact development practices",
such as reducing impervious cover, increasing site-wide infiltration,
and preserving open space and other natural areas, to the
maximum extent practicable.
(5) Promote water conservation through the re-use of stormwater.
(6) Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and
nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that
§ 242-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-1
1:195
§ 246-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this By-law. Additional definitions may be adopted by
separate regulation:
ALTER — Any activity that will measurably change the ability of a ground
surface area to absorb water, will change existing surface drainage
patterns, or will increase or decrease the rate or volume of flow from a site.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural, non-structural and
managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and
practical means to prevent and/or reduce increases in stormwater volumes
and flows, reduce point source and nonpoint source pollution, and promote
stormwater quality and protection of the environment. "Structural" BMPs
are devices that are engineered and constructed to provide temporary
storage and treatment of stormwater runoff. "Nonstructural" BMPs use
natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require extensive
construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by eliminating the
pollutant source.
BETTER SITE DESIGN — Site design approaches and techniques, including
low-impact development (LID) that can reduce a site's impact on the
watershed through the use of nonstructural stormwater management
practices. Better site design includes conserving and protecting natural
areas and green space, reducing impervious cover, and using natural
features for stormwater management, and providing site-wide infiltration.
DEVELOPMENT — Any construction that disturbs or alters a parcel of land
as defined in the Massachusetts Stormwater Standards.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity that causes a change in the position or
location of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth material; results in an
they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no
threat to public safety or the environment.
(7) Establish provisions to ensure there is an adequate funding
mechanism, including surety, for the proper review, inspection and
long-term maintenance of stormwater facilities implemented as
part of this By-law.
(8) Establish the Town of Dedham's legal authority and capacity to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this By-law through
funding, permitting, inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
B. Nothing in this By-law is intended to replace the requirements of the
Dedham Flood Plain Zoning By-law, the Dedham General Wetlands
Protection By-law, or any other By-law that may be adopted by the Town
of Dedham, or any Rules and Regulations adopted thereunder. Any
activity subject to the provisions of the above-cited By-laws or Rules
and Regulations must comply with the specifications of each. In case of
conflict, the more stringent provisions shall apply.
§ 246-1 DEDHAM CODE § 246-2
1:196
increased amount of runoff or pollutants; measurably changes the ability of
a ground surface to absorb waters; removes trees; clears or grades land; or
results in an alteration of drainage characteristics.
EXISTING LAWN — Grass area which has been maintained and mowed in
the previous two years.
IMPERVIOUS — Any material or structure on, above or below the ground
that prevents water from infiltrating through the underlying soil.
Impervious surface is defined to include, without limitation: paved surfaces
(parking lots, sidewalks, and driveways), concrete, brick, stone, and
rooftops.
INFILTRATION — The act of conveying surface water into the ground to
promote groundwater recharge and the reduction of stormwater runoff
from a project site.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An ecosystem-based approach to
land development and stormwater management that ensures that each
development site is designed to protect, or restore, the natural hydrology of
the site.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS — The
Department of Environmental Protection's requirements to manage
stormwater located in the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations at 310 CMR
10.05(6)(k) and the accompanying Stormwater Handbook issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) OR MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Dedham.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from many diffuse sources
caused by rainfall, snowmelt, or other method of pollutant transport moving
over and through the ground. As the runoff moves, it picks up and carries
away natural and human-made pollutants, finally depositing them into water
resource areas.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE — Activities that are regularly scheduled to
maintain the health and condition of a landscaped area. Examples include
removal of weeds or invasive species, pruning, mowing, raking, and other
activities that are done at regular intervals within the course of a year.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan setting up the
functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing
§ 246-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-2
1:197
operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system to ensure
that it continues to function as designed.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions that reasonably may be expected
or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity in
accordance with approved plans on a specific site or tract of land. Postdevelopment
refers to the phase of a new development or redevelopment
project after completion, and does not refer to the construction phase of a
project.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions that exist prior to the proposed
disturbance activity. Where phased development or plan approval occurs
(preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at
the time prior to the first plan submission shall establish pre-development
conditions.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RECONSTRUCTION — Any action causing complete removal and
replacement of paved surfaces, such as driveways, parking areas and roads.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, improvement, repaving,
or resurfacing on a previously-developed site as defined in the
Massachusetts Stormwater Standards.
RUNOFF — Rainfall or snowmelt water flowing over the ground surface.
SITE — The entire parcel of land being developed.
STOCKPILING — The storage of unsecured material for future use,
excluding the storage of materials 10 cubic yards or less when secured
utilizing erosion controls that prevent erosion of the material.
STORMWATER — Runoff from precipitation or snowmelt and surface water
runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or non-structural
practices that are designed to control or treat stormwater runoff pollutant
loads, discharge volumes, and/or peakflow discharge rates. Stormwater
Management includes the use of Low-Impact Development (LID)
management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT (SMP) — A permit issued by the
Conservation Commission or its designated agent, after review of an
application, plans, calculations, and other supporting documents, which
is designed to protect the environment of the Town from the deleterious
effects of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER OFFICER — The Conservation Agent or other person(s)
designated by the Conservation Commission to review Stormwater
Management Permit applications and advise the Dedham Conservation
Commission on Stormwater Management Permit applications as outlined in
this By-law.
§ 246-2 DEDHAM CODE § 246-3
1:198
§ 246-3. Authority.
This By-law is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes,
and pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40
CFR 122.34, and as authorized by the residents of the Town of Dedham at
Town Meeting dated November 16, 2015.
§ 246-4. Administration.
§ 246-5. Applicability.
A. The permitting provisions of this By-law shall be overseen and
administered by the Conservation Commission or its designated
Stormwater Officer.
B. Stormwater Management Regulations ("Regulations"). The
Conservation Commission may adopt, and periodically amend, rules
and regulations relating to the terms, conditions, definitions,
enforcement, fees (including application, inspection, and/or consultant
fees), delegation of authority, procedures and administration of this Bylaw
after conducting a public hearing to receive comments on the
proposed rules and regulations or any proposed revisions. Such hearing
dates shall be advertised in a newspaper of general local circulation at
least seven days prior to the hearing date. Failure of the Conservation
Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or
invalidate the effect of this By-law.
A. This By-law shall be applicable to any alteration, disturbance,
development or redevelopment of 500 square feet or more, including
any activities that require a permit issued by the Planning Board, the
Zoning Board of Appeals or the Building Department.
B. This By-law shall apply to land or parcels of land that are held in
common ownership (including ownership by related or jointlycontrolled
persons or entities) as of the effective date of this By-law, if
the total land-disturbing activities on said land or parcels, considered
as a whole, would presently or ultimately exceed the minimum
thresholds in § 246-5C and are not exempted by § 246-6, and no such
activity shall commence until a permit under this By-law has been
issued. A development shall not be segmented or phased in a manner to
avoid compliance with this By-law.
C. Storm Water Management Permit Thresholds. A Storm Water
Management Permit shall be required for any of the following, except
for an activity exempt per § 246-6:
(1) Minor Stormwater Permit.
§ 246-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-5
1:199
§ 246-6. Exemptions.
No person shall alter, disturb, develop or redevelop within the Town of
Dedham without having obtained a Minor or Major Stormwater Permit with
the following exceptions:
(a) Any residential alteration, disturbance, development or
redevelopment of 500 square feet to 2,000 square feet, except
for construction of a new dwelling.
(b) Any commercial, industrial, institutional, or municipal
alteration, disturbance, development or redevelopment of 500
square feet to 1,000 square feet (except for such activities
within the Aquifer Protection Overlay District, which shall
require a Major Stormwater Permit).
(2) Major Stormwater Permit.
(a) Construction of any new dwelling or new dwelling replacing an
existing dwelling;
(b) Any alteration, disturbance, development or redevelopment
exceeding the thresholds listed in § 246-5C(1) above.
A. Any activity which will disturb or alter land areas below the thresholds
stipulated in § 246-5 above.
B. Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as
defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulation 310 CMR 10.04 and
G.L.c. 40A, § 3.
C. Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits,
including building permits, have been issued before the effective date
of this By-law.
D. Normal maintenance of existing lawn, landscaping, or gardens areas.
E. Construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or drainage
patterns.
F. Construction of utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer, electric, telephone,
cable television, etc.) other than drainage which will not alter terrain,
ground cover, or drainage patterns, provided that appropriate BMPs
are used to prevent erosion, sedimentation and release of pollutants.
G. Emergency repairs to any existing utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer,
electric, telephone, cable television, etc.) or emergency repairs to any
stormwater management facility that poses a threat to public health or
safety, as determined by the Conservation Commission. Where such
activity is subject to the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission,
the work shall not proceed without the issuance of an Emergency
Certification by the Commission.
§ 246-5 DEDHAM CODE § 246-6
1:200
§ 246-7. Procedures.
Permit Procedures, Permit Requirements and Performance Standards shall
be established and included as Stormwater Management Regulations
promulgated under § 246-4 of this By-law to meet the following purposes:
§ 246-8. Enforcement.
The Conservation Commission, or an authorized agent of the Conservation
Commission, shall enforce this By-law, Regulations, orders, violation
notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal
remedies for such violations.
H. The maintenance or resurfacing (not including reconstruction) of any
public or private way.
I. The construction or expansion of a residential driveway with a total
paved area (including any existing pavement) of less than 1,000 square
feet.
A. Ensure the Town's compliance with requirements of its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems (MS4) and other applicable State and Federal mandates.
B. Reduce and eliminate impairments of the Charles and Neponset Rivers
and to preserve the health of the Town's groundwater resources.
C. Regulate and control stormwater runoff quantity and quality.
D. Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management, better
site design practices or "low-impact development practices", such as
reducing impervious cover, increasing site-wide infiltration, and
preserving open space and other natural areas, to the maximum extent
practicable.
E. Promote water conservation through the re-use of stormwater.
F. Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and
nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they
continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to
public safety or the environment.
G. Establish provisions to ensure there is an adequate funding mechanism,
including surety, for the proper review, inspection and long-term
maintenance of stormwater facilities implemented as part of this Bylaw.
A. Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this by-law, or any
associated regulations, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the
Conservation Commission may seek injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction restraining the person from activities which
§ 246-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-8
1:201
would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
B. Orders. If the Conservation Commission determines that a person's
failure to follow the requirements of this By-law, any Regulatory
provision issued hereunder, or any authorization issued pursuant to this
By-law or Regulations is creating an adverse impact to a water
resource, then the Commission may issue a written order to the person
to remediate the adverse impact, which may include requirements to:
(1) Cease and desist from land-disturbing activity until there is
compliance with the By-law or provisions of an approved
Stormwater Management Permit;
(2) Maintain, install or perform additional erosion and sediment
control measures;
(3) Perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(4) Remediate erosion and sedimentation resulting directly or
indirectly from land-disturbing activity;
(5) Comply with requirements in the Stormwater Management Permit
for operation and maintenance of stormwater management
systems;
(6) Remediate adverse impacts resulting directly or indirectly from
malfunction of the stormwater management systems; and/or
(7) Eliminate discharges, directly or indirectly, into a watercourse or
into the waters of the Commonwealth.
C. If the Conservation Commission determines that abatement or
remediation of pollutants is required, the order shall set forth a
deadline for completion of the abatement or remediation. Said order
shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to
abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town
may, at its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be
charged to the violator or property owner. Within 30 days after
completing all measures necessary to abate the violation or to perform
remediation, the violator and the property owner will be notified of the
costs incurred by the Town, including administrative costs. The violator
or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or
basis of costs with the Conservation Commission within 30 days of
receipt of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due is not
received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest or within
30 days following a decision of the Conservation Commission affirming
or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, the cost shall become a special assessment against the
property owner of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any
unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in G.L. c.59, § 57 after the
30th day at which the costs first become due.
§ 246-8 DEDHAM CODE § 246-8
1:202
§ 246-9. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have unacceptable adverse or cumulative effect on
the resource areas protected by this by-law. Failure to provide adequate
evidence to show the effect the proposed project may have on the surface
waters or ground waters of the Commonwealth, and/or the storm drainage
system of the Town of Dedham shall be sufficient cause for the Commission
to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
§ 246-10. Stormwater management compliance certificate.
D. Criminal and Civil Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of
this by-law, valid regulation, or the terms or conditions in any permit or
order prescribed or issued there under, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $300 for each day such violation occurs or continues or subject
to a civil penalty, which may be assessed in an action brought on behalf
of the Town in any court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure set forth in G.L. c.40, § 21D and § 1-6B of the Town of
Dedham General By-laws, in which case any police officer of the Town
of Dedham, the Conservation Agent, and such other persons as are
authorized by the Conservation Commission shall be the enforcing
person. The penalty for the first violation shall be a warning. The
penalty for the second violation shall be $100. The penalty for the third
and subsequent violations shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that
such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
F. Entry to perform duties under this by-law. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the Commission, its agents, officers, and employees may enter
upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their
duties under this by-law and regulations and may make or cause to be
made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission
deems reasonably necessary.
G. Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Conservation Commission shall
be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
H. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this by-law are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
A. Because a SMP runs with the title of a property, a person shall request
the Dedham Conservation Commission to issue a Stormwater
Management Compliance Certificate (SMCC) upon completion of all
work authorized under a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP).
§ 246-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-10
1:203
§ 246-11. Fee schedule.
B. The following procedure shall be followed in the application for a
SMCC:
(1) A person who has been issued a SMP or their legal representative
shall submit a letter or appropriate form with the Dedham
Conservation Commission to request an issuance of a SMCC.
(2) Any as-built plans or other documentation required under the SMP
shall accompany the SMCC request.
(3) The Dedham Conservation Commission shall vote on a SMCC
request at a public hearing. Such requests shall be advertised on
the Dedham Conservation Commission meeting agendas that are
posted at Dedham Town Hall and Dedham Public Library.
(4) The Dedham Conservation Commission may refer a SMCC request
to the Stormwater Officer for review and comment prior to taking
any action.
C. The SMCC shall be recorded at the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds
and shall run with the title of the property. Proof of recording, including
Registry Book and Page or Land Court Instrument Number shall be
provided to the Conservation Commission for its records.
A. Rules.
(1) Permit and application fees are payable at the time of application
and are non-refundable.
(2) Permit fees shall be calculated by the Conservation Commission in
accordance with the fee schedule below.
(3) Town, County, State and Federal projects are exempt from fees.
(4) Failure to comply with the by-law after official notification shall
result in fees twice those normally assessed.
B. Fees.
(1) A non-refundable application fee of the larger of $30 or $0.0030
per square foot of the parcel to which the permit will be issued
shall be due and payable to the Town of Dedham at the time an
application is filed.
(2) Application fees for permits issued under Minor Stormwater
Management Permits (mSMP)s under § 246-4C of this by-law shall
be waived when such permits are issued for projects associated
with existing single-family dwellings. [Amended 5-15-2017 ATM
by Art. 29]
(3) Consultant fees shall be determined at the time of project review
based on a specific scope of work. Consultant fees shall be outlined
§ 246-10 DEDHAM CODE § 246-11
1:204
§ 246-12. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of
this By-law shall not invalidate any section, provision, paragraph, sentence,
or clause thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or determination that
previously has been issued.
Chapter 250
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 125.
Parks and public places — See Ch. 204.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 210.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 250-1. Director of Public Works to administer public ways.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
The Director of Public Works shall act as the Superintendent of Streets and
shall be responsible to the Town Manager for the efficient administration of
all matters relating to any public way of the Town.
in Stormwater Management Rules and Regulations promulgated
under this by-law.
(4) For a direct connection to the Town of Dedham Storm Drainage
System, a non-refundable fee of $500 is due at the time an
application is filed.
(5) A copy of the Stormwater Management Rules and Regulations shall
be available for a fee of $5.
(6) A complete printed set of the Town of Dedham Construction
Standards and Specifications including standard construction
details for Stormwater Management Projects shall be available for
a fee of $25.
(7) The only method of payment, which will be accepted, is US
Currency (cash) or a check made payable to the Town of Dedham.
C. These fees are in addition to any other local or state fees that may be
charged under any other law, by-law, or applicable regulation.
D. The above fee schedule may be reduced by the Conservation
Commission. Any such change shall be made at a posted public hearing
of the Commission not less than 30 days prior to the date upon which
the change is to be effective.
§ 246-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2
1:205
§ 250-2. Notice of intention to lay out or change public way to be
published.
Notice of intention to lay out, alter or relocate a Town way shall, in addition
to the notice required by law, be published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Town,
the last publication to be not less than seven days prior to the day of
hearing.
§ 250-3. Street opening permits.
No person or utility shall make any excavation, modify, or fill any excavation
within the limits of any public way without first obtaining a Street Opening
Permit to do so from the Director of Public Works. Any excavation within
the Town's streets, sidewalks, or other public Right of Way shall only be
permitted in accordance with the current Town of Dedham, Street Opening
Regulations. The granting of such permit shall require all such activities to
conform to the current Town of Dedham, Street Opening Regulations.
§ 250-4. Construction of access ways onto public ways regulated.
A. It is the intent of this section to protect the public safety and
convenience by controlling the location of and construction of certain
access ways which connect to public ways or ways used as public ways
for the use of motor vehicles.
B. Access ways as defined herein shall not be constructed or used until a
permit has been issued therefor.
C. Effect on existing uses. Access ways in use at the time this section
becomes effective shall not be affected by this section unless said ways
are widened by more than 50% of their existing width or relocated so
that they will connect to the public way at a different point.
D. Access ways requiring a permit:
(1) For purposes of this section, an access way shall be defined as: A
way that (i) serves a land area or land use that may be described as
Residential, Business, Manufacturing, or Industrial, or any other
similar designation; and (ii) connects or abuts a public way or a way
used as a public way and falls under the jurisdiction of the Street
Commissioners (Selectmen).
(2) A permit shall not be required for:
(a) A way that connects with or abuts a State Highway under the
jurisdiction of the State Highway Division of the Massachusetts
Highway Department; or
(b) A way of less than 30 feet width that constitutes a residential
driveway access or an accessway designed to serve any
residential property entirely within the Town of Dedham; and
§ 250-2 DEDHAM CODE § 250-4
1:206
(c) A way within the Town of Dedham that would come under the
Subdivision Control Law or Major Site Plan Review as
currently in effect in the Town of Dedham,
E. Method of obtaining a Permit for Construction of an Access Way:
(1) Applicant — shall mean any person, firm, corporation or any other
legal entity who can construct an access way as described herein.
(2) The applicant shall notify the Street Commissioners (Selectmen) of
his intent to construct said access way in writing, and submit with
said notice a plan showing in detail sufficient information to
determine the following: (Note: In many cases a print of the plan
required by the Parking by-law can be used for the plan to be
submitted as required herein if it shows the required information.)
(a) The point at which the access way will connect with the public
way.
(b) The width of the access way and the radii of the curves
connecting with the public way. Location of islands and/or
dividers, if any.
(c) The grades of the access way, particularly in relation to sight
distances, maneuverability and drainage.
(d) The number of motor vehicles which may be stored or parked
in the area to be served by the access way. The Street
Commissioners shall have the right to determine whether or
not an access way will or may serve 25 or more parking or
storage facilities with or without regard to the existence of
other access ways to the same general area.
F. Issuance of required permit:
(1) A permit for the construction or use of an access way as defined
herein shall not be issued until the Board of Selectmen, acting as
Street Commissioners, hold a duly advertised public hearing
concerning the same by advertising once in a newspaper having a
general circulation in the Town of Dedham at least seven days
before the day of the hearing.
(2) If the applicant satisfies all the requirements of this section
enumerated in Subsection E(2), above, and if the Street
Commissioners shall determine that such proposed plan does not
constitute a public hazard, a permit shall be issued to the applicant
forthwith in a form satisfactory to the Board of Selectmen.
(3) If the applicant in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen is unable
to comply with the requirements of this section in any one or all
respects, said Board of Selectmen shall not issue such permit until
the applicant is able to prove compliance with this section at a rehearing,
if deemed necessary by said Board.
§ 250-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:207
§ 250-5. Vehicles interfering with snow removal may be removed
and stored.
The Director of Public Works or the Chief of Police may, to facilitate the
removal of snow or ice from any public way in the Town, remove or cause
to be removed from the public way any vehicle which interferes with such
work. The vehicle may be removed to and stored in any convenient place,
including a public garage, and the cost of removal and storage charges, if
any, shall be imposed upon the owner of such vehicle.
§ 250-6. Obstructions located in the public right-of-way.
§ 250-7. Temporary repairs to private ways. [Amended 5-19-2014
ATM by Art. 33]
The Director of Public Works may, at his discretion, undertake such action
as may be necessary to keep private ways which have been open to public
use for a period in excess of 10 years passable for emergency vehicles.
This by-law shall not be construed so as to allow complete repaving or
rebuilding projects for any private way, nor shall any such repairs exceed in
cost the amount of $1,500 for any given private way in any given fiscal year.
The liability limit of the Town for any claim arising from any such work on
any private way shall be $5,000.
G. Enforcement: In addition to enforcement under § 1-6 of these By-laws, if
the Board of Selectmen determines that an access way has been
constructed in violation of this section or constructed in a manner
inconsistent with a permit issued therefor, said Board of Selectmen may
close or obstruct the entrance of such access way at a point where it
intersects the public way and said access way shall remain closed until
the provisions of this section are strictly observed by the landowner.
A. No person shall place or locate any temporary obstruction within any
Public Right of Way without first obtaining a Street Opening Permit to
do so from the Director of Public Works.
B. Any obstruction within the Town's streets, sidewalks, or other public
Right of Way shall only be permitted in accordance with the current
Town of Dedham, Street Opening Regulations. An obstruction shall be
considered, but not limited to, dumpsters, unregistered vehicles (such
as construction machines and equipment), construction materials, or
other such object or objects which are not specifically permitted under
state or local regulations and may pose a potential hazard to the
general public.
§ 250-4 DEDHAM CODE § 250-8
1:208
§ 250-8. Laying out and improvements of private ways.8 [Added
5-19-2014 ATM by Art. 33]
Owners of land abutting any private way that is open to public use may
petition the Board of Selectmen to lay out and accept such way as public
and improve such way to standards acceptable to the Board of Selectmen.
The Board may determine to approve such petition and establish standards
for the improvement of such way in accordance with a policy implemented
by said Board after due notice and hearing. The following conditions shall
be met:
A. One hundred percent of the owners of land abutting on the private way
or who otherwise own any part of the way shall agree to the laying out
and acceptance of the way as public and the construction of such
improvements to the way as the Board of Selectmen shall determine.
B. One hundred percent of said owners shall agree to pay such portion of
the cost of laying out and improving the private way as the Board of
Selectmen may determine to assess as a betterment, which assessment
may be up to and including 100% of such costs. Such costs shall include
the costs to the Town of ascertaining ownership of the way and related
properties and obtaining such property rights as are necessary to
public use and maintenance of the way. Said betterment assessment
shall be equally assessed on all benefited properties if all benefited
properties are existing or potential single family lots and otherwise
shall be assessed proportionately pursuant to G.L. c.80, and pursuant to
G.L. c.80, § 13, interest shall be at a rate equal to 2% above the rate of
interest chargeable to the Town for the project to which the
assessments relate, as determined by the Town Treasurer. All
improvements and/or assessments shall be in accord with applicable
Massachusetts General Laws.
C. Prior to any expenditure by the Town on construction, said owners and
all others specially benefited by such layout and improvement or
owning property in which rights must be acquired by the Town for use
and maintenance of such ways shall, as applicable: (i) release the Town
from all liability in connection with the project; (ii) agree to indemnify
and hold harmless the Town from all claims of injury or damage by third
parties; (iii) grant to the Town and its agents, contractors and
employees a license to enter the way to perform the project; (iv) agree
to provide for the ongoing maintenance and repair of said way unless
and until said way shall be accepted as a public way; (v) waive rights to
appeal the amount of the betterment assessment pursuant to G.L. c.80,
§§ 5-10A; and (vi) waive claims for damages from any taking of land or
easements for public way purposes in connection therewith, such
agreement to be acknowledged by a notary public and to be binding
upon successors and assigns of such property owners.
8. Editor's Note: With the inclusion of this section, former § 250-8 was renumbered as
§ 250-9 with the permission of the Town.
§ 250-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-8
1:209
§ 250-9. Discharge of collected ground or surface water.
Chapter 265
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
D. Upon completion of the layout of the way as a public way by the Board
of Selectmen, including referral of such layout to the Planning Board for
its recommendation and filing of the layout plan with the Town Clerk
pursuant to G.L. c.82, §§ 21-24, such private way shall be submitted to
the next Annual Town Meeting for acceptance by the Town as a public
way.
A. Discharge of water. No person shall discharge or divert or cause to be
discharged or diverted ground or surface water collected by
mechanical pump within a building or any surface water collected on
private property, including but not limited to pools, in a manner that
would create a hazardous or icy condition or cause damage to a public
way or sidewalk. No person shall allow a discharge to continue for more
than 10 minutes after being notified to cease by the Director of the
Department of Public Works or by a police officer of the Town.
B. Any person who violates this by-law shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $300. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C. As an alternative to criminal prosecution, the Director of Public Works
or any police officer of the Town may elect to enforce this by-law by
utilizing the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in G.L. c.40,
§ 21D, as may be amended from time to time. The fine for each
noncriminal violation shall be $300 and each day or portion of a day on
which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 250-8 DEDHAM CODE § 250-9
1:210
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Traffic Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 12, Sec. 9, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 265-1. Legislative authority.
Subject to the provisions of Article 47 of the 1963 Annual Town Meeting
accepting the provisions of G.L. c.90, § 20C, and in accordance with G.L.
c.40, § 21(21), the Board of Selectmen may adopt, alter suspend or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the General Laws, relative to
vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the streets of the Town, and to the
movement, stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on, and their exclusion
from all or any streets, ways, highway, roads and parkways under the
control of the Town. The Selectmen may designate any way or part thereof
under their control as a through way under and subject to the provisions of
G.L. c.89, § 9.
§ 265-2. Public notices; petitions; hearings.
No such adoption, alteration, or repeal of rules or regulations shall take
effect until public notice has been given, except with respect to such special
rules or regulations as are declared by the Board of Selectmen to be
urgently required for the public safety or welfare or are of a temporary
nature and are to be effective for a period of not more than three weeks.
Public notice shall be by publication in one or more newspapers with
general circulation within the Town and shall include a summary of the rules
or regulations, the date, not less than 21 days after the date of publication,
upon which such rules or regulations shall take effect, and a notice of the
right to petition for a public hearing. If 25 or more voters of the Town
file such petitions with the Board of Selectmen prior to the effective date,
the proposed action of the Board shall be suspended until the Board holds
a public hearing. At least seven days prior notice of the hearing shall be
published in the same newspapers. Within one week after such hearing the
Board may affirm or void the proposed action; if the Board fails to affirm or
void within one week, the proposed action shall stand.
§ 265-3. Exceptions to parking prohibitions.
Any regulation prohibiting the parking or standing of vehicles may provide
that it does not apply in specified residential areas to any motor vehicle
which is (i) registered under G.L. c.90, (ii) principally garaged in the Town
of Dedham, and (iii) owned or used by a resident in such area who has
filed with the Chief of Police written notice of intention to park in such area
and who conspicuously displays notice of the filing on the vehicle; provided,
however, that neither filing notice nor displaying notice of the filing shall
assign any specific space to any person or vehicle.
§ 265-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-4
1:211
§ 265-4. Violations; fines.
Except as otherwise provided below, any violation of Chapter 265 or rule or
regulation adopted hereunder shall be enforced in accordance with § 1-6 of
these By-laws.
§ 265-4 DEDHAM CODE § 265-4
1:212
ARTICLE II
Abandoned and Nonoperating Vehicles
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 39, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 265-5. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this section:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Town which is not a street or
highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or
slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include
without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, moped
and motorized scooter.
§ 265-6. Abandonment of vehicles.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Town and no person shall
leave any vehicle at any place within the Town for such time and under such
circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been
abandoned.
§ 265-7. Leaving of wrecked, non-operating vehicle on street.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, or
junked vehicle on any street or highway within the Town.
§ 265-8. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles.
No person in charge or control of any property within the Town, whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain
on such property longer than 14 days; and no person shall leave any such
vehicle on any property within the Town for a longer time than three
days; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in
an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of
such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Town.
§ 265-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-9
1:213
§ 265-9. Impounding.
The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place
within the Town which reasonably appears to be in violation of this section
or lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with G.L. c.135 relative to unclaimed
and abandoned property.
§ 265-10. Penalties.
Any violation of this by-law shall be subject to a fine of $50. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 30 days or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 265-9 DEDHAM CODE § 265-10
1:214
ARTICLE III
Motorized Recreational Vehicles
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 40, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 265-11. Permission required for use on public and private
property.
Motorized recreational vehicles, including trail bikes, snowmobiles, minicars,
and other off-road vehicles, may not be used on public property unless
the agency in charge thereof shall have opened the land for the use of such
vehicles and shall have erected signs stating that such uses are permitted.
Said vehicles may not be used on private property without the permission of
the owner or tenant. Permission may be given in advance and may be given
to an individual or club, or by the posting of appropriate permission signs
by the owner or a person authorized by him. No person shall operate such
vehicles within 500 feet of an occupied residence without the permission
of the owner or tenant, except in cases of emergency, or except directly to
depart from and return to such residence.
§ 265-12. Conformance to prevailing laws and regulations.
Operators of motorized recreational vehicles must conform with other
prevailing laws and regulations.
§ 265-13. Unsafe operation; disturbing the peace.
No person shall operate a motorized vehicle, skateboard, scooter, gas or
electric scooter, All Terrain Vehicle (ATV), snowmobile, mini-car, or any
mode of transport on any sidewalk, public or private way, or public property
in a reckless or careless manner so as to endanger the safety, or disturb the
peace of any citizen.
§ 265-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-13
1:215

ARTICLE IV
Traffic Violations
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 50, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 265-14. Fines for violations of truck ban.
Violation of any truck ban imposed by the Board of Selectmen or Town
Meeting shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of § 1-6 of
these By-laws.
§ 265-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-14
1:217

ARTICLE V
Fire Lanes
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 51, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 265-15. Establishment of fire lanes; signs.
The Fire Chief or his designee pursuant to G.L. Chapter 40 Section 21(14)
may establish fire lanes as a means of access for fire apparatus to any
building, and may require the owner of such property to post "No Parking"
signs and appropriate pavement markings at designated places on such fire
lanes.
§ 265-16. Blocking fire apparatus from access to buildings
prohibited.
No person shall by any means, including a parked vehicle, obstruct or block
a private way so as to prevent the access of fire apparatus to any building.
§ 265-17. Obstruction of or parking in fire lane; access areas
established.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a vehicle in any fire lane established
by the Fire Chief under § 265-15 of this article. Such a fire lane shall
constitute an access area to be established at the discretion of the Fire
Chief or his designee.
§ 265-18. Violations and penalties; failure to comply.
Any person who shall refuse to post such signs or appropriate pavement
markings as may be ordered by the Fire Chief or who violates any provisions
of signs posted in accordance with the order of the Fire Chief shall be
subject to a fine of $300.
§ 265-19. Unattended vehicles in fire lanes; towing; impounding.
The Chief of Police or any member of his department designated by him
is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any unattended vehicle
within a fire lane established under this section. Such vehicle may be towed
and impounded until the costs of towing, impounding and other fines are
paid.
§ 265-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-19
1:219

ARTICLE VI
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 52, of the 1996 By-laws; amended
11-18-2013 STM by Art. 16]
§ 265-20. Parking reserved for disabled veterans or handicapped
persons.
Owners or persons in control of private ways or improved or enclosed
property used as off-street parking areas for businesses, shopping malls,
theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, or
other places where the public has a right of access shall reserve parking
spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated
by a disabled veteran or handicapped person whose vehicle bears the
distinguishing license plate or placard authorized by G.L. c.90, § 2, in
accordance with the provisions of G.L. c.40, § 21(23).
§ 265-21. Parking used only by disabled veterans or handicapped
persons.
No person other than a disabled veteran or handicapped person shall park
or leave a vehicle unattended within parking spaces designated as reserved
for vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or handicapped
persons as authorized by G.L. c.40, § 21, clause 23 or in such manner as to
obstruct a curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons as a means
of egress to a street or public way.
§ 265-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-21
1:221

ARTICLE VII
Commercial Vehicle Parking
[Adopted as Ch. 13, Sec. 53, of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 265-22. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential district
regulated.
No person shall park, or cause to be parked, at any location on any public
way within the Town of Dedham located within or abutting a residential
district, any commercial vehicle of more than 2 1/2 tons gross vehicle
weight, for any period in excess of four hours, unless said vehicle is actually
in the process of loading, unloading, or providing some discernible service
to one or more adjacent residential properties.
§ 265-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-22
1:223

ARTICLE VIII
Vehicles Impounded for OUI Arrests
[Adopted Ch. 13, Sec. 59, of the 1996 By-laws]
§ 265-23. Time restriction for release.
No motor vehicle impounded pursuant to an arrest for operating under the
influence (OUI) of intoxicating substances pursuant to state law may be
released prior to the passing of 12 hours following arrest.
§ 265-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-23
1:225
Chapter 271
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 246.
§ 271-1. Purpose.
§ 271-2. Definitions.
A. The purpose of the by-law is to protect the wetlands, related water
resources and adjoining land areas in the Town of Dedham by
controlling activities deemed by the Conservation Commission likely to
have a significant or cumulative effect upon wetland values, including
but not limited to the following: public or private water supply,
groundwater, flood control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm
damage prevention, water pollution prevention, fisheries, shellfish,
wildlife habitat, recreation, aesthetics, agriculture and aquaculture
values (collectively, "the resource area values protected by this bylaw").
B. Nothing in this by-law is intended to replace the requirements of the
Dedham Floodplain Zoning By-law. Any activity subject to the
provisions of both by-laws must comply with the specifications of each.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this by-law.
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by the
by-law:
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate
materials of any kind;
(1)
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristic sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood
retention characteristics;
(2)
(3) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality;
(4)
(5) Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation;
Driving of piles, erection or repair of buildings, or structures of any
kind;
(6)
§ 265-23 DEDHAM CODE § 271-2
1:226
§ 271-3. Jurisdiction.
§ 271-4. Exceptions.
COMMISSION — The Dedham Conservation Commission.
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,
the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to Town by-laws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, the Town of Dedham, and any other legal entity, its
legal representatives, agents or assigns.
(7) Placing of obstructions or objects in the water;
(8) Destruction or alteration of plant life, including cutting of trees;
Changing water temperature, depth, flow rate, biochemical oxygen
demand, or other physical or chemical characteristics of water;
(9)
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater;
(10)
(11)Application of pesticides or herbicides.
(12)Destruction or alteration of wildlife habitat.
Any work within 200 feet of any river as defined in the
Massachusetts Rivers Act of 1996, as may be amended from time
to time.
(13)
B. All other definitions as set forth in G.L. c.131, § 40 and Massachusetts
Regulation 310 CMR or as amended from time to time issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection are hereby made part of this
by-law.
A. Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided in
this by-law, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, or otherwise alter the
following resource areas: any freshwater wetland; marshes; wet
meadows; bogs; swamps; vernal pools; banks; reservoirs; lakes; ponds;
streams; creeks; beaches; lands under waterbodies; lands subject to
flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water (collectively
the "resource areas protected by this by-law" listed in this section);
lands within 100 feet of any of the aforesaid resource areas and areas
within 200 feet of any waterbody which meets the definition of a "river"
under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, G.L. c.131, § 40,
Para. 14. Said resource areas need not border surface waters in order
to qualify for protection.
B. No person shall dump material of any type within any resource area
protected by this by-law, any public right-of-way or upon any publicly
owned land. The Conservation Commission shall have the authority to
enforce the cleanup of any such illegal dumping.
§ 271-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-4
1:227
§ 271-5. Application for permits and requests for determination.
A. The permit and application required by this by-law shall not be required
for maintaining, repairing, or replacing, but not substantially changing
or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used
in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, telephone,
telegram or other communication services provided that written notice
has been given to the Commission prior to the commencement of work.
This exception shall not apply to the application of herbicides. The
permit and application required by this by-law shall not be required for
work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural use or in aquacultural use, provided that written notice has
been given to the Commission prior to the commencement of work.
B. The permit and application of this by-law shall not apply to emergency
projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety of the
public, provided that the work is to be performed by or has been
ordered to be performed by an agency of the Commonwealth or a
political subdivision thereof, provided that advance notice, oral or
written, has been given to the Commission prior to the commencement
of work or within 24 hours after commencement, provided that the
following conditions are met:
(1) The Conservation Commission or its agent certifies the work as an
emergency project.
(2) The work is performed only for the time and place certified by the
Conservation Commission for the limited purposes necessary to
abate the emergency.
(3) Within 21 days of commencement of an emergency project a permit
application shall be filed for review as provided by this by-law.
(4) Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the
Commission, the Commission may, after notice and a public
hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and
order restoration and mitigation measures.
C. Other than stated in this section, the exceptions provided in the
Wetlands Protection Act shall not apply under this by-law.
A. Written applications shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities regulated by this by-law affecting the resource areas
protected by this by-law. The application shall include such information
and plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission to describe
proposed activities and their effects on the resource areas protected by
this by-law. No activities shall commence without receiving and
complying with a permit issued pursuant to this by-law.
B. Activities which require a Notice of Intent under this by-law but not
under G.L. c.131, § 40 or as it may be amended from time to time may
§ 271-4 DEDHAM CODE § 271-5
1:228
§ 271-6. Notice and hearings.
use the abbreviated Notice of Intent at the discretion of the
Commission.
C. The Commission may accept as the application and plans under this bylaw
the Notice of Intent and plans filed under the Wetlands Protection
Act, G.L. c.131, § 40 or as it may be amended from time to time.
D. Any person desiring to know whether or not proposed activity of an
area is subject to the by-law, may in writing request a determination
from the Commission. Such a request for determination shall contain
data and plans specified by the regulations of the Commission. In the
absence of regulations, the same notice, plans, and specifications
required to be filed by an applicant under G.L. c.131, § 40, or as it may
be amended from time to time, will be accepted as fulfilling the filing
requirements of this by-law.
E. At the time of an application or request, the applicant shall pay a filing
fee specified in the appended schedule located in § 271-16 of this bylaw.
This fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection
Act, G.L. Ch. 131, Sec. 40, or as it may be amended from time to time.
The Commission may waive the filing fee and costs and expenses for an
application or request filed by a government agency or when the
Commission determines that a project serves an overwhelming public
purpose.
A. Any person filing an application or a request for determination with the
Commission shall at the same time give written notice thereof by
certified mail or hand delivery to all abutters according to the most
recent records of the Assessors, including those across a traveled way
or a body of water. The notice to abutters shall enclose a copy of the
application or request, with plans, or shall state where copies may be
examined and obtained by abutters free of charge. When a person
requesting a determination is other than the owner, the request, the
notice of the hearing and the determination itself shall be sent by the
Commission to the owner as well as the person making the request.
B. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application or
request for determination, with written notice given at the expense of
the applicant, Said notice shall be published at least five days prior to
the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Dedham.
C. The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed application or request for determination.
D. The Commission shall issue its permit or determination within 21 days
of the close of the public hearing.
E. The Commission in its discretion may combine its hearing under this bylaw
with any hearing required to be conducted under the Wetlands
Protection Act, G.L. c.131, § 40, or as amended from time to time.
§ 271-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-6
1:229
§ 271-7. Coordination with other boards. [Amended 11-17-2014
ATM by Art. 18]
Any person filing a permit application or a request for determination with
the commission shall at the same time provide a copy thereof, by certified
mail or hand delivery, to the Town Manager's Office, Board of Selectmen,
Planning Board and other local departments and boards as deemed
necessary by the Commission. The applicant shall have the burden of
satisfying the Commission that copies were mailed or delivered. The
Commission shall not take final action until such boards and officials have
had 14 days from receipt of notice to file written comments and
recommendations with the Commission, which the Commission shall take
into account but which shall not be binding on the Commission. The
applicant shall have the right receive any such comments and
recommendations, and to respond to them at a hearing of the Commission
prior to final action.
§ 271-8. Permits, determinations and conditions.
F. The Commission shall have authority to continue the hearing to a date
certain announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the hearing,
which may include receipt of additional information offered by the
applicant or others, information and plans required of the applicant,
deemed necessary by the Commission in its discretion, or comments
and recommendations of boards and officials listed in § 271-7 of this bylaw.
In the event the applicant objects to a continuance or
postponement, the hearing shall be closed and the Commission shall
take action on such information as is available.
A. If the Commission after a public hearing determines that the activities
which are the subject of the application are likely to have an adverse or
cumulative effect upon the resource areas protected by this by-law, the
Commission, within 21 days of he close of the hearing, shall issue or
deny a permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit, the
Commission shall impose conditions which the Commission deems
necessary or desirable to protect those values, and all activities shall be
carried out in accordance with those conditions. If it issues a permit (or
Order of Conditions), the Commission shall record it in the Registry of
Deeds of the Land Court and no work shall be undertaken until
reimbursement of any costs is received by the Commission.
B. The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements of this by-law; for failure to submit necessary information
or plans requested by the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent
unacceptable adverse or cumulative effects upon the wetland values
protected by this by-law; or where conditions are not adequate to
protect those values, or if in the Commission's judgment such denial is
necessary to preserve the environmental quality of the areas subject to
this by-law.
§ 271-6 DEDHAM CODE § 271-8
1:230
§ 271-9. Regulations.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this by-law. Failure
by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or
invalidate the effect of this by-law.
§ 271-10. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this by-law, in addition to any security
required by another municipal or state board, agency or official, the
Commission may require that the performance and observance of the
conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by a proper
bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or the undertaking of
financial responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission, to be
released in whole or in part upon issuance of a certificate of Compliance for
work performed pursuant to the permit.
§ 271-11. Enforcement.
C. A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission in its discretion may issue
a permit expiring five years from the date of issuance for recurring or
maintenance work, provided that annual notification of time and
location of work is given to the Commission. Any permit may be
renewed once for an additional one-year period, provided that a request
for renewal is received in writing by the Commission at least 30 days
prior to expiration.
D. The Commission is also empowered to revoke a permit which it has
issued for failure to perform the permitted work in accordance with any
conditions set forth by the Commission in the issued permit or for
violations of the Wetlands Protection Act, Massachusetts General Law,
Chapter 131, Section 40, or as amended from time to time, this by-law,
or any other Local, State or Federal law or regulation. The Commission
shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of revoking a permit. Such a
public hearing will be advertised at least five working days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in Dedham.
E. The Commission in an appropriate case may combine the permit or
other action on an application issued under this by-law with the Order
of Conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act.
A. The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have the
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this by-law and may make or cause to be
made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission
deems necessary.
§ 271-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-11
1:231
§ 271-12. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have unacceptable adverse or cumulative effect on
the resource areas protected by this by-law. Failure to provide adequate
evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause
for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
§ 271-13. Appeals.
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in
an action filed within 60 days thereof, in accordance with G.L. c.249, § 4.
§ 271-14. Relation to the wetlands protection act.
This by-law is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and Home Rule statutes, independent of the
Wetland Protection Act, G.L. c.131, § 40, or as it may be amended from time
to time, and regulations thereunder.
§ 271-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this by-law shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or
determination which previously has been issued.
§ 271-16. Filing fee schedule for permits for work within the
resource areas or one-hundred-foot buffer zone to any resource
area protected by this by-law.
B. The Commission shall have the authority to enforce this by-law, its
regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative orders, in accordance with § 1-6 of these By-laws, and/or
civil and criminal court actions.
C. Upon request of the Commission, the Town Manager, Board of
Selectmen and the Town Counsel shall take legal action for the
enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission the Chief
of Police shall take legal action for enforcement under criminal law.
[Amended 11-17-2014 ATM by Art. 18]
D. Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other
officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement.
A. Rules:
(1) Permit fees are payable at the time of application and are nonrefundable.
§ 271-11 DEDHAM CODE § 271-16
1:232
(2) Permit fees shall be calculated by this Commission per schedule
below.
(3) Town, County, State and Federal projects are exempt from fees.
(4) Failure to comply with the law after official notification shall result
in fees twice those normally assessed.
B. Fees.
(1) Minor project (house additions, tennis court, swimming pool utility
work, etc. associated with existing single-family dwelling): $100 +
$1/square feet of resource area disturbed.
(2) Single-family dwelling, new construction: $250 + $1/square feet of
resource area disturbed, 0.02/square feet land subject to flooding
or 100 feet buffer zone or 200 feet riverfront area disturbed.
(3) Subdivisions (road and utilities only): $250 + $2/feet of roadway
sideline within a resource area protected by this by-law and within
100 feet of any resource area protected by this by-law or 200 feet of
a river as defined under the Massachusetts Rivers act.
(4) Multifamily Dwellings, Commercial and industrial projects: $500 +
$1/square feet of resource area disturbed, 0.02/square feet land
subject to flooding or 100 feet buffer zone or 200 feet riverfront
area disturbed.
(5) Permit extensions. No Permit Extensions shall be permitted for
Wetland Delineations
(a) Single-family dwelling or minor project: $50 per year
(maximum three years).
(b) Other: $100 per year (maximum three years).
(6) Request for determinations of applicability: $50
(7) Wetland delineation and delineation review: $0.50 per linear foot of
resource area delineated, to a maximum of $100 per existing
single-family dwelling.
(8) Control of nuisance vegetation, including aquatic vegetation: $100
per acre of resource area proposed to be treated, including total
water resource area and associated buffer zone. Minimum fee of
$150.
C. NOTE: These fees are in addition to the local portion of the state fee for
Notices of Intent and Requests for Determination of applicability
charged under G.L. c.131, § 40 and as it may be amended from time to
time.
D. The above fee schedule may be reduced by the Conservation
Commission. Any such change shall be made at a posted public hearing
§ 271-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-16
1:233
Appendix
Chapter A300
GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES AND SPECIAL ACTS
§ A300-1. List of General Law acceptances and Special Acts.
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1890 Ch. 386, Acts of
1890
Ballots for Town elections
1890 Ch. 303, Acts of
1872; Ch. 107, Acts
of 1874; Ch. 58,
§ 25, Public Statutes
Assessment of betterments on
improved sidewalks
1891 Ch. 58, Public
Statutes
Empowering Selectmen to appoint
inspectors of provisions and
animals intended for slaughter
1894 Ch. 154, Acts of
1882
Public parks
1896 Ch. 455, Acts of
1894; Ch. 453, Acts
of 1895
Supervision of the business of
plumbing
1897 Ch. 226, § 2, Acts of
1897
Apportionment of valuation of
Westwood
9-26-1899 Ch. 462, Acts of
1893
Building line
1900 Ch. 270, Acts of
1897
Construction of sewerage system
(partially repealed by Charter
1974)
1900 Ch. 343, Acts of
1900
Construction of sewerage system
(partially repealed by Charter
1974)
1900 Ch. 462, Acts of
1893
Building line of public ways
1900 Ch. 313, Acts of
1896
Building line on parkways
4-2-1900 Ch. 31B, Acts of
1896
Eight hour day
of the Commission not less than 30 days prior to the date upon which
the change is to be effective, and copies thereof shall be posted in a
conspicuous location in the office of the Conservation Commission and
with other lists of fees available in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 271-16 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:234
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1901 Ch. 309, Acts of
1885
Licensing groves for picnics
3-5-1901 Ch. 344, Acts of
1899
Eight hour day
1902 R.L. 104, §§ 1, 4-12 Inspection of buildings
1902 Ch. 346, Acts of
1902
One-year term for Moderator
1906 R.L. c.50, §§ 1-9, as
amended
Betterments
1909 Ch. 209, Acts of
1908
To protect forests from fires
1909 R.L. 208, § 9 Setting fires negligently
1909 Ch. 560, § 113, Acts
of 1907
Boston Caucus Act by Republicans
1911 R.L. c.19, § 37 Extending Civil Service to police
and firemen
1912 (Art. 65) Ch. 367, Acts of
1911
Use of school halls
1912 (Art. 70) Ch. 560, § 367, Acts
of 1907
Three-year term for Overseers of
the Poor
1912 (ballot) Ch. 503, Acts of
1912
Pensioning laborers in
employment of cities and towns
1913 R.L. c.75, § 66 13 ATM 29, Accepted
1913 R.L. c.102,
§§ 122-127
13 ATM 30, Accepted
1913 Ch. 135, Acts of
1913
13 ATM 63, Accepted (repealed by
Charter 1974, Charter 2014)
11-14-1913 Ch. 807, Acts of
1913
Workmen's compensation
1914 R.L. c.65, § 15 14 ATM 45, Accepted
1914 (ballot) Ch. 487, Acts of
1913
Promoting call men
1914 (ballot) Ch. 807, Acts of
1913
Workmen's compensation
1914 Ch. 635, Acts of
1912
Tenement House Act
1914 (ballot) Ch. 217, Acts of
1914
Vacations of laborers employed by
cities and towns
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:235
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1914 (ballot) Ch. 688, Acts of
1914
Making Saturday a half holiday
1914 (ballot) Ch. 790, Acts of
1914
Abolishing party enrollment
1916 (Art. 17) Ch. 191, Acts of
1907
Board of Survey
1916 (Art. 22) Ch. 237, Acts of
1904
Pensions for members of Police
and Fire Departments
1916 (ballot) Ch. 98, General Acts
of 1916
1916 (ballot) Ch. 104, General
Acts of 1916
1916 (ballot) Ch. 179, General
Acts of 1916
1916 Art. 43, postponed
act. 1914; Ch. 795,
voted TM 1917
1917 (Art. 50) Ch. 347, Acts of
1912, as amended
by Ch. 645, Acts of
1913
1917 (STM, Art.
4)
Ch. 264, Acts of
1917
1917 (Art. 13) Ch. 468, Acts of
1911
Chief of Police on Civil Service
1917 (Art. 1) Ch. 835, § 421, Acts
of 1913
Voting precincts
1918 (Art. 16) Ch. 494, Acts of
1913
Planning Board
1-31-1918 Ch. 835, Acts of
1913
Precinct, voting
1919 (ballot) Ch. 311, Acts of
1919
Continuation school for employed
minors
1919 (ballot) Ch. 116, Acts of
1919
1919 (ballot) Ch. 819, Acts of
1913
1919 (Art. 6) Ch. 835, § 401, Acts
of 1913
Town Clerk term, 3 years
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:236
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1920 (Art. 6) Ch. 240, Acts of
1920
Sports on Sunday
1920 (ballot) Ch. 166, Acts of
1920
Day off for police officers
1920 G.L. c.147, §§ 32-47 Licensed boxing matches
1921 (Art. 18) Ch. 591, §§ 27, 28,
29, Acts of 1920
(G.L. c.48, §§ 42-44)
Fire Department
1921 (Art. 27) Ch. 52, Acts of 1921 Amendment to Sewerage Act
(partially repealed by Charter
1974)
1921 (Art. 31) Ch. 14, Acts of 1921
(G.L. c.41, § 25A)
Assistant Assessors
1922 (Art. 19) Ch. 38, Acts of 1922 Civil Service, Chief of Fire
Department
1924 (Art. 20) G.L. c.41, § 1, as
amended by Ch. 66,
Acts of 1923
Town Treasurer, Collector of
Taxes terms, 3 years (specifically
retained by Charter 1974)
1924 (ballot) Ch. 9, Acts of 1924 Janitors of Town Hall and school
buildings on Civil Service
(repealed by Charter 2014)
1926 G.L. c.32, §§ 44-45 Pensions for school janitors
1926 (STM, Art.
36; ballot)
Ch. 358, Acts of
1926
Representative Town Meeting
(repealed by Charter 1974,
Charter 2014)
11-2-1926 Ch. 358, Acts of
1926
Voting precincts/Limited Town
Meeting
1928 (ballot) G.L. c.48, § 59 Platoon system in Fire
Department
1929 G.L. c.136, §§ 21-25,
as amended
Sunday sports
1930 G.L. c.136, §§ 7 and
8
Sale of ice cream and fruit, etc. on
Sunday
1932 (Art. 15) Ch. 13, Acts of 1932 Payments for particular sewers
(partially repealed by Charter
1974)
1933 (ballot) Ch. 120, § 19, Acts
of 1933
Sale of wines and malt beverages
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:237
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1934 Ch. 211, Acts of
1933
Selectmen can exercise powers of
Cemetery Commission, Gypsy
Moth Superintendent and Tree
Warden (repealed by Charter
1974, Charter 2014)
1934 Ch. 325, Acts of
1935
Street Lighting Committee
(repealed by Charter 1974,
Charter 2014)
1934 Ch. 240, Acts of
1935
Acquisition of Boston
Consolidated Gas Co. of property
of Dedham and Hyde Park Gas
and Electric Company
11-6-1934 Ch. 215, Acts of
1934
Superintendent of Infirmary
(repealed by Charter 2014)
1936 Ch. 3, Acts of 1936 Civil Service laws apply to
Department of Public Works
(repealed by Charter 2014)
1936 G.L. c.32, §§ 26-31H
(Ch. 318, Acts of
1936)
Contributory retirement system
for Town employees
1936 Ch. 51, Acts of 1937 Use of Stone Park for playground
and athletic purposes (partially
repealed by Charter 1974)
10-27-1936 Acts of 1936 New precinct
1938 G.L. c.54, § 103A, as
amended by Ch. 77,
§ 1, Acts of 1937
Absentee voting at regular Town
elections
1939 G.L. c.139, §§ 1-3 Burnt, dilapidated or dangerous
buildings
1940 G.L. c.41, § 11A Vacations for policemen and
firemen
1940 G.L. c.41, §§ 81F-81J Improved method of municipal
planning
1940 G.L. c.147, § 16B Policemen excused from duty one
day per week without loss of pay
1940 G.L. c.41, § 100A Indemnification of officers and
employees for damages incurred
arising out of operation of
vehicles owned by Town
1940 Ch. 96, Acts of 1943 Town authorized to pay money to
Thomas Doggett (repealed by
Charter 1974, Charter 2014)
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:238
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1940 Ch. 18, Acts of 1945 Late filing of certificates of
nomination and nomination
papers for current year's election
(repealed by Charter 1974,
Charter 2014)
1941 Ch. 414, Acts of
1941
Civil Service for Department of
Public Works
3-5-1945 Ch. 414, Acts of
1941
Commission Prb. Works
1946 Ch. 1, Acts of 1946 Cities and towns to celebrate
properly for veterans
1946 Ch. 90, Acts of 1947 Town authorized to convey
parkland (repealed by Charter
1974, Charter 2014)
1947 Ch. 559, Acts of
1946
Amount of pensions and
retirement allowances payable to
retired former public employees
increased
1948 Ch. 419, Acts of
1948
Voting precincts; nomination and
election of Town Meeting
members (repealed by Charter
1974, Charter 2014)
1948 Ch. 207, Acts of
1946
Bowling on the Lord's Day
1948 Ch. 265, Acts of
1947
Closing of public offices in cities
and towns on Saturdays
1948 G.L. c.121, § 26K
(added by Ch. 574,
Acts of 1946)
Organization of Housing
Authority; shortage of safe and
sanitary dwellings for low-income
families
1948 Ch. 45, Acts of 1949 Late registration of voters for
Town Meeting permitted
(repealed by Charter 1974,
Charter 2014)
1949 Ch. 588, Acts of
1948
Pensions increased
1949 G.L. c.41, § 97A Powers and duties of Selectmen
and Police Chief in regard to
Police Department
1950 Ch. 613, Acts of
1950
Town authorized to convey portion
of Stone Park to Frank and
Antoinette Zonfrelli
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:239
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1950 Ch. 135, Acts of
1950
Election of Town Meeting
members (repealed by Charter
1974, Charter 2014)
1951 Ch. 610, Acts of
1950
Establishment of Dedham-
Westwood Water District
1951 Ch. 91, Acts of 1951 Town authorized to borrow money
to pay judgment (repealed by
Charter 1974, Charter 2014)
1951 G.L. c.40, § 6B Purchase of uniforms for Police
and Fire Departments
1951 G.L. c.54, § 103A Absentee voting at Town elections
1951 G.L. c.32, § 89A Increased pensions to widows of
employees killed in line of duty
1952 Ch. 359, Acts of
1953
Traffic circle designated Norfolk
County Marine Corps League
Memorial Circle
1953 Ch. 434, Acts of
1953
Rent control
1953 Ch. 494, Acts of
1954
Acts and proceedings at
adjourned Town Meeting
validated (repealed by Charter
1974, Charter 2014)
1954 G.L. c.41, § 38A Tax Collector is also Town
Collector
1954 Ch. 710, Acts of
1955
Acts and proceedings at
adjourned Town Meeting
validated (repealed by Charter
1974, Charter 2014)
1956 Ch. 670, Acts of
1955
Pensions increased to certain
retired employees
1956 Ch. 446, Acts of
1956
Town authorized to borrow money
outside debt limit to improve
Wigwam Brook (partially repealed
by Charter 1974)
1956 Ch. 119, Acts of
1956
Representative Town Meetings
(repealed by Charter 1974,
Charter 2014)
1956 Ch. 65, Acts of 1957 Park land may be used for
municipal purposes (partially
repealed by Charter 1974)
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:240
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1956 Ch. 64, Acts of 1957 Stone Park may be used for school
purposes (partially repealed by
Charter 1974)
1957 G.L. c.41, § 19B Permanent tenure for John Carey
as Town Clerk
1957 G.L. c.32B Town may provide plan for group
life insurance, hospital, surgical,
group accidental death and
medical insurance for some Town
employees and their dependents
1958 Ch. 1123, Acts of
1958
Office of Comptroller created
1958 G.L. c.129, § 15 Board of Health to nominate
Inspector of Animals
1958 Ch. 506, Acts of
1958
Erection of statute, Marine Corps
League Memorial Circle
1959 G.L. c.44, § 65 Salary advances to Town
employees for vacations
1959 G.L. c.142, § 13 Plumbing rules and regulations
1961 G.L. c.147, § 17B 40-hour week for Police
Department
1963 (Art. 47) G.L. c.90, § 20C Regulated parking violations
1963 (ATM, Art.
68)
G.L. c.41, § 23A Executive Secretary
1963 (Art. 70) G.L. c.40, § 22E Air space over parking lot
2-23-1963 G.L. c.32B, §11A Contributory Life Insurance
1964 (Art. 47) Ch. 670, Acts of
1960
Retirement Board annuities
1964 Rescind air space vote (Art. 70)
1964 G.L. c.48, § 58B 48-hour week for permanent
members of Fire Department
1964 G.L. c.40, § 6A Appropriate funds to advertise
Town's resources, advantages,
attractions
1964 Ch. 239, Acts of
1964
Filling of vacancies among Town
Meeting members (repealed by
Charter 1974, Charter 2014)
3-9-1964 G.L. c.40 (Ch. 697,
Acts of 1963)
Historical Commission
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:241
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
3-8-1965 (Art.
27)
Ch. 478, Acts of
1963
Increased pension
1966 Ch. 17, Acts of 1966 Construction for youth center
(repealed by Charter 2014)
2-26-1966
(ballot)
G.L. c.40, § 6C Snow removal, private way
3-14-1966 (Art.
29)
Ch. 5, Acts of 1966 Low-income housing
3-14-1966 (Art.
30)
Ch. 6, Acts of 1966 Elderly housing (repealed by
Charter 1974, Charter 2014)
3-13-1967 (Art.
68)
G.L. c.90, § 18A Pedestrian control
12-2-1967 Acts of 1967 By-laws building
1969 G.L. c.32, § 6J Widows benefits
3-10-1969 (Art.
35)
G.L. c.32, § 95A Retirement pension
4-5-1969 G.L. c.41 Establishment of Police
Department
3-9-1970 (Art.
63)
G.L. c.40, § 22D Tow lot
3-9-1970 (Art.
63)
G.L. c.90, § 20C Parking fines
3-9-1970 (Art.
64)
G.L. c.148, § 56 Parking lots
3-8-1971 (Art.
55)
G.L. c.40, § 6K Public Nurse uniform
3-8-1971 (Art.
91)
G.L. c.41, § 100D Indemnification of Town
employees
2-26-1972 Ch. 486, Acts of
1971
Beano
3-13-1972 (Art.
9)
G.L. c.152, § 69 Extend Workmen's Compensation
to all employees
3-13-1972 (Art.
10)
G.L. c.40, § 6J Buy work clothes
3-13-1972 (Art.
11)
G.L. c.40, § 6L Rent work clothes
3-13-1972 (Art.
14)
G.L. c.41, § 108L Educational incentive pay for
police officers
3-13-1972 (Art.
77)
G.L. c.40, § 8E Youth Commission
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:242
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
3-13-1972 (Art.
79)
G.L. c.40, § 8B Council on Aging
1974 G.L. c.138, § 1 Public drinking
4-29-1974 (Art.
8)
G.L. c.41, § 100G, as
amended by Ch.
200, Acts of 1973,
and Ch. 192, Acts of
1978
Funeral and burial expenses for
firefighters and police officers
killed on duty
4-29-1974 (Art.
13)
G.L. c.71, § 14 Establish Regional School District
Planning Committee
3-27-1975 (ballot
question #1)
G.L. c.45, § 14, as
amended by Ch.
617, Acts of 1974
(Ch. 617 repealed by
Ch. 412, Acts of
1998)
Park and Recreation Commission
5-28-1975 (Art.
40)
G.L. c.40C, as
amended by Ch.
359, Acts of 1971
Dedham Historic Districts By-Law
1976 Ch. 485, Acts of
1975
Public employees direct deposit
4-26-1976 (Art.
27)
G.L. c.40, § 6H Town repairs on private ways
(repealed by Ch. 693, § 1, Acts of
1978)
4-26-1976 (Art.
46)
G.L. c.41, § 41B
(added by Ch. 586,
Acts of 1975)
Payment of public employees by
means of direct bank credits
3-19-1977 (ballot
question #2)
G.L. c.71,
§§ 16-169(I)
Regional Vocational Technical
School District
12-27-1977
(STM, Art. 17)
G.L. c.40, § 13 Municipal Building Insurance
Fund established
1978 G.L. c.40, §§ 6J and
6L
Purchase of clothes for Town
employees
1978 G.L. c.147, § 17B 40-hour work week for police
1978 G.L. c.32B Additional life insurance for Town
employees
1978 G.L. c.40, § 60C Removal of ice and snow from
private ways
1978 G.L. c.32, § 95A Pensions for widows or children of
retired Town employees
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:243
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1978 G.L. c.41, § 108I Career incentive pay program for
Police Department
1978 G.L. c.40, § 8E Youth Commission
1978 G.L. c.41, § 100G Funeral or burial expenses for
police or firefighters killed in line
of duty
1978 G.L. c.138, § 1 Regulations for public drinking
1978 G.L. c.40C (Ch. 359,
Acts of 1971)
Historic Districts
1978 G.L. c.41, § 41B (Ch.
485, Acts of 1975)
Direct deposit for public
employees
1978 G.L. c.40, § 6H Repairs to private ways
1978 G.L. c.40, § 13 Municipal Buildings Insurance
Fund
4-11-1978 (Art.
12)
G.L. c.40, § 100E Indemnification of Town officials
(repealed by Ch. 512, § 10, Acts of
1978)
4-11-1978 (Art.
13)
G.L. c.41, § 6N (Ch.
693, Acts of 1977)
Making repairs on private ways
4-11-1978 (Art.
17)
G.L. c.44, § 53C Establishing fee of 10% of the
costs of off-duty work details
4-10-1979 (Art.
20)
G.L. c.44, § 53C Workmen's Compensation Fund
established
4-22-1980
(ballot)
G.L. c.258, § 13 Accepted indemnification to
$1,000,000
10-6-1980 (STM,
Art. 3)
Ch. 20, Acts of 1980 Appropriate $/5 years preceding
350th Anniversary
3-16-1981 (STM,
Art. 12)
G.L. c.262, § 34, as
amended by Ch.
329, § 73, Acts of
1980
Increase Town Clerk fees
4-13-1981 (Art.
11)
G.L. c.148, §§ 26C
and 26E
Require installation of smoke
detectors
7-22-1981 G.L. c.41 Revoke grant incentives for police
11-16-1981 (Art.
5)
G.L. c.90, § 20A 1/2 Parking ticket collection system
11-16-1981 (Art.
8)
G.L. c.143, § 34 (Ch.
85, Acts of 1980)
Appointment of Building
Inspector, 3-year term
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:244
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
4-12-1982 G.L. c.138, § 12B
(Ch. 606, Acts of
1981)
Special Town meeting
5-17-1982 (Art.
27)
G.L. c.44, § 53E (Ch.
339, Acts of 1981)
Recreation Fund
7-12-1983 (Art.
1)
G.L. c.41, §§ 69A-B Water Commissioners
11-14-1983 (Art.
6)
G.L. c.60A, § 1 Prisoner of War motor vehicle
excise tax exemption
4-23-1984 (Art.
13)
G.L. c.148, § 26G Installation of sprinkler systems
4-23-1984 G.L. c.44, § 53D Dedham Pool Committee
4-8-1985 (Art.
35)
G.L. c.151B, § 4, as
amended by Ch.
266, Acts of 1984
Mandatory retirement
9-23-1985 (Art.
1)
Ch. 193, Acts of
1985
Dedham-Westwood Water District
4-14-1986 G.L. c.599, Acts of
1985
Waive age requirement for Mr.
Drinkwater
4-15-1986 (Art.
9)
G.L. c.64G, § 3A Room occupancy excise tax
4-15-1986 Ch. 308, Acts of
1985
Dog control
7-21-1986 (Art.
5)
Ch. 188, §§ 16 and
17, Acts of 1985
Minimum salary for teachers
11-17-1986 (Art.
3)
G.L. c.40, § 39K Revolving Fund-Endicott Estate
11-17-1986 (Art.
11)
Ch. 640, Acts of
1985 (G.L. c.40,
§ 57)
Denial or revocation of permits
and licenses for nonpayment of
taxes
4-27-1987 (Art.
16)
G.L. c.41, § 108L Reaccept Quinn Bill
11-9-1987 (Art.
1)
G.L. c.262, § 34 Town Clerk fees
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:245
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
4-25-1988 (Art.
26)
Ch. 626, Acts of
1987
Municipal charges and liens
(Endicott Estate rentals, police
private details, false alarm fines,
licenses by Selectmen, permits by
Building Department, permits by
Board of Health, excise tax,
personal property tax, charges for
sale of lots and graves, trash
collection fees)
4-25-1988 (Art.
27)
Ch. 306, Acts of
1986
Revolving accounts
4-25-1988 (Art.
28)
G.L. c.44, § 53E Endicott Estate Enterprise Fund
4-25-1988 (Art.
32)
G.L. c.40C, § 14 Historical Commission
4-25-1988 (Art.
35)
G.L. c.83, §§ 16A-F Municipal liens
11-14-1988 G.L. c.121B, § 39 Elderly housing project
11-14-1988 G.L. c.188, § 12 Equal opportunity educational
grant
4-9-1990 (Art.
17)
G.L. c.40, § 8H Recycling Program
4-9-1990 (Art.
26)
G.L. c.32, § 22D Contributory retirement
4-8-1991 Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
EEOG (Blue Hills)
4-8-1991 (Art.
15)
G.L. c.98, § 56 Sealer of Weights and Measures
fees
4-8-1991 (Art.
18)
Open Space Committee
4-8-1991 (Art.
19)
G.L. c.148, §§ 26G
and 26I
Installation of automatic sprinkler
systems
4-8-1991 (Art.
30)
Ch. 653, § 41, Acts
of 1989
Quarterly tax payments
4-8-1991 (Art.
34)
G.L. c.32, § 90 Retirement Board annual exams
4-8-1991 (Art.
35)
G.L. c.32, § 90G 3/4 Creditable service beyond age 70
4-8-1991 (Art.
36)
G.L. c.32, § 99 Advance payment for retirees
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:246
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
4-8-1991 (Art.
44)
Ch. 291, Acts of
1990
Enhanced 911
4-8-1991 (STM,
Art. 3)
G.L. c.40, § 13C Worker's Compensation Claims
Reserve Fund
4-13-1992 Ch. 188, § 12, Acts
of 1985
Equal education opportunity grant
4-13-1992 (Art.
27)
G.L. c.59, § 5, cl. 41c Elderly real estate tax exemption
4-13-1992 (Art.
39)
G.L. c.71, § 71E Preschool Revolving Fund
4-12-1993 (Art.
28)
G.L. c.44, § 53E 1/2 School Bus Revolving Fund
2-7-1994 (Art.
10)
G.L. c.10, § 58 Cultural Council Revolving Fund
2-7-1994 (Art.
11)
G.L. c.44, § 53E 1/2 Composting Bins Revolving Fund
4-11-1994 (Art.
12)
G.L. c.53, § 9A Nomination papers for Town
offices
4-11-1994 (Art.
30)
G.L. c.44, § 53E 1/2 Composting Bins Revolving Fund
4-10-1995 G.L. c.60, § 3C Town scholarship fund
5-15-1995 (Art.
19)
Ch. 324, Acts of
1993
Building Commissioner conflicts
of interest
4-8-1996 G.L. c.41, § 100B Medical benefits for retired police
officers and firemen
4-8-1996 G.L. c.40, § 8J Commission on Disability
4-8-1996 G.L. c.40, § 22G Funds received from fines for
handicap parking violations
4-8-1996 G.L. c.50, § 5, cl.
41A
Allow Board of Assessors and
Town Collector to grant deferral
of sewer liens
4-8-1996 G.L. c.40, § 42J Deferral of water liens
12-18-1998 Ch. 411, Acts of
1998
Exemption the position of school
custodian from the provisions of
the Civil Service Law
12-18-1998 Ch. 412, Acts of
1998
Charter amendment, § 3-11 (Parks
and Recreation Commission)
(repeals Ch. 617, Acts of 1974)
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:247
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
1-10-2001 Ch. 401, Acts of
2000
Authorizing Cemetery
Commissioners to refund certain
monies
1-11-2001 Ch. 408, Acts of
2000
Authorizing Town to reimburse
certain sewer use fees
4-9-2001 ATM,
Art. 17
G.L. c.41, § 19k
G.L. c.41, § 108p
Salary increases for the Clerk,
Collector and Treasurer upon
receiving a professional
designation of CERTIFICATION
4-9-2001 ATM,
Art. 40
G.L. c.58, § 5, as
amended by Ch.
181, § 1, of the Acts
of 1995
Annual cost-of-living increase of
100% of the Consumer Price
Index during the previous
calendar year as determined
annually by the Commissioner of
Revenue to be the maximum costof-
living adjustment authorized
thereunder, said increase to be
applied to certain senior citizens
and surviving spouses and minors
1-31-2002 Ch. 20, Acts of 2002 Charter amendment, §§ 3-1(a);
3-6; 3-12; 4-2; 5-1 (establishing
position of Director of Finance)
4-8-2002 ATM,
Art. 26
G.L. c.58, § 5, cl.
17D, as amended by
Ch. 73, § 1, Acts of
1986
4-8-2002 ATM,
Art. 41
G.L. c.83, § 16G Deferral of charges for use of
common sewers to property
owners receiving an exemption
from property taxes under G.L.
c.59, § 5, cl. 41A, with respect to
such property
4-8-2002 ATM,
Art. 43
G.L. c.40, § 8G Allow Police Department to enter
into a mutual aid agreement with
other police departments in
Norfolk County
6-4-2002 Ch. 130, Acts of
2002
Authorizing Town to reduce sewer
fee liability in exchange for
volunteer services by persons
over age 60
8-6-2002 Ch. 215, Acts of
2002
Authorizing Town to reimburse
certain sewer use fees
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:248
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
8-9-2002 Ch. 238, Acts of
2002
Authorizing Town to send certain
information to the voters of the
Town
8-13-2002 Ch. 276, Acts of
2002
Authorizing repaying of certain
sewer fees paid in error by Town
8-13-2002 Ch. 277, Acts of
2002
Authorizing Town to reimburse
certain real estate taxes
4-14-2003 ATM,
Art. 41
G.L. c.31, § 58A Maximum age restrictions for fire
fighters and police officers;
provided that the provisions shall
not take effect for fire fighter
candidates until the expiration of
the fire fighter entrance list
established by means of the
entrance exam given in March
2002; and the provisions shall not
take effect for police officer
candidates until the expiration of
the police officer entrance list
established by means of the
entrance exam given in 2003
4-14-2003 ATM,
Art. 42
G.L. c.148, § 26H Automatic sprinkler systems in
lodging houses and
boardinghouses
4-14-2003 ATM,
Art. 43
G.L. c.32B, § 9I Insurance for employees on
military leave of absence for
active service
9-5-2003 Ch. 59, Acts of 2003 Charter amendment, § 4-1
(elimination of residency
requirement for Town
Administrator)
3-25-2004 Ch. 49, Acts of 2004 Authorizing Town to reimburse
certain sewer fees paid in error
4-12-2004 ATM,
Art. 47
G.L. c.40, § 57 Denial or revocation of local
licenses or permits for
nonpayment of local taxes, fees or
other charges
4-12-2004 ATM,
Art. 59
G.L. c.40, § 22F Fees for licenses, permits and
certificates; and charges for
services rendered by the Town or
any department thereof
11-1-2005 STM,
Art. 12
G.L. c.32B, § 18 Medicare extension plans;
mandatory transfer of retirees
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:249
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
11-18-2005 Ch. 135, Acts of
2005
Authorizing Town to transfer land
for senior center purposes
4-10-2006 ATM,
Art. 47
G.L. c.138, § 12 Allowing a common victualler,
who holds a license under G.L.
c.138, § 12, to sell wines and malt
beverages, upon written approval
of the licensing authority, to sell
liqueurs and cordials pursuant to
said license, subject to all other
licensing provisions of G.L. c.138
8-2-2006 Ch. 208, Acts of
2006
Authorizing Town to grant
additional alcoholic beverages
licenses
11-27-2006 STM,
Art. 12
G.L. c.39, § 12D Allowing members of boards,
commissions and committees who
have missed a single adjudicatory
hearing to participate in a
decision on the matter under
certain
Circumstances
11-27-2006 STM,
Art. 13
G.L. c.59, § 5, cl. 54 Establishing a minimum value of
personal property subject to
taxation, with a minimum taxable
valuation of $1,000
4-9-2007 ATM,
Art. 43
G.L. c.60, § 2, para.
2
Abatement of any tax due which is
less than $10
4-10-2008 Ch. 72, Acts of 2008 Authorizing Town to grant an
additional license for the sale of
alcoholic beverages
5-19-2008 ATM,
Art. 42
G.L. c.32,
§ 9(2)(d)(ii)
Increase in death benefits for
surviving children of deceased
employees who died while in the
scope of employment
1-13-2009 Ch. 499, Acts of
2008
Designating Riverdale Park as the
Honorable Marie-Louise Kehoe
Park
5-18-2009 ATM,
Art. 18
G.L. c.44, § 53F 1/2 Establishing a Sewer Enterprise
Fund effective fiscal year 2010
5-18-2009 ATM,
Art. 19
G.L. c.32B, § 20 Establishing an other postemployment
benefits liability trust
fund to be known as the "OPEB
Trust Fund"
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:250
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
11-6-2009 Ch. 121, Acts of
2009
Charter amendment, §§ 4-2; 5-1;
5-3; 5A-8 (organizing Town
agencies)
11-16-2009 STM,
Art. 6
G.L. c.64L, § 2(a) Local meals tax
5-17-2010 ATM,
Art. 41
G.L. c.43D Designation of Priority
Development Site
11-15-2010 STM,
Art. 13
G.L. c.138, § 33B Authorizing holder of on-premises
pouring licenses under G.L. c.138,
§ 12, to sell alcoholic beverages
between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon on Sundays
1-7-2011 Ch. 427, Acts of
2010
Authorizing Town to grant an
additional license for the sale of
alcoholic beverages
3-19-2014 Ch. 53, Acts of 2014 Home Rule Charter of the Town of
Dedham
11-13-2017 ATM,
Art. 15
G.L. c. 90, § 17C Establishing a speed limit of 25
miles per hour in any thickly
settled or business district in the
Town that is not a state highway
11-13-2017 ATM,
Art. 16
G.L. c. 59, § 5, cl.
22G
Making the spouse of a veteran
who holds title to the veteran's
domicile as a trustee or
conservator eligible for available
veteran exemptions and allowing
the surviving spouse who
acquired title to a deceased
veteran's domicile under a trust or
conservatorship to retain
eligibility for an exemption
11-13-2017 ATM,
Art. 17
G.L. c. 59, § 5K Increasing the maximum tax bill
reduction an eligible program
participant over the age of 60 may
receive in exchange for providing
volunteer services to the Town
from $1,000 to $1,500
§ A300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A300-1
1:251
Enactment
Date
General Law
Citation Subject Matter
11-13-2017 ATM,
Art. 18
G.L. c. 32B, § 20 Designating the Treasurer as the
Trustee and Plan Administrator of
the OPEB Fund, and confirming
the authority of the Treasurer to
invest the OPEB Fund in the State
Retiree Benefits Trust Fund and
to take such other action,
including execution of documents,
consistent therewith
§ A300-1 DEDHAM CODE § A300-1
1:252

TOWN OF DEDHAM
ZONING BYLAW
 
DEDHAM PLANNING BOARD 
John R. Bethoney, Chair
Ralph I. Steeves, Vice Chair
Robert D. Aldous, Clerk
James E. O’Brien IV
Michael A. Podolski, Esq.

AMENDED AT ANNUAL TOWN MEETING, NOVEMBER 13, 2017 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS


Section 1.0	PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY  	10
               1.1	Purpose 	10
               1.2	Authority 	10
               1.3	Scope ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………	10
               1.4	Applicability …………………………………………………………………………………………………	10
               1.5	Amendments ………………………………………………………………………………………………..	10
               1.6	Separability ………………………………………………………………………………………………….	10
               1.7	Planning Board Associate Member ………………………………………………………………..	10

Section 2.0	
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS ……………………………………………………..	
11
2.1	Types of Districts ………………………………………………………………………………………….	11
	2.1.1	General ……………………………………………………………………………………………	11
	2.1.2	Overlay Districts ………………………………………………………………………………	11
	2.1.3	Location of Districts …………………………………………………………………………	12
	2.1.4	Location of Boundaries …………………………………………………………………….	12
		
Section 3.0	USE REGULATIONS ……………………………………………………...........................	14
          3.1	Principal Uses ……………………………………………………………..……………………………….	14
	3.1.1	General ……………………………………………………………………………………………	14
	3.1.2	Exempt Agricultural Uses; State Building Code ………………………………….	14
	3.1.3	Use Regulation Table ……………………………………………………………………….	14
	3.1.4	Classification …………………………………………………………………………………...
Major Nonresidential Project ……………………………………………………………	14
	3.1.5		14
		Table 1 Principal Use Regulations …………………………………………………….
•	Accessory Use Table, Residential …………………………………………..
•	Accessory Use Table, Nonresidential ……………………………………..	15
19
20
	3.1.6	Footnotes to Use Regulation Table ………………………………….........................	21
             3.2	Special Accessory Uses in All Districts …………………………………………………………..	23
	3.2.1	Trailers ……………………………………………………………………………………………	23
	3.2.2	Scientific Accessory Uses ………………………………………………………………….	24
	3.2.3	Jersey Barriers …………………………………………………………………………………	24
             3.3	Nonconforming Uses Structures ……………………………………………………………………	24
	3.3.1	Applicability …………………………………………………………………………………….	24
	3.3.2	Nonconforming Uses ………………………………………………………………………..	25
	3.3.3	Nonconforming Structures ……………………………………………………………….	25
	3.3.4	Variance Required ……………………………………………………………………………	25
	3.3.5	Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures …………..
Abandonment or Non-Use ………………………………………………………………...
Reconstruction after Catastrophe or Voluntary Demolition ………………..
Reversion to Nonconformity …………………………………………………………….	25
	3.3.6		26
	3.3.7		26
	3.3.8		26


Section 4.0	DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS ……………………………………….......................	27
               4.1	Dimensional Requirements
Table 2 - Table of Dimensional Requirements ………………………………………………..	28
	Footnotes to Table of Dimensional Requirements ………………………………………….	29
               4.2           	Height of Buildings and Structures ………………………………………………………………..	31
	4.2.1	Buildings Permitted in Residential Districts ……………………………………..	31
	4.2.2	Buildings Permitted in Nonresidential Districts ………………………………..	31
	4.2.3	Projections and Structures ………………………………………………………………	31
	4.2.4	Special Permit …………………………………………………………………………………	31
               4.3	Special Set Back and Yard Exceptions …………………………………………………………….	31
	4.3.1	General …………………………………………………………………....................................	31
	4.3.2	Special Permit …………………………………………………………………………………	32
	4.3.3	Special Setback Requirements in Nonresidential Districts …………………	32
4.4	Group Housing Projects ………………………………………………………………………………...	32
	4.4.1	General …………………………………………………………………...…………...………….	32
               4.5	Special Lot Size Exceptions for Dwellings ……………………………………...…………........	33
	4.5.1	General …………………………………………………………………...…………..................	33
               4.6	Reduction of Occupied Lots …………………………………………………………………………..	33
               4.7	Separate Lots for Dwellings …………………………………………………………………………..	34
               4.8	Irregularly Shaped Lots …………………………………………………………................................	34

Section 5.0	GENERAL REGULATIONS …………………………………………………………………	35
              5.1	Off-Street Parking Regulations ………………………………………………………………………	35
	5.1.1	Purpose …………………………………………………………………………………………..	35
	5.1.2	Applicability ……………………………………………………………………………………	35
	5.1.3
5.1.4
5.1.5

5.1.6
5.1.7
5.1.8
5.1.9
5.1.10
5.1.11
5.1.12
5.1.13	Exceptions ……………………………………………………………………………………....	35
		Required Parking Spaces …………………………………………………………………	36
		Shared Parking ……………………………………………………………………………….	36
		Table 3, Dedham Parking Table ……………………………………………………….	37
		Required Parking Spaces:  CB District ………………………………………………	42
		Parking Lot Design Standards ………………………………………………………….	42
		Construction Standards …………………………………………………………………..	43
		Zoning District Requirements:  Residential ……………………………………...	44
		Zoning District Requirements:  RDO Districts …………………………………...	44
		Construction Delay ………………………………………………………………………….	44
		Waiver ……………………………………………………………………………………………	45
		Loading Requirements …………………………………………………………………….	45
              5.2	Landscaping …………………………………………………………………………………………………	46
	5.2.1	Applicability ……………………………………………………………………………………	46
	5.2.2	Landscaped Areas ……………………………………………………………………………	47
	5.2.3	Planting Requirements …………………………………………………………………….	47
	5.2.4	Seasonal Planting Waiver ………………………………………………………………...	47
	5.2.5	Waiver of Landscaping and Planting Requirements …………………………..	48
              5.3	Enclosure of Uses ………………………………………………………………………………………….	48
	5.3.1	General …………………………………………………………………………………………...
Special Permit …………………………………………………………………………………	48
	5.3.2		49
              5.4	Screening of Uses ………………………………………………………………………………………….	49
	5.4.1	General …………………………………………………………………………………………...	49

Section 6.0	SPECIAL REGULATIONS …………………………………………………………………..	50
               6.1	Adult Uses Overlay District ……………………………………………………………………………	50
	6.1.1
6.1.2

6.1.3
6.1.4
6.1.5
6.1.6	Purpose …………………………………………………………………………………………..	50
		Establishment of Adult Uses Overlay District and Relationship to 
Underlying Districts ………………………………………………………………………...	
50
		Definitions ………………………………………………………………………………………	51
		Scope of Permitting Authority ………………………………………………………….	52
		Special Permit Submittal Requirements …………………………………………...	52
		Special Permit Requirements and Conditions …………………………………...	53
	6.1.7
6.1.8	Termination of Special Permit for Adult Uses ……………………………………	54
		Severability ……………………………………………………………………………………..	55
               6.2	Hospitals and Related Facilities ……………………………………………………………………..	55
	6.2.1
6.2.2
6.2.3
6.2.4
6.2.5	General …………………………………………………………………………………………...	55
		Infrastructure ………………………………………………………………………………….	55
		Dimensional Regulations …………………………………………………………………	55
		Landscaping Requirements ……………………………………………………………..	56
		Buffer Zone …………………………………………………………….……………………….	56
               6.3	Planned Commercial Development Standards ………………………………………………..	56
	6.3.1	General …………………………………………………………………..……………………….	56
	6.3.2	Standards ………………………………………………………………..………………………	57
               6.4	Temporary Uses ………………………………………………………………….………………………..	57
               6.5	Earth Removal and Retaining Walls ………………………………………………………………	57
	6.5.1	Earth Removal ………………………………………………………….……………………..	57
	6.5.2	Retaining Walls ……………………………………………………………………………….	58
6.6	Substance Abuse Treatment Center ……………………………………………………………….	58
		
Section 7.0	SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS …………………………………………….	59
               7.1	Planned Residential Development Standards …………………………………………………	59
	7.1.1
7.1.2	General …………………………………………………………………………………………...	59
		Standards ………………………………………………………………………………………..	59
               7.2	Conversion of Single Family to Two Family Dwelling ……………………………………...	60
	7.2.1	General …………………………………………………………………………………………...	60
               7.3	Multifamily Residential Complex …………………………………………………………………..	60
	7.3.1

7.3.3	General …………………………………………………………………………………………..
Table 5 – Multi-Family Table …………………………………………………………..	60
61
		Site Plan Review …………………………………………………………………………….	62
		Accessory Uses ………………………………………………………………………………	63
              7.4	Mixed Use Developments  …………………………………………………………………………….	63
	7.4.1
7.4.2	Purpose………………………………………………………………………………………….	63
		Special Permit Requirement/Special Permit Granting Authority……….	63
	7.4.3	Conditions, Restrictions, and Requirements……………………………………..	63
	7.4.4	Site Plan Review …………………………………………………………………………….	64
              7.5	Assisted Living Facilities ………………………………………………………………………………	65
	7.5.1
7.5.2
7.5.3

7.5.4
7.5.5
7.5.6
7.5.7	General ………………………………………………………………………………………….	65
		Conditions – Infrastructure …………………………………………………………….	65
		Dimensional Regulations ………………………………………………………………..
Table 6 – Assisted Living Dimensional Requirements ………………………	65
65
		Landscaping Requirements …………………………………………………………….	65
		Buffer Zone ……………………………………………………………………………………	66
		Accessory Uses ………………………………………………………………………………	66
		Non-Residential Uses ………………………………………………….…………………	66
               7.6	Senior Campus District ………………………………………………………………………………..	67
	7.6.1	Character and Purpose …………………………………………………………………..	67
	7.6.2	Establishment ……………………………………………………………………………….	67
		7.6.3	Applicability ………………………………………………………………………………….	67
	7.6.4	Use Regulations ……………………………………………………………………………..	67
	7.6.5	Dimensional and Related Controls …………………………………………………..	69
		Table 7 – Table of Dimensional Requirements, Senior Campus District …...	70
		Notes to Table 7 ……………………………………………………………………………………	71
	7.6.6	Landscaping Requirements ……………………………………………………………...	71
	7.6.7	Off-Street Parking and Related Requirements …………………………………..	72
		Table 8 – Requirements, Residential and Residential Care Uses …………	74
		Table 8 – Requirements, Institutional Uses ………………………….……………	74
	7.6.8	Site Plan Review in SC District ………………………………………..………………..	75
               7.7	Special Residential Regulations ……………………………………………………………………..	80
		
Section 8.0	OVERLAY DISTRICTS ………………………………………………………………………	82
               8.1	Flood Plain Overlay District …………………………………………………………………………..	82
	8.1.1
8.1.2
8.1.3
8.1.4
8.1.5
8.1.6
8.1.7
8.1.8
8.1.9
8.1.10
8.1.11
8.1.12	Purpose …………………………………………………………………..………………………	82
		Location …………………………………………………………………..……………………..	82
		Applicability ……………………………………………………………………………………
Reference to Existing Regulations …………………………………….………………	82
82
		Procedures ……………………………………………………………………………………...	83
		Base Flood Elevation Data ……………………………………………..…………………	83
		Watercourse Alteration and Relocation ……………………………….…………...	83
		Review of All Project Proposals ……………………………………….……………….	84
		Permitted Uses …………………………………………………………..……………………	84
		Prohibited Uses ………………………………………………………….……………………	85
		Portion of Parcel within Flood Plain Overlay District ………………………...	85
		Federal Flood Insurance Program ……………………………………..……………..	85
              8.2	Aquifer Protection Overlay District ……………………………………………….……………….	86
	8.2.1
8.2.2
8.2.3
8.2.4
8.2.5
8.2.6
8.2.7
8.2.8
8.2.9
8.2.10
8.2.11
8.2.12	Purpose …………………………………………………………………..………………………	86
		Definitions ………………………………………………………………..…………………….	86
		Location …………………………………………………………………..……………………..	87
		Scope of Authority ……………………………………………………….…………………	88
		Permitted Uses …………………………………………………………..…………………..	88
		Prohibited Uses ………………………………………………………….…………………..	89
		Uses Permissible by Special Permit …………………………………..……………..	90
		Criteria for Approval by the Board of Appeals ………………………..…………	91
		Other Boards ……………………………………………………………..……………………	91
		Reimbursement of Costs ……………………………………………….…………………	91
		Design and Operations Guidelines ……………………………………………………	92
		Violations ……………………………………………………………………………………….	92
              8.3	Wireless Communications Services Overlay District ………………………….…………..	93
	8.3.1	Purpose …………………………………………………………………..……………………..	93
	8.3.2	Establishment ………………………………………………………………………………..	93
	8.3.3	Applicability …………………………………………………………………………………..	93
	8.3.4	Use Regulations ……………………………………………………………………………..	94
		Table 9 – Use Regulations ………………………………………………………………	94
	8.3.5	Site Plan Review ………………………………………………………..…………………..	94
	8.3.6	Dimensional Requirements …………………………………………….……………...	95
	8.6.7	Performance Standards ………………………………………………..………………..	96
	8.3.8	Co-Location of Wireless Communications Equipment ………………………	96
	8.3.9	Coexistence with Other Uses …………………………………………..……………….	96
	8.3.10	Exemptions ……………………………………………………………………………………..	96
8.4	Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPOD) ……………………………………………….	97
	8.4.1	Purpose …………………………………………………………………..………………………	97
	8.4.2	Establishment …………………………………………………………………………………	97
	8.4.3	Applicability and Eligibility ……………………………………………………………...	97
	8.4.4	Special Permit Granting Authority ……………………………………………………	98
	8.4.5	Historic Preservation Special Permit ………………………………….…………….	98
	8.4.6	Site Plan Review ………………………………………………………...……………………	99
			
Section 9.0	ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES …………………………………………….	100
              9.1                          	Administration ……………………………………………………………………..………………………	100
	9.1.1
9.1.2
9.1.3	Execution ………………………………………………………………………………………..	
		Enforcement …………………………………………………………….……………………..	100
		Emergency Powers Granted to Building Inspector …………………..………..	100
              9.2	Board of Appeal ……………………………………………………………………………………………	100
	9.2.1
9.2.2
9.2.3
9.2.4
9.2.5	Establishment …………………………………………………………………………………	100
		Powers ……………………………………………………………………………………………	101
		Rules and Regulations ………………………………………………….………………….	101
		Fees ………………………………………………………………………………………………..	101
		Quorum …………………………………………………………………..………………………	101
	9.2.6	Meetings and Records ………………………………………………….………………….	102
      9.3   	Special Permits …………………………………………………………………………………………….	102
	9.3.1
9.3.2
9.3.3
9.3.4
9.3.5
9.3.6
9.3.7
9.3.8
9.3.9	Special Permit Granting Authority ……………………………………………………	102
		Criteria …………………………………………………………………….……………………..	102
		Procedures ……………………………………………………………….……………………..	102
		Other Boards …………………………………………………………….…………………….	102
		Conditions ………………………………………………………………..……………………..	103
		Plans ………………………………………………………………………………………………	103
		Regulations …………………………………………………………………………………….	104
		Fees …………………………………………………………………………………………….…	104
		Lapse ……………………………………………………………………..………………………	104
              9.4	Special Permit for Major Nonresidential Project ……………………………….……………	104
	9.4.1
9.4.2
9.4.3
9.4.4
9.4.5
9.4.6
9.4.7
9.4.8
9.4.9
9.4.10
9.4.11	Purpose …………………………………………………………………..………………………	104
		Applicability ……………………………………………………………………………………	104
		Application and Review Procedure …………………………………………………..	104
		Contents and Scope of the Application ……………………………….…………….	105
		Statements ……………………………………………………………….……………………..	106
		Development Impact Standards ……………………………………….………………	107
		Required Traffic Standards …………………………………………….………………..	107
		Recommended Traffic Standards ……………………………………..………………	108
		Required Environmental Standards …………………………………..……………..	108
		Recommended Environmental Standards …………………………………………	109
		Required Community and Fiscal Standards ………………………………………	109
	9.4.12
9.4.13
9.4.14
9.4.15	Recommended Community and Fiscal Standards ………………….…………..	109
		Planning Board Findings and Action ………………………………….…………..…	109
		Conditions, Limitations, and Safeguards ……………………………..…………….	110
		Administration ………………………………………………………………………………..	111
             9.5	Site Plan Review …………………………………………………………………..……………………….	111
	9.5.1
9.5.2
9.5.3
9.5.4
9.5.5
9.5.6
9.5.7
9.5.8
9.5.9
9.5.10
9.5.11	Purpose …………………………………………………………………..………………………	111
		Applicability ……………………………………………………………………………………	111
		Exemptions ……………………………………………………………….…………………….	112
		Application ……………………………………………………………….…………………….	112
		Major Site Plan:  Additional Information …………………………………………..	114
		Procedures ……………………………………………………………….…………………….	114
		Approval ………………………………………………………………….……………………..	115
		Regulations …………………………………………………………………………………….	116
		Modification Site Plan Review ………………………………………………………….	116
		Lapse ……………………………………………………………………..……………………….	116
		Appeal …………………………………………………………………….………………………	117
             9.6	Design Review Advisory Board ………………………………………………….………………….	117
	9.6.1
9.6.2
9.6.3
9.6.4
9.6.5
9.6.6	Establishment …………………………………………………………………………………	117
		Duties …………………………………………………………………….……………………….	117
		Jurisdiction ……………………………………………………………….…………………….	117
		Applicability ……………………………………………………………………………………	118
		Exemptions ……………………………………………………………………………………..	118
		Procedures ……………………………………………………………….……………………..	118

Section 10.0        	DEFINITIONS …………………………………………………………………………………..	119

  Section 11.0   MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS …………………………………..	129
11.1	History …………………………………………………………………………………………………………	129
11.2	Purpose …………………………………………………………………………….………………………….	129
11.3	Establishment ………………………………………………………………………………………………	129
11.4	Definitions …………………………………………………………………………..……………………….	129
11.5	Location …………………………………………………………………………….…………………………	130
11.6	Procedure ………………………………………………………………………….…………………………	131
11.7	Special Permit Conditions ………………………………………………………..……………………	132
11.8	Prohibition Against Nuisance …………………………………………………….………………….	133
		
Section 12.0 ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT …………………………………………………………………….	134
12.1	Purpose ……………………………………………………………………..…………………………………	134
12.2	Arts Overlay District Boundaries …………………………………………….……………………..	134
12.3	Applicability …………………………………………………………………………………………………	134
12.4	Use Regulation …………………………………………………………………….………………………..	134
12.5	Arts-Related Definitions …………………………………………………………..……………………	135
12.6	Dimensional Requirements …………………………………………………………………………..	136
	Table 10 – Table of Dimensional Requirements, Arts Overlay District …………….	136
12.7	Table 11 - Table of Allowable Uses ……………………………………………..…………………	137
12.8	Landscaping and Screening Requirements …………………………………….………………	137
12.9	Required Parking ………………………………………………………………….………………………	138
	Table 12 – Table of Required Parking ………………………………………….…………………	139
12.10	Modification of Landscaping and Parking Standards ………………………….…………...	140

Section 13.0 MORATORIUM ON MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS  …………………..………….   141
13.1	History …………………………………………………………………………………………………………	141
13.2	Purpose …………………………………………………………………………….………………………….	141
13.3	Definition ……………………………………………………………………………………………………..	141
13.4	Moratorium ………………………………………………………………………………………………….	141

 
				
 
SECTION 1.0   PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

1.1	PURPOSE
These regulations are enacted to promote the general welfare of the Town of Dedham, to pro-tect the health and safety of its inhabitants, to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town, to preserve the cultural, historical and agricultural heritage of the com-munity, to increase the amenities of the town, and to reduce the hazard from fire by regulating the location and use of buildings and the area of open space around them, all as authorized by, but not limited to, the provisions of the Zoning Act, G.L. c. 40A, as amended, Section 2A of 1975 Mass. Acts 808, and by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

1.2 	AUTHORITY 
This Zoning Bylaw is enacted in accordance with the provisions of the General Laws, Chapter 40A, and any and all amendments thereto.

1.3 	SCOPE 
For these purposes, the construction, repair, alteration, reconstruction, height, number of sto-ries, and size of buildings and structures, the size and width of lots, the percentage of lot area that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of popula-tion, and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land in the Town are regulated as hereinafter provided.

1.4 	APPLICABILITY
All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved, and the use of all premises in the Town, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning By-law. No building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is expressly permitted within the district in which such building, structure or land is located. Where the application of this Bylaw imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits, restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this Bylaw shall control.

1.5 	AMENDMENTS
This Bylaw may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the Town Meeting in the manner provided in G.L. c. 40A, s.5, and any amendments thereto. 

1.6 	SEPARABILITY 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision herein.

1.7 	PLANNING BOARD ASSOCIATE MEMBER  
The Planning Board may designate one Associate Member who may sit on the Planning Board for purposes of acting on a Special Permit application in the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member of the Planning Board, or in the event of a vacan-cy on the Planning Board, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9.  Such Associate Member shall be appointed annually by a majority vote of the Planning Board.
 
SECTION 2.0   ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

2.1  	TYPES OF DISTRICTS
2.1.1  	General  
For the purposes of this Bylaw, the Town of Dedham is divided into following types of zoning districts:

Residential Districts:
Single Residence A			SRA
Single Residence B			SRB
General Residence			GR
Senior Campus			SC

Nonresidential Districts:
Administrative and Professional	AP
Limited Manufacturing		LMA
Limited Manufacturing Type B	LMB
Research, Development & Office	RDO
General Business			GB
Highway Business			HB
Central Business			CB
Local Business			LB

2.1.2 	Overlay Districts  
There are also established the following overlay districts:
1.	Flood Plain Overlay District (FPOD) superimposed over other zoning districts or parts thereof so that the provisions of this Bylaw pertaining to such underlying districts remain in effect, except where FPOD regulations impose different or addi-tional, greater or more restrictive requirements.  A use which falls within the Flood Plain Overlay District must comply with the requirements of Section 8.1.

2.	Aquifer Protection Overlay District (APOD) superimposed over the other dis-tricts or parts thereof so that the provisions of this Bylaw pertaining to such under-lying districts remain in effect, except where APOD regulations impose different or additional, greater or more restrictive requirements. A use which falls within the Aquifer Protection District must comply with the requirements of Section 8.2.

3.	Wireless Communications Services Overlay District (WCSOD) superimposed over the other districts or part thereof so that the provisions of this Bylaw pertain-ing to such underlying districts remain in effect, except where WCSOD regulations impose different or additional, greater or more restrictive requirements.

4.	Adult Uses Overlay District (AUOD) superimposed over the other districts or parts thereof so that the provisions of this Bylaw pertaining to such underlying dis-tricts remain in effect, except where AUOD regulations impose different or addi-tional, greater or more restrictive requirements.

5.	Medical Marijuana Overlay District (MMOD) is established as a district that overlays the underlying districts, so that any parcel of land lying in the MMOD shall continue to lie in one or more of the other zoning districts in which it was previous-ly classified, as provided for in this Zoning Bylaw.

6.	Arts Overlay District (AOD) superimposed over the other zoning districts or part thereof so that the provisions of this Bylaw pertaining to such underlying districts remain in effect, except where the AOD regulations impose different or additional, greater, or more restrictive requirements

7.	Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPOD) superimposed over the other zoning districts or part thereof so that the provisions of this Bylaw pertaining to such underlying districts remain in effect, except where the HPOD regulations im-pose different or additional, greater, or more restrictive requirements.

2.1.3 	Location of Districts
Said districts herein before referred to are located as shown on a map of the Town of Dedham Mass. Geographic Information System Map, prepared for the Dedham Planning Board, signed by the Planning Board by the Town of Dedham Engineering Department Geographic Information System Division at a scale of 1 inch = 750 feet dated January 26, 2012, and filed in the office of the Town Clerk which map, together with detailed sketches, Appendix A, and all notations thereon, is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this Bylaw. A vote of the Town adding or deleting zoning districts or changing their boundaries made in the form of a verbal description shall be incorporated in this Bylaw in graphic form by addition to or alteration of the Zoning Map, but any delay or error in the revision of the Zoning Map shall not postpone or otherwise affect the effec-tiveness of an amendment. The Planning Board may from time to time add new streets and other geographical features to the Zoning Map to keep it reasonably current and to facilitate orientation, but no changes shall be made of the zoning districts, except pursu-ant to a vote of the Town.

2.1.4 	Location of Boundaries
The location of the boundary lines of the districts shown upon the aforesaid zoning map shall be determined as follows:

1.	Where a boundary line is shown approximately on the location of a property or lot line and the exact location of the boundary line is not indicated by means of a figure or otherwise, then the property or lot line shall be the boundary line.

2.	Where a boundary line is shown outside of the lines of a street and approxi-mately parallel thereto, it shall be deemed parallel to the nearest exterior line thereof; and a figure placed upon the zoning map between such boundary line and such exterior line indicates the distance in feet between the two lines, measured at right angles to the exterior street line unless otherwise indicated.
3.	Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the entire lot area may be count-ed to meet the area requirements of the district in which the principal use of the lot is located. The active use, including buildings, access ways, parking, and stor-age, 


where permitted, may extend not more than 10 feet into the district in which such use is not permitted, provided that a special permit shall be required to ex-tend such uses into any part of the lot located in a residence district SRA, SRB, or GR.

4.	In any case not covered by the other provisions of this paragraph, the location of a boundary shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given from other lines upon the zoning map, or, if distances are not given, then by the scale of the map.
 
SECTION 3.0   USE REGULATIONS

3.1 	PRINCIPAL USES

3.1.1 	General  

No new building or structure shall be constructed or used, in whole or in part and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than for one or more of the uses specifically permitted herein.

3.1.2 	Exempt Agricultural Uses; State Building Code 

Nothing in these use regulations shall be construed to prohibit agricultural, horticultur-al, and floricultural uses or the expansion or reconstruction of existing structures on parcels which are more than five acres in area and further provided that no section of this Bylaw shall be construed to restrict or regulate the use of materials or methods of construction specifically regulated by the State Building Code.

3.1.3 	Use Regulation Table 

See Table 1.  In the Use Regulation Table, the headings on each page shall denote the var-ious zoning districts, and the symbols employed opposite each use listed shall have the following meanings:

	YES	Use permitted as of right
	NO	Use prohibited
	SP	Use permitted only upon issuance of a Special Permit
                                                          by the Board of Appeals
	PB	Use permitted only upon issuance of a Special Permit
                                                            by the Planning Board	

3.1.4 	Classification  

Where any activity or use may be classified under more than one use designation in the Use Regulation Table, the more specific designation shall determine permissibility, if equally specific, the more restrictive shall govern.  Additional restrictions on use may apply if located in a Flood Plain Overlay District or an Aquifer Protection Overlay Dis-trict and a use shown as permitted in the Use Regulation Table is not exempt thereby from compliance with all other applicable provisions of the Zoning Bylaw and with other laws, Bylaws, regulations, and permitting or licensing requirements.

3.1.5. 	Major Nonresidential Project  

Where the Use Regulation Table indicates that a Major Nonresidential Project (MNP) may be authorized by the issuance of a Special Permit, the Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority.  Where a use is not otherwise allowed as of right or by Special Permit in the district, such use shall not be allowed as a MNP in the district.



 
TABLE 1 - TOWN OF DEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS 
 
PRINCIPAL USE – See Foot-notes, Section 3.1.6	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
A.   RESIDENTIAL USES
1.	Single family detached house.	YES	YES	YES	NO	SP	NO	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	NO
2.	Alteration and use of existing single-family house as a dwelling for not more than two families. (See Section 7.2.1)	
SP	
YES	
YES	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
SP	
YES	
SP
3.	Two-family or semi-detached house consisting of two single family dwelling units separat-ed by a party wall.	
NO	
YES	
YES	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
SP	
YES	
SP
4.	Mixed Use Developments	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP22	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	SP	SP
5.	Assisted Living Residence (See Section 7.5)	SP	SP	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
6.	Multi-Family Residential (See Section 7.3)	SP	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
7.	Dwelling Unit, Transient Oc-cupant	SP 	SP 	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	NO
8.	Lodging House	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO



PRINCIPAL USE	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
B.   EXEMPT AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
1.	Use of land or structures for reli-gious purposes	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
2.	Use of land or structures for edu-cational purposes on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivi-sions, or bodies politic, or by a re-ligious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corpo-ration	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
3.	Child care facility 	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
4.	Governmental administration building, fire or police station; use of land for recreational water supply by a public agency	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
5.	Any municipal facility or gov-ernmental use not specifically listed; Essential services 4 	SP	SP	YES	SP	SP	SP	YES	YES	SP	SP	SP	YES
6.	Hospital, nursing, or convalescent home, outpatient facility, charita-ble or philanthropic institution, or cemetery (but not including a place of detention or a correction-al institution	SP	SP	NO	SP22	SP	NO	SP 	SP 	SP 	SP	SP	YES
7.	Public renewable and/or alterna-tive energy generating facilities on municipal property 27, 28	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
8.	Substance Abuse Treatment Cen-ter	NO	NO	NO	SP22	SP 	NO	NO	SP 	SP	NO 	NO 	NO
See Footnote explanations in Section 3.1.6

TABLE 1 - TOWN OF DEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS 

PRINCIPAL USE	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
C.   AGRICULTURAL AND OPEN LAND USES
1.	Orchard, truck garden, nurse-ry, or similar open use of land on a parcel with less than five acres for agriculture, silvicul-ture, viticulture, or horticul-ture, except the raising of swine, poultry, or fur animals, and not including any sales-room or roadside stand.	
YES	
YES	
YES	
NO	
NO	
YES	
YES	
YES	
NO	
YES	
YES	
YES
2.	Use of land for the primary purpose of agriculture, horti-culture, floriculture, or viti-culture on a parcel of more than five acres in area.1	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES
3.	Facility for the sale of pro-duce, wine, and dairy prod-ucts, provided that during the months of June, July, August, and September of every year, or during the harvest season of the primary crop, the ma-jority of such products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner of the land containing more than five acres in area on which the facility is located.11	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES
4.	Other nonexempt salesroom or stand for the display and sales of agriculture and horti-cultural products, the major portion of which are grown on the premises11	
SP	
SP	
NO	
SP	
NO	
NO	
SP	
SP	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
5.	Private recreational country or tennis club, when not con-ducted for profit.	YES	YES	YES	YES	NO	YES	YES	YES	NO	YES	YES	NO
6.	Boat launching site, tennis court, riding academy, out-door skating rink, ski ground, or golf course2 (but not a min-iature golf course or a driving range).	
SP	
SP	
YES	
YES	
SP	
NO	
YES	
YES
	
YES	
YES	
YES	
SP

See Footnote explanations in Section 3.1.6







TABLE 1 - TOWN OF DEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS PRINCIPAL USE REGULATIONS



PRINCIPAL USE	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
D.   OFFICE USES
1.	Medical Office	NO	SP8	NO	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
2.	Business or professional of-fice	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
3.	Banks or financial institution	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES9	YES	YES
4.	Freestanding automatic teller machines, not accessory to use of the property for a bank	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP
5.	Major Nonresidential Project	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB

PRINCIPAL USE – See Footnote Explanations Section 3.1.6	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
E.   COMMERCIAL USES
1.	Small retail business	NO	NO	NO	YES	NO22	NO	SP	SP	YES	YES10	YES	YES
2.	Salesroom for automobiles, automotive sales	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO23	NO	SP	SP	SP	NO	NO	NO
3.	Retail Business	NO	NO	NO	YES	NO22	NO	SP	SP	YES	SP12	YES	YES
4.	Personal service establish-ment	NO	NO	NO	YES	SP20,23	NO	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
5.	General service establishment	NO	NO	NO	SP	NO23	NO	YES	YES	YES	NO	YES	YES
6.	Trade shop	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO23	NO	YES	YES	SP	NO	YES13	SP
7.	Reserved												
8.	Any use requiring a common victualler license, but not an inn holder license, under sec-tion 2 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws	
NO	
NO	
NO	
SP	
NO22	
NO	
SP	
SP	
SP	
SP15	
SP16	
SP16
9.	Animal or veterinary hospital	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO23	NO	YES	YES	SP	SP	SP	NO
10.	Hotel or motel	NO	NO	NO	YES	SP	NO	YES	YES	SP	NO	NO	SP
11.	Convention or conference cen-ter, trade exhibit facility, thea-ter, or motion picture theater	
NO	
NO	
NO	
YES	
SP	
NO	
SP	
SP	
SP	
NO	
SP	
SP
12.	Commercial boat rental or limousine livery	NO	NO	NO	YES	SP	NO	YES	YES	YES	NO	YES	NO
13.	Kennel	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO23	NO	YES	YES	SP	NO	NO	NO
14.	Drive-through facilities	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	SP	SP
15.	Major Nonresidential Project	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB 
16.	Marijuana Establishments	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO


See Footnote explanations in Section 3.1.6

 



PRINCIPAL USE	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
F.   WHOLESALE, STORAGE AND SHOWROOMS 
1.	Wholesale office or showroom	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	NO	YES	YES	YES	NO	YES	SP
2.	Commercial storage	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	NO	YES	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO
3.	Warehouse	NO	NO	NO	NO	SP26	NO	NO29	YES	SP	NO	NO	NO
4.	Major Nonresidential Project	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB


PRINCIPAL USE	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
G.   VEHICULAR AND AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES & USES
1.	Full-service, self-service, or split is-land gasoline service stations with au-tomotive repair bays but not per-forming body work24	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
YES	
YES	
SP17	
NO	
SP17	
SP17
2.	Garage for servicing trucks and trail-ers	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO
3.	Auto body and paint shop, soldering or welding shop, and automotive re-pair garages	NO	NO	NO	NO	SP	NO	YES	YES	YES	NO	SP	NO
4.	Parking lot, as defined in Section I-4, as a principal use, which is approved pursuant to Section VIII of this Bylaw	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
SP	
NO	
YES	
YES
	
YES	
NO	
SP	
YES
5.	Major Nonresidential Project	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB	PB 	PB	PB




PRINCIPAL USE	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC19	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB18	
GB	
CB
H.   MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES
1.	Manufacturing	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	SP	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO
2.	Limited manufacturing	NO	NO	NO	SP	SP	NO	SP	YES	SP	NO	NO	NO
3.	Research, experimental, or testing la-boratory	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	NO	YES	YES	SP	NO	SP	SP
4.	Printing or publishing establishment with not more than 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area used for production	NO	NO	NO	SP	YES	NO	YES	YES	YES	NO	NO	NO
5.	Bottling works for beverages and liq-uids of every kind (excluding alcoholic beverages)	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO
6.	Brewery, Distillery, or Winery with Tasting Room	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	PB 	NO	PB	NO	NO	NO
7.	Major Nonresidential Project	NO	NO	NO	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB	PB	NO	PB	PB
8.	Renewable and alternative energy manufacturing facilities27	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO
9.	Renewable and alternative energy re-search and development facilities	NO	NO	NO	NO	YES	NO	YES	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO
	
See Footnote explanations in Section 3.1.6
 
                                                                                                                                                                           

TOWN OF DEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS ACCESSORY USE TABLE - RESIDENTIAL

 


I.  ACCESSORY USE TABLE – RESIDENTIAL	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SRB	
GR	
PR	
PC23	
RDO	
AP	
LMA	
LMB	
HB	
LB20	
GB	
CB
1.	Private garage for more than three (3) automobiles, or for more than one commercial vehicle, or for a commercial vehicle exceeding 2.5 tons in gross weight, provided that such garage is accessory to a permitted use and is not less than fifty (50) feet from side and rear lot lines.	
SP	
SP	
YES	
YES	
YES	
SP	
YES	
YES	
YES	
SP	
YES	
YES
2.	Private garage for not more than three (3) automobiles, one of which may be a commercial vehicle if not exceeding 2.5 tons in gross weight. The keep-ing of an unregistered automobile outside of an enclosed garage shall not be regarded as an accessory use in any residential district, nor after a period of three months except in accordance with a permit therefor by the Board of Appeals based on a finding that the further keeping of the automobile up-on the premises complies with the requirements of this Bylaw and specify-ing a fixed term and such conditions as the Board of Appeals deem neces-sary to assure such compliance.	



YES	



YES	



NO	



NO	



NO	



NO	



NO	



NO	



	NO	



NO	



NO	



NO
3.	Private greenhouses, stable, tool shed playhouse, tennis court, boat house, or other similar building for domestic storage or use.	
YES30	
YES	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
4.	The keeping of animals, livestock or poultry for personal enjoyment or household use.	
YES	
YES	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
5.	The regular renting of rooms or the furnishing of table board in a dwelling by the owner-occupant thereof to not more than three (3) persons.	
YES	
YES	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO
6.	Accessory dwelling unit (See Section 7.7)												
7.	Such industry of light manufacturing (including processing, assembling, and repairs) as is usual in connection with permitted principal use, provid-ed that: a) Such accessory use does not occupy an area exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area occupied by the principal use, and b) The major portion of any products manufactured are sold at retail on the premises, and c) Not more than five (5) operatives are regularly employed in such accessory use.	

NO	

NO	

NO	

NO	

NO	

NO	

NO	

NO	

YES	

YES	

YES	

YES
8.	Preparation and service of take-out food as an accessory use incidental to the operation of a grocery store	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
NO	
YES	
YES	
YES	
YES
9.	A.  Family or adult day care, small	YES	YES	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	  NO
10.	B.  Family or adult day care, large	SP 	SP 	SP	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO
11.	Home Occupation	YES	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO

See Footnote explanations in Section 3.1.6





TOWN OF DEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS ACCESSORY USE TABLE - NONRESIDENTIAL


II. TABLE OF ACCESSORY USES - NONRESIDENTIAL	DISTRICTS
	SRA
SBA	GR	PR	PC¬23	RDO	AP	LMA	LMB	HB	LB20	GB	CB
1.	Parking of motor vehicles incidental to the permitted principal use and sub-ject to requirements of this Bylaw.	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
2.	Outdoor dining area accessory to a permitted restaurant, but not including drive-in area for food consumption in automobiles.	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	YES	YES
3.	Dwelling accessory to the principal permitted use (such as the residence of a watchman, caretaker, or operator of a business or manufacturing establish-ment), if the dwelling conforms to the requirements applicable if it were lo-cated in a General Residence (GR) district.	NO	NO	NO	YES	YES	NO	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
4.	Other accessory uses identified in this Bylaw or customarily incidental and necessary to principal permitted use.	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES	YES
5.	Dining facility accessory to and serving solely the residents of a planned resi-dential development.	NO	NO	YES	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	  NO

See Footnote explanations in Section 3.1.6

 
FOOTNOTES TO USE REGULATION TABLE  

In the Use Regulation Table, the footnotes refer to the following requirements:

1.	Any greenhouse, heating plant accessory thereto, and any building or structure in which poultry, livestock, or horses are housed, and any storage or use of odor or dust producing material shall be located not less than 100 feet from side and rear lot lines.

2.	Any building, structure, or ground area used therefor is located not less than 50 feet from side and rear lot lines, and further provided that any lot used as a riding academy shall have an area of not less than three (3) acres.

3.	For facilities with more than six (6) children, any outdoor activity area located within 50 feet of side and rear lot lines shall be separated therefrom by a solid fence or dense evergreen planting at least five (5) feet in height.

4.	The public use may include public utilities or communications uses and is necessary for service to the neighborhood or require a location in that vicinity for reasons of space or function.

5.	Reserved for future use.

6.	Reserved for future use.

7.	Reserved for future use.

8.	If the physician or dentist is not a resident of the premises, the floor area so used on one lot or several lots used as one establishment shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.

9.	Provided that not more than five persons are regularly employed therein.

10.	Must be of a size no greater than needed to serve the neighborhood in which the store is located, shall not have more than 1,500 square feet of selling and public use space, except by Special Per-mit from the Board of Appeals.

11.	Provided that any display, whether open or enclosed, is not less than 50 feet from side and rear lot lines, and not nearer the exterior line of any street than the front yard depth required for a building in the district in which said display is located. 

12.	Provided that the store is similar to those listed in E. 1 in general character, hours of business, numbers of persons or cars attracted, and the effect on adjacent property and improvements, and that its stock in trade does not consist primarily of large bulky objects not subject to being carried away by the customers on their person or in their cars. 

13.	The floor area of the establishment used for work and storage shall not exceed 2,500 square feet.

14.	The stock in trade shall not consist primarily of bulky objects which are not likely to be carried away on the person or in the cars of customers.


15.	Provided that the area used by the public does not exceed 1,500 square feet and that no dancing, live, or mechanical entertainment is regularly provided, and subject to such other conditions as the Board of Appeals may impose regarding hours of operation, traffic, take-out service, etc.

16.	Provided that the area used by the public does not exceed 2,000 square feet and that no dancing, live, or mechanical entertainment is regularly provided and subject to such other conditions as the Board of Appeals may impose regarding hours of operation, traffic, take-out service, etc.  

17.	Provided that this use does not interfere with the safety and convenience of pedestrian and ve-hicular movement in the area and in relation to adjacent streets, properties, and improvements.

18.	In a Local Business District, it is the intent of this Bylaw that all structures and permitted uses be of a size that is no greater than is needed to serve the neighborhood in which it is located. Large supermarkets and similar businesses which will draw or create heavy volumes of traffic shall be avoided. Retail establishments and restaurants shall not have more than 1,500 square feet of sell-ing and/or public use space except by special permit from the Board of Appeals.

19.	PC - Planned Commercial development may be allowed on a lot or lots consisting of a minimum of 5 acres, located in the LMA, LMB, HB, GB, CB, or RDO Districts in accordance with Section 6.0, upon approval of a Major Nonresidential Project Special Permit.

20.	Such establishments are secondary uses in RDO districts. They shall be located within the primary use buildings and are intended to service the occupants of such buildings and other non-residential buildings in the immediate vicinity. There shall be no exterior signs visible from abut-ting streets.

21.	Including research, experimental and testing activities, which may include the development of prototypes and demonstration models, but not mass production.

22.	Except SP if located on a lot having frontage on a major highway, that lot either having been es-tablished by plan or deed prior to the effective date of this Bylaw (April 8, 1996) or, if newer, ly-ing entirely within five hundred (500) feet of a major highway, and further provided that devel-opment on the lot will include direct access onto a major highway and that projected traffic gen-eration by all uses on the lot during the afternoon peak hour does not exceed 3.5 trip ends per 1,000 square feet of lot area, excluding pass-by trips but not diverted trips, based upon current trip generation materials from the ITE or other source acceptable to the Zoning Board of Appeals.

23.	Except subject to the following if located on a lot having frontage on an existing or planned access directly onto a major highway, that lot either having been established by plan or deed prior to the effective date of this Bylaw (April 8, 1996) or, if newer, lying entirely within five hundred (500) feet of a major highway:  alteration to a use in this category, if legally existing on the lot as of the effective date of this Bylaw (April 8, 1996), is allowed by right, not requiring a Special Permit, but requiring at least site plan (and Design Review Advisory Board) review if increasing the number of parking spaces on the lot, altering the location or configuration of driveway entrances, regard-less of whether the applicability thresholds of Section 9.5 have been exceeded.  Establishment of a new use in this category is allowed by Special Permit; and development in this category is not subject to note 20.

24.	No second principal use is allowed on any lot containing a gasoline service station.  Gasoline ser-vice stations shall not contain more than 100 square feet of interior retail sales and display area for non-automotive products as an accessory use except by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.

25.	See Section 7.6.

26.	Provided that such use may be allowed only in a building in existence as of the effective date of this Bylaw containing a minimum of 40,000 square feet and located on a lot with a land area of not less than five (5) acres within the RDO District, and subject to such other conditions as the Board of Appeals may impose under Section 9.3.2 of the Zoning Bylaw.  Any Special Permit so granted shall be for a specified tenant or occupant and shall otherwise be non-transferable.

27.	Renewable energy shall include solar (photovoltaic or PV and thermal), low impact hydroelectric and kinetic, geothermal, landfill gas, and renewable energy fuel cells, while alternative energy consists of combined heat and power facilities, electric and hydrogen powered vehicle and asso-ciated technologies including advanced batteries and recharging stations.

28.	Any public facility with the purpose of generation power for public distribution shall be located on no less than three (3) acres (continuous integrated parcel of land) and be sited no closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential dwelling.  This type of facility shall be limited to solar, geo-thermal, landfill gas, or low impact hydroelectric power generation. Such facility shall also be re-quired to install reasonable screening and other environmental mitigation which shall, however, not interfere with the generation of power at the facility.

29.	Provided, however, that such use may be allowed only in a building in existence as of the effective date of this Bylaw containing a minimum floor area of 150,000 square feet.

30.	Provided that any building not required by the State Building Code to obtain a building permit shall obtain a prior written determination from the Building Commissioner, on a Town form cre-ated for this purpose, specifying the proposed location conforms to all requirements of this By-law, and subject to post-construction inspection and verification by the Building Commissioner that said structure is located in conformity with the information on which the determination of the Building Commissioner was based.

3.2	SPECIAL ACCESSORY USES IN ALL DISTRICTS
3.2.1	Trailers  
The Board of Appeals may, upon application and after a duly authorized hearing under the General Laws, grant permits for trailers, whether on wheels or not hereafter place on any land within the Town which shall be used or occupied as a dwelling or residence, or for business, or office purposes, or storage of material relating to the business, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days in the aggregate, for any one year.  The Board of Appeals may also grant per-mits for longer period of time by special exception to the terms of this section in harmony with the zoning regulations and statutes, or to do or act anything else in relation thereto.  Ex-cept in accordance with a permit granted under this paragraph, no use of a trailer on the premises shall be regarded as an accessory use to any business for more than twenty-four (24) of any forty-eight (48) consecutive hours; provided, however, that trailers may be placed on a construction site with a building project for the duration of said project with a building permit issued by the Building Commissioner. The location of construction trailers on a lot shall conform to the setback requirements of the district unless authorized by the Board of Appeals.

3.2.2 	Scientific Accessory Uses 
Uses whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, which are accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right and which are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related production may be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit provided the Board of Appeals finds that the proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good.

3.2.3	Jersey Barriers
The Board of Appeals may, upon application, and after a duly authorized hearing under the General Laws, grant permits for jersey barriers hereafter place on any land within the town which shall be used for a period of six (6) months in the aggregate, for any one year. The Board of Appeals may also grant permits for a longer period of time by special exception to the terms of this section in harmony with the zoning regulations and statues, or to do or act on anything else in relation thereto.

Jersey barriers may be placed along a public road construction site for the duration of said project with a Street Opening Permit issued by the Director of Public Works and without the review and/or approval of the Board of Appeals. All State Agencies placing jersey barriers on State Roads are exempt. The location of such jersey barriers shall conform to the require-ments set forth by the Director of Public Works and be consistent with the Manual on Uni-form Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).

Jersey barriers may be placed along a private road construction site or on a private property construction site with a building project for the duration of said project, not to exceed 6 months, with a building permit issued by the Building Commissioner and without the review and/or approval of the Board of Appeals. The location of the jersey barriers on a lot shall con-form to the setback requirement of the district unless authorized by the Board of Appeals.

3.3 	NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
3.3.1 	Applicability 
This zoning Bylaw shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully be-gun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing required by G.L. c. 40A, s. 5 at which this zoning Bylaw, or any relevant part thereof, was adopted. Such prior, lawfully existing nonconforming uses and structures may continue, provided that no modification of the use or structure is accomplished, unless authorized hereunder.

3.3.1.1	Construction or operations under a building or Special Permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this Bylaw unless the use or construction is com-menced within a period of not more than six (6) months after the issuance of the permit and, in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.




3.3.2 	Nonconforming Uses
The Board of Appeals may award a special permit to change a nonconforming use in accord-ance with this section only if it determines that such change or extension shall not be substan-tially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood. The fol-lowing types of changes to nonconforming uses may be considered by the Board of Appeals:

1.	Change or substantial extension of the use

2.	Change from one nonconforming use to another, less detrimental, nonconforming use.

3.3.3 	Nonconforming Structures 
The Board of Appeals may award a special permit to reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure in accordance with this section only if it determines that such re-construction, extension, alteration, or change shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood. The following types of changes to nonconforming structures may be considered by the Board of Appeals:

1.	Reconstructed, extended or structurally changed 

2.	Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a sub-stantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent

3.3.4 	Variance Required 
Except as provided in subsection 3.3.5, below, the reconstruction, extension, or structural change of a nonconforming structure in such a manner as to increase an existing nonconform-ity, or create a new nonconformity, including the extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming distance within a required yard, shall require the issuance of a variance from the Board of Appeals.

3.3.5  	Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures 
Nonconforming single and two family residential structures may be reconstructed, extended, altered, or structurally changed upon a determination by the Building Inspector that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change does not increase the nonconform-ing nature of said structure.  The following circumstances shall not be deemed to increase the nonconforming nature of said structure:

a.	Alteration to a structure located on a lot with insufficient area which complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, and building height requirements.

b.	Alteration to a structure located on a lot with insufficient frontage which complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, and building height requirements.

c.	Alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required yard setback areas, where the alteration will comply with all current setback, yard, building coverage, and building height requirements.
d.	In the event that the Building Inspector determines the nonconforming nature of such structure would be increased by the proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change, the Board of Appeals may, by Special Permit, allow such reconstruction, exten-sion, alteration, or change where it determines that the proposed modification will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neigh-borhood.

3.3.6  	Abandonment or Non-Use  
A nonconforming use or structure which has been abandoned or not used for a period of two years shall lose its protected status and be subject to all of the provisions in this Zoning Bylaw.

3.3.7  	Reconstruction after Catastrophe or Voluntary Demolition
A nonconforming structure may be reconstructed after a catastrophe or after voluntary demolition in accordance with the following provisions:

a.	Reconstruction of said structure shall commence within two years after such catastrophe or demolition.

b.	Building(s) or structure(s) as reconstructed shall be located on the same footprint as the original nonconforming structure, and shall be only as great in volume or area as the orig-inal nonconforming structure.

c.	In the event that the proposed reconstruction would (a) cause the structure to exceed the volume or area of the original nonconforming structure or (b) cause the structure to be located other than on the original footprint, a special permit shall be required from the Board of Appeals prior to such demolition.

3.3.8 	Reversion to Nonconformity
No nonconforming use shall, if changed to a conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use.
 
SECTION 4.0   DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
4.1  	DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS – TABLE 2
No building, structure, or part thereof shall be constructed, altered, moved, added, or reconstructed, except in accordance with the Table of Dimensional Requirements (see Table 2) or as exempt there-from by other provisions of this Bylaw, and no buildable or built-upon lot shall be subdivided, altered, or reduced, except by taking by eminent domain or conveyance for a public purpose for which a tak-ing by eminent domain could have been made, so as to result in a violation of the requirements of said Table.


 
TABLE 2 – TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS  
 

	
SRA
	
SRB	
GR	LMA/LMB	
HB	
LB	
GB	
CB
				RDO/AP4				
Minimum Frontage (ft.)	12513	95	*1	1504	2004	N/A	N/A9	N/A9
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)	40,000	12,500	*1	1 acre4	1 acre4	12,500	N/A9	N/A9
Minimum Lot Width as percentage of required
Minimum Frontage	7012,13	7012	*112	70	70	70	N/A9	N/A9
Minimum Front Yard (ft.)	25	25	20	3011	30	20	*2	*2
Minimum Side Yard (ft.)	255	155	155	1511	20	156	N/A	N/A
1-st. Det. Accessory Building15	5	5	5	15	15	5	N/A	N/A
Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)	255	255	255	2511	25	25	N/A	N/A
1-st. Det. Accessory Building	5	5	5	25	25	207	N/A	N/A
Maximum Lot Coverage8 (%)	30	30	30	50	40	40	80	80
Maximum Floor Area Ratio	1514	.514	0.9	.3510	0.35	0.4	0.4	2.4
Space between Buildings (ft.) for buildings erected, moved, or added after January 22, 1990	10	10	10	15	15	10	15	N/A

* Dimensional requirements for each planned residential or commercial development to be specified in the Special Permit
**If a semi-detached or multi-family dwelling occupies several lots in the same ownership, this Table of Dimensional 
   Requirements shall apply as if such lots constituted a single lot.
 
FOOTNOTES TO TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS

*1.	(Applies to GR General Residence District):  
a.	Frontage:  50 ft., except 90 ft. for a two-family home.  
b.	Lot Width at front and rear building lines:  90 ft. for a two-family home, except 50 ft. for a single family home. 
c.	Lot Area: 11,000 sq. ft., except 7,500 sq. ft. for a single-family home. 

*2.	10 ft. for any part of a building within 200 ft. of a residence district boundary abutting on the same street, measured parallel to said street, and 20 ft. from Ames St. north of Charles River, Washington St. north of Wigwam Brook, and Court St.

*3.	If a semi-detached or multi-family dwelling occupies several lots in the same owner-ship, this Table of Dimensional Requirements shall apply as if such lots constituted a single lot.

*4.	Minimum lot frontage and area shall not apply to any lot recorded by plan or deed in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or filed with the Land Court prior to passage of Article 57 of the 1973 Town Meeting, if in an RDO district, or Article 40 of the 1963 Town Meet-ing, if in an LMA, LMB, RDO, or HB district.

*5.	In SRA, SRB, and GR districts, the required minimum side yard shall be 10 ft. and the re-quired minimum rear yard shall be 20 ft. for any lot established by a recorded plan or deed prior to adoption of Article 12 of the 1989 Annual Town Meeting.

*6.	In LB districts, no side or rear yard shall be required for buildings on lots established by plan or deed before January 1, 1970.

*7.	The minimum 20 ft. rear yard in LB districts applies to dwellings only.

*8.	Lot coverage applies to buildings and structures, and not to paved ground level sur-	faces.

*9.	GR dimensional regulations apply to one- and two-family dwellings located in CB and GB districts, including Note *1, provided that the Board of Appeals may grant excep-tions from such requirements by Special Permit, for lots established by plan or deed recorded before 1/1/95, if compliance would entail practical difficulties and the excep-tion would have no adverse effect on nearby properties.

*10.	In the RDO district, the Planning Board may, by Special Permit, grant an increase in Floor Area Ratio to 0.40 for projects which have frontage on a major highway and which will result in the consolidation of two or more lots, upon determination by the Board that the resulting development will better serve traffic safety and visual clarity than would development on the existing lots at the otherwise allowable floor area ratio.






*11.	In addition, in the RDO district, no portion of a building for a use not allowed in a Single or General Residence district shall be closer to such district than forty (40) feet or, if greater, the height of that building.

*12.	The minimum lot width for the required front yard in the SRA, SRB, and GR districts shall be equal to the minimum frontage requirement.

*13.	150 ft. in the SRA district for lots created after the adoption of Article 24, at the Town Meeting, April 10, 2000.

*14.	These Floor Area Ratios apply only to one and two family residential dwellings.

*15.	One-story detached accessory building exterior wall shall not be greater than 10 feet in height above the finished grade, and the overall height of the one-story detached acces-sory building shall not be higher than 15 feet above the finished grade.
 
4.2 	HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
4.2.1 	Buildings Permitted in Residential Districts 
Dwellings shall not exceed the height of 38 feet to the high point of a hip, gable, or gam-brel roof, or 30 feet to the high point on a flat or mansard roof, measured from the av-erage finished grade of the lot between the frontage street and the rear building line. Other buildings permitted as of right or by special permit in residence districts shall not exceed the height of 38 feet, measured in the same manner.

4.2.2 	Buildings Permitted in Nonresidential Districts 
Buildings in Nonresidential districts CB, GB, HB, LB, LMA, LMB, RDO, and AP, other than single and two-family dwellings, shall not exceed the height of 40 feet, measured from the average finished grade of the lot within 20 feet of the outside walls of the building to the high point of the roof, provided that for buildings with sloping roofs the height shall be measured to the eave line if no portion of the building above the eave line is used for human occupancy. No building shall have more than five levels used for human occu-pancy, including any part of the building below the average finished grade so used.

4.2.3 	Projections and Structures 
The foregoing height limits shall not apply to structures or parts of buildings customari-ly carried above the roof line and not used for human occupancy, such as chimneys, ventilators, skylights, solar panels, steeples, domes, towers, tanks, scenery lofts, church spires, and the like, provided they are located at least 50 feet from the centerline of any street, cover less than 25 percent of the footprint of the building, and do not exceed 85 feet in height, and provided further that antennas, whether on a building or freestand-ing, shall not exceed the height of 50 feet, measured from the average finished grade within 20 feet thereof.

4.2.4	Special Permit
Where the topography of the land, location of the building, its architecture, or the pur-pose of a structure or projection make adherence to the above height limits impractical the Board of Appeals may by special permit allow such projections or structures to ex-ceed the height of 85 feet, with the exception of antennas which shall not exceed the height of 50 feet, or allow the building height to be measured in a different manner, without changing the substance and intent of building height limits, and subject to ap-propriate conditions, safeguards, and limitations on location, size, use, construction, and appearance.

4.3 	SPECIAL SET BACK AND YARD EXCEPTIONS
4.3.1 	General
Notwithstanding the Table of Dimensional Requirements, no building in any district need be further from the exterior line of any street than the average distance from 


such line of the dwellings or other principal buildings located on the lots adjacent there-to on either side. In determining such average, a vacant side lot having a frontage of fif-ty (50) feet or more shall be considered as though occupied by a building having the re-quired set back, and a lot separated from the lot in question only by a vacant lot having a frontage of less than fifty (50) feet shall be deemed an adjacent lot.

4.3.2  	Special Permit  

The side and rear yard requirements hereof may be varied by the Board of Appeals by Special Permit in the specific case of an irregular, narrow, or shallow lot or a lot unusu-al either in shape or topography, provided that in the opinion of the Board it is impossi-ble or extremely difficult to adhere to such requirements.  Nothing herein shall prevent the projection of cornices or eaves not exceeding eighteen (18) inches in width or of uncovered steps, unroofed porches or window sills into any required yard or other open space.

4.3.3  	Special Setback Requirements in Nonresidential Districts

In an Administrative and Professional, Local Business, General Business, and any Lim-ited Manufacturing Districts, no open display or other open use including off-street parking, where permitted, and no sign or other structure, shall be located nearer to the exterior line of any street than either twenty (20) feet or the permitted setback dis-tance for a building on the lot, whichever distance is the lesser, except the following:

a.	Utility pole or mail box

b.	Plants growing in the soil, if not obstructing the view from the street of cars enter-ing and leaving the premises

4.4 	GROUP HOUSING PROJECTS
4.4.1  	General 
Where a row house and an apartment house are permitted, a group of two or more such houses may be located on a tract of land of at least three (3) acres not subdivided into individual lots provided that such use is authorized by the Board of Appeals in each specific case, and provided further that:

a.	The area of the tract of land shall not be less than the total of the lot areas herein re-quired if each such house were located on an individual lot; and 

b.	The open spaces surrounding each house shall conform to a standard at least as high as required by the provisions of this Bylaw applying to such a house if located on an individual lot.


 
4.5  	SPECIAL LOT SIZE EXCEPTIONS FOR DWELLINGS
4.5.1  	General
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, a single family detached house or a single family dwelling unit of a semi-detached or row house may be constructed, where per-mitted by the use regulations of the district, on a lot having less than the required area and frontage, provided that all other provisions of this Bylaw are complied with, and provided further that, prior to the effective date of the area and frontage requirements in question, said lot was:

a.	Laid out by Plan or Deed duly recorded with the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or in the Norfolk Registry of the Land Court which were in conformity with lot size re-quirements, if any, that were applicable to the construction of a dwelling on said lot at the time of said recording and provided further that:

i.	Said lot has an area of at least 5,000 sq. ft. and a frontage of 50 ft.

ii.	That at the time this amendment to the Zoning Bylaw became effective, said lot was not in common ownership with abutting vacant lot or lots which can or could have been combined with said undersized lot to comply with or more nearly comply with the Zoning requirements in effect at the time this amend-ment was adopted.

b.	Or laid out on a subdivision plan under the subdivision control law that has been duly recorded. The date of approval of said plan being less than eight (8) years prior to the application for a permit to use said lot for a dwelling. 

c.	For the purposes of this Section and notwithstanding any definition to the contrary and provided that all other conditions of this subsection have been met, individual abutting lots shown on a recorded plan will retain their separate identity and will not be considered merged even if as a result of registration such lots are described collectively in a deed or Certificate of Title as a parcel of land with a metes and bound description of a single area.

4.6 	REDUCTION OF OCCUPIED LOTS
No lot on which a building is located in any district shall be reduced or changed in size or shape so that the building or lot fails to comply with the lot area, frontage, coverage, set back, yard, or height provisions of this Bylaw applicable to the construction of said building on said lot. A lot already nonconforming to the above dimensional provisions shall not be further reduced or its boundaries revised so as to increase the extent of non-conformance or non-compliance with the requirements of this Bylaw. If land is subdivided, conveyed, devised, or otherwise trans-ferred so as to reduce any lot conveyed or retained in violation of this section, no lot resulting from such division, conveyance, or transfer, regardless of its dimensions, shall be deemed to be a building lot or entitled to a building or occupancy permit. This prohibition shall not apply, however, when a portion of a lot is taken or conveyed for a public purpose.

 
4.7 	SEPARATE LOTS FOR DWELLINGS
Except for authorized group housing projects and for combined dwelling and business uses on lots in General and Local Business districts, there shall be provided for each residential struc-ture containing one or more dwelling units, as allowed by the applicable district regulations, a separate lot of land meeting the requirements of this Bylaw for the district in which the struc-ture will be situated, or falling within the exemption for previously recorded lots. Nothing here-in shall prohibit or restrict the continued use of lawfully established existing living quarters in buildings accessory to the principal residential or other permitted use.  The provisions of this paragraph shall not prohibit or restrict the issuance of Special Permits for dwellings accessory to the principal non-residential use in Limited Manufacturing districts.

4.8  	IRREGULARLY SHAPED LOTS
When the distance between any two points on lot lines is less than fifty (50) feet, measured in a straight line, the smaller portion of the lot which is bounded by such straight line and such lot lines shall be excluded from the computation of the minimum lot area unless the distance along such lot lines between such two points is less than 150 feet.

 
SECTION 5.0   GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.1 	OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
5.1.1 	Purpose 
It is the intention of this Bylaw that all structures be provided with sufficient off-street parking:

a.	To meet the needs of persons employed at or making use of such structures; 
b.	To ensure that any use of land involving the arrival, departure, or storage of motor vehicles on such land be so designed as to minimize hazards to pedestrians and abutters caused by the noise, fumes, and headlight glare of automobiles parking off the street; 
c.	To reduce congestion in the streets and contribute to traffic safety by assuring ade-quate space for parking of motor vehicles off the street; 
d.	To provide off-street loading space for all structures requiring the delivery of goods.

5.1.2 	Applicability
These standards shall apply to all parking for multifamily dwellings with three or more dwelling units and all nonresidential uses. Any new parking area for multifamily dwell-ing with three or more dwelling units or any nonresidential structure or use with five or more parking spaces, or change to any existing such parking area with five or more parking spaces, shall be subject to site plan approval from the Planning Board pursuant to Section 9.5.

a.	Modification of Existing Lots.  Any modification to an existing parking lot, whether subject to an existing parking plan or not, shall be subject to the requirements of this Section 5.1. When such modification is requested, the applicant shall, to the ex-tent feasible, eliminate all prior existing parking nonconformities, unless the Plan-ning Board makes a written finding that site conditions render literal compliance with the provision of this Section 5.1 impracticable or infeasible for some or all ex-isting nonconforming parking areas.

b.	The approval by the Board of Appeals of a Special Permit, or the finding that the proposed change in a nonconforming use is not substantially more detrimental, shall not relieve the owner and/or lessee of the requirements Section 9.5 Site Plan Review.

5.1.3 	Exceptions
	The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 	5.1:

a.	One and two family dwellings.

b.	Maintenance work which does not alter or change the existing layout.

5.1.4	Required Parking Spaces
The number of parking spaces to be provided shall be based on the net floor area of a building or on its rated capacity as set forth in Table 3; for uses not listed in Table 3, the Planning Board shall utilize the requirements for the use most similar in terms of activ-ity and parking demand; where it is not certain which of several possible uses will be the ultimate use, the higher of several requirements shall be used. Fractional numbers of parking spaces shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. Where several separate uses share the same parking lot, the number of parking spaces provided shall not be less than the total number of spaces required in the maximum use period, allow-ing for a reasonable number of extra spaces for the cars arriving before the preceding users leave. A Board of Appeals variance shall apply to specific dimensional require-ments of parking only to the extent expressly stated in the variance. Use variances for parking or for other purposes are not permitted.

5.1.5 	Shared Parking
For the purposes of this Bylaw, “shared parking” shall be defined as parking spaces that can be commonly shared or used to serve two or more individual land uses without conflict or encroachment and may include properties in the same or different owner-ship. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Bylaw, shared parking may be per-mitted by the Planning Board, subject to site plan approval, provided that:    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
a.	The Applicant submits a shared parking analysis by a competent traffic engineer or other parking professional demonstrating the availability of parking space supply to satisfy the peak parking space demand of the various uses during all or part of the day. The Applicant may use off-site parking for shared parking provided the off-site parking is located within four hundred (400) feet of the premises.

b.	In the event that shared parking involves parties in different ownership, or the same ownership that is off-site, a proposed contract, agreement, or suitable legal in-strument acceptable to the Planning Board, specifying the location of all spaces to be jointly used, the number of such spaces, the hours during the day that such park-ing shall be available, and the duration or limit, if any on such parking, shall be rec-orded with the Norfolk Registry of Deeds with a copy thereof filed with the Plan-ning Board. 

c.	Any reduction in area required for parking because of these joint use provisions may be required as reserved landscaped open space.

d.	Nothing in this Section 5.1.5 shall relieve the owner from providing parking facili-ties in accordance with this Bylaw if subsequently the joint use of parking facilities shall terminate.

 
DEDHAM PARKING TABLE – TABLE 3


PRINCIPAL USE	NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES

RESIDENTIAL AND RESIDENTIAL CARE USES
a.	One, two, or multi-family residence	1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit (2 spaces minimum), except that publicly-supported housing for the elderly shall require 1 space per dwelling unit
b.	Rooming and lodging houses, rental of rooms, bed-and-breakfast accommodations, hotels and motels (ex-clusive of restaurants, dining rooms, or public assem-bly facilities open to the general public and requiring additional parking), trailer camps, and seasonal camp-ing facilities for adults or families	1.25 parking spaces per guest room, or per two persons rated capacity or sleeping accommodations for two per-sons (a double bed shall be considered sleeping accommo-dations for two persons), provided that, for trailer or mo-bile home camps one space shall be located next to each site.
c.	Hospitals, nursing, or convalescent homes, living care, and other quasi-medical and institutional facilities providing residential care, including prisons, boarding schools for persons 16 years or age or older, and group homes	1 parking space per two persons rated or design capacity.
d.	Assisted Living Residence	0.3 parking spaces per dwelling unit; plus 1 parking space per employee on the largest work shift.

COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS, AND OFFICE USES
a.	Retail sales and services not specifically identified below and including the floor area devoted to uses ac-cessory to the principal retail use:	1 parking space per 200 square feet floor area or a fraction thereof, provided that:
i.	Where goods or items for sale are produced or processed on site, such as a bakery, coping or printing shop, or a custom art studio, the area de-voted to the production or storage of items to be sold shall be counted as part of the retail floor ar-ea.	

ii.	Where display, sale, or related activities custom-arily take place outdoors, one-half the outdoor ar-ea devoted or available for such activities shall be added to the floor area.	
iii.	Where retail sales or services are conducted in a dwelling as a permitted home occupation or as a non-conforming use, parking for such sales or services shall be in addition to the off-street park-ing required for the residential use.	

iv.	In an enclosed shopping mall, the areas used as a public concourse and not used for storage, dis-play, or sales of goods shall not be counted as floor area of calculating parking demand.  Parking for eating places, entertainment, athletic, and other facilities identified herein separately in categories other than retail sales shall be added to the retail parking required; the Planning Board may author-ize paving or constructing 80 percent of the aggre-gate required parking spaces, provided that land-scaped vacant space remains available for the construction of additional parking, if needed in the future.	
b.	Professional, business, governmental, and similar of-fices and banks, including real estate offices and mail order or wholesale offices involving no on-site storage or distribution of goods or commodities	1 parking space per 200 square feet floor area on the ground or street floor, and 1 parking space per 300 square feet floor area on floors above the ground floor.  Parking for offices located on residential premises shall be in addition to the required residential parking. Parking for freestanding automatic teller machines shall be provided at the rate of four parking spaces per terminal.
c.	Physicians and dentists, medical centers, clinics, and other practicing health professionals, including veteri-narians and accessory uses, but not room and board
	5 parking spaces for each practicing professional plus one additional space per 500 square feet floor area. If the health professional has an office on residential premises, service parking shall be in addition to the required residential parking.
d.	Restaurant, cafeteria, lunch counter, or dining room open to the public, including those in a hotel, retain store, or another facility not intended or used for pub-lic assembly	2 parking spaces per five seats design or rated capacity, in addition to off-street parking required for the hotel or other uses. Drive-in or take-out service shall provide 1 additional parking space per 250 square feet of floor area of such eat-ing establishment. The Special Permit required for an eating establishment may include modifications of these re-quirements based on the specifics of each case.
e.	Testing or research laboratory or research facility not open to general public and not included in or accesso-ry to manufacturing or production	1 parking space per 300 square feet floor area.


f.	Funeral homes	2 parking spaces per five persons or seats of rated capacity of all rooms available for funeral services and related pub-lic functions, but not less than 12 parking spaces. 
g.	Club, recreational, amusement, athletic, sports, or ex-ercise facility with participatory activities shall pro-vide parking spaces equal to the sum of the following:	

i.	One-half the number of participants, players, members, exercise equipment users, etc., at full use of the facilities design capacity, courts, or equipment.	



ii.	Where space for spectators is provided:  one-third the spectator design or actual seating capacity, in-doors and outdoors. Where the seating is not fixed and comprises folding chairs or similar accom-modations, and there is no maximum occupancy figure, the capacity shall be assumed at one seat per 20 square feet of floor or outdoor area availa-ble for viewer or spectator seating.
	
iii.	If the club or other facility includes one or more dining rooms or other eating establishments, addi-tional parking shall be provided in accordance with paragraph d. above, except that combined spectator and restaurant seats shall be counted to satisfy both requirements simultaneously.	
h.	Self-storage facilities	8 parking spaces plus 2 additional spaces for each 10,000 sq.ft. of floor area or fraction thereof over the first 20,000 sq.ft.
i.	Theater, motion picture theater, public assembly hall, auditorium, or function hall for large public gatherings, whether as a separate facility or as part of an institu-tion	1 parking space per 3 seats design or actual seating capaci-ty, and, in the absence of permanent seating or permitted occupancy capacity, one parking space per 20 sq.ft. of floor area for public gatherings.  Provided, however, that if the Planning Board makes a finding that sufficient parking has otherwise been provided at a hotel complex, the Planning Board may reduce the requirements under this subsection for such areas within said hotel complex to not less than 1 parking space per six seats design or actual seating capacity or permitted occupancy capacity. The Planning Board shall make detailed written findings supporting any such reduc-tion under this subsection.
j.	Bowling Alleys	5 parking spaces per lane.
k.	Home Occupation	1 parking space for each person providing paid services who is not a resident of the premises.
	
INSTITUTIONAL USES
a.	Day Care Center	1 space for every teacher and employee, 1 space for visi-tors, plus 1 space for every six children based on the larg-est enrollment on site at any given time; the Planning Board may allow a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for the purpose of improving site utilization, but not to increase permitted enrollment if the number of spaces provided is adequate to provide one space for every teach-er and employee, and to support, without detriment to the neighborhood, drop-off and pick-up areas for the maximum number of children arriving and departing the facility at any one time in accordance with a parking and traffic man-agement plan approved by the Planning Board.
b.	Elementary and Middle Schools, and other educational institutions for children under 16 years of age	1 parking space per 16 children design or licensed capaci-ty, but not less than 5 spaces.
c.	High Schools, colleges, vocational schools, and other educational institutions for persons over 16 years of age	1 parking space per two students design or licensed capaci-ty, provided that, if it can be shown that the students are trainees shall not or cannot drive and will require no park-ing, now or in the future, the standards of paragraph n. above shall apply.
d.	Civic and veterans organizations, libraries, museums, public utilities buildings, religious and social organi-zations	1 parking space per 400 sq.ft. floor area, except that for meeting rooms, auditoriums, places of worship, assembly halls, and the like, parking spaces in accordance with para-graph 2.g. above shall be provided; and for restaurants or cafeterias, dining rooms, or other food service facilities, spaces shall be provided as called for respectively in para-graphs 2.d. and 1.c. above.  Where the use of assembly, food service, or living facilities shall be limited exclusively to members, occupants, students and staff of such institu-tions and never leased or made available to outsiders or the general public, only the parking spaces needed to satis-fy the requirements of the one use calling for the highest number of such spaces shall be provided.
e.	Substance Abuse Treatment Center	5 parking spaces for each practicing professional, plus one (1) additional space per 500 square feet floor area.
	
AUTOMOTIVE AND RELATED USES
a.	Service stations and repair garages, including self-service or split island filling stations, body and paint shops, and car washes	5 parking spaces arranged so as not to interfere with access to pumps and service or repair facilities, plus 1 additional space per bay or garage door. Where the number of bays or repair/service facility entrances cannot be determined, 1 additional space per 250 sq. ft. floor area shall be provided instead.
b.	Car, truck, trailer, tractor, or other vehicle on wheels or treads, including snow or all-terrain vehicles and con-struction machinery, or boat sales	1 parking space per 500 sq. ft. area, indoors or outdoors, used, designed, or available for sales, offices, storage, ser-vicing, or repair. No part of the designated indoor or out-door parking area shall be used for the display or storage of vehicles to be sold, displayed, serviced, or repaired.
c.	Transportation terminals, passenger stations, park-and-ride lots, and similar facilities designed for park-ing as the principal use	The number of off-street parking spaces shall be based on long-range projection of expected demand.  Any part of the parking lot not initially needed shall be landscaped, to be paved when parking demand requires it.
	
INDUSTRIAL AND WAREHOUSE USES
a.	Manufacture, processing, assembly, testing, research and development, including the customary accessory uses, but no on-site sales	1 parking space per 500 sq. ft. floor area, but at least 5 park-ing spaces.

b.	Warehouse, storage, and distribution of transshipment as the principal use, which may include customary of-fice and repackaging accessory uses, such as mail or-der or wholesale, but no on-site retail sales, servicing, or other uses listed in paragraph 5.a. above:	1 parking space per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area, but at least 5 spaces.  Where outdoor storage is allowed, 1 additional parking space shall be provided for every 2,000 sq. ft. of outdoor storage area. Separate additional parking shall be provided for trucks, vans, and other fleet vehicles and ma-terial handling equipment based on site.
c.	Contractors, yards, lumber yards, bulk sales of fuel (tank farms) or building materials, utility company or public utility materials and equipment storage, and similar uses requiring large spaces for indoor or out-door storage of trucks, special purpose vehicles, equipment, and materials:	1 parking space per 500 sq. ft. floor area, plus 1 parking space per 500 sq. ft. of outdoor storage of materials and commodities, in addition to off-street screened parking for fleet trucks, vans, and special purpose vehicles or equip-ment based on site.
d.    Brewery, Distillery, or Winery with Tasting Room	1 parking space per 500 sq. ft. floor area, but at least 5 park-ing spaces. 1 parking space per 200 sq. ft. when there is a tasting room.
	
LOADING AND UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
Where off-street parking is required by this Section, load-ing berths or bays generally at least 12 ft. wide and 55 ft. long plus adequate maneuvering space shall be provided for the loading and unloading of stock and other materials as follows:	
a.	Retail Store and Service Establishments	For each retail store or service establishment with gross floor area over 8,000 sq. ft., at least one berth. A second berth shall be provided for the floor area in excess of 8,000 and up to 80,000 sq. ft.  Additional loading berths shall be provided at the rate of one berth for each additional 80,000 sq. ft. or a fraction thereof.
b.	Office Buildings and Business Establishments other than Retail	For each building with gross floor area of 15,000 sq.ft, at least one loading berth shall be provided. Additional load-ing berths may be required at the rate of one berth for each additional 80,000 sq. ft.

c.	Manufacturing, Industrial, and Similar Use	For manufacturing, processing, industrial, research and development, and similar plants and facilities with a gross floor area of 8,000 sq. ft. or more, at least one loading berth shall be provided.  The Planning Board may require addi-tional berths for increases in floor area by more than 50,000 sq. ft.

 
5.1.6	Required Parking Spaces, CB District
In the Central Business (CB) zoning district, off-street parking existing on January 1, 1995, shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of Table 3.  However, any revision of the parking layout, building renovation, or alteration changing the footprint or the floor area of a building, or change of use to one with different parking requirements that in-creases the amount of required parking beyond the cumulative required parking, shall require approval by the Planning Board. Any addition, alteration, and new building con-struction shall require Site Plan Review in accordance with Section 9.5; however, the Planning Board may waive literal compliance based on written findings that compli-ance is impractical or unfeasible and that approval of the site plan is in the public inter-est and not inconsistent with the intent of this Section 5.1.

5.1.7	Parking Lot Design Standards
1.	Parking Spaces and Aisles:  
For parking at right angles to a building, lot line, or aisle, the width of a parking space shall not be less than nine (9) feet, the length shall be nineteen (19) feet, of which two (2) feet may overhang a curb or barrier, but shall not extend across a street or lot line, provided that for parking lots used for long term (four hours or longer) parking by the same group of drivers, such as all-day employee parking, parking space width may be reduced to lot less than sixteen (16) feet.  For parking at other angles, the depth shall be such as to accommodate a 9 foot by 19 foot park-ing space with 1.5 feet maximum overhang.

2.	Parking Angle:  The following requirements are applicable:











These requirements are for aisles providing access to parking stalls for one-way use only. For two-way use, the minimum shall be 20 feet or the aisle width required above, whichever is greater.

3.	Parallel Parking:  
Parking parallel to curb or building shall require 22 feet long parking spaces, 9 feet wide.  Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall conform to the applicable federal and state standards as to number and dimensions, and shall be located near 


building entrances and wheelchair ramps. No parking space shall obstruct the exit path from any other space or be located as to require backing out into or from a street. For driveway curves, the smaller radius shall be not less than 12 feet, and the width of a driveway, where the driveway it is not used for maneuvering in and out of parking spaces, shall not be less than 10 and not more than 15 feet for one-way and not less than 20 and not more than 30 feet for two-way traffic, except that for parking lots with a capacity of 10 or fewer parking spaces and for garages, drive-way entrances and exits may be reduced with Planning Board approval to not less than 12 feet for two-way traffic. Lots for 200 or more parking spaces shall have more than one two-way access, located so as to serve different parts of the parking lot. Parking lots designed to include parking for trucks, buses, or other large vehi-cles shall have designated parking spaces, driveways, and access ways large enough to accommodate such vehicles. In order to screen parking to the greatest extent, wherever and whenever possible, parking shall be located to the rear and sides of buildings.

4.	The number of parking spaces with reduced stall dimensions shall not exceed 25% of the total number of spaces in the parking lot.

5.1.8	Construction Standards
1.	All areas to be used for parking, driveways, aisles or access ways to streets open to public travel, pedestrian walkways, and safety islands shall have a pavement sur-face, designed and maintained, to provide a firm surface, safe traction, and clean walking conditions in wet, freezing, or other inclement weather. 

2.	Except for lots designed to serve five (5) or fewer cars, an alternative surface may be used for parking, driveways, aisles, or access ways which is firm, provides safe traction.  

3.	For pedestrian walks an alternative surface may be used provided it provides a clean walking surface in wet, freezing, or other inclement weather conditions.  

4.	Pavement shall consist of bituminous concrete which is 3.5 inches thick after com-paction.  An equivalent surface such as cement, concrete brick, masonry, or other permanent surface which provides the design strength of bituminous concrete which is 3.5 inches thick after compacted is permissible.  

5.	Paved areas shall be graded so as to avoid ponding and to channel surface water to catch basins or to landscaped, unpaved areas and to avoid excessive surface drain-age to the streets. 

6.	Parking and maneuvering spaces shall have grades between 1 and 4 per cent when-ever possible. 

7.	Parking spaces and driveways shall be marked by white striping, and pedestrian paths, fire lanes, and safety zones shall be marked by yellow striping, 4 inches wide, and/or by curbing, barriers, and retaining walls. 



8.	Large parking lots designed for 200 cars or more or for customer, employee, and fleet vehicles parking shall be laid out in several areas separated by landscaping, fencing, or space buffers. 

9.	Pavement markings and directional signs shall be used for circulation guidance and safety. Whenever a new site plan approval or a revision to an existing site plan ap-proval depicts an increase in the total impervious surface on the lot, the same shall be submitted to the Conservation Commission for review, and the provisions for drainage on said site plan approval shall be in accordance with a duly issued Order of Conditions or Stormwater Management Permit, whichever is applicable. 

10.	All artificial lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public way or other property. Artificial lighting standards and design requirements are within Site Plan Approval Design Manual as most recently amended.  

5.1.9	Zoning District Requirements:  Residential
1.	Parking Decks. Parking decks shall be prohibited above or below ground in residen-tial districts unless allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.

5.1.10 	Zoning District Requirements: RDO Districts
1.	Access. Driveways serving uses located in the RDO district shall be located as fol-lows, unless an alternative egress configuration is authorized by the Planning Board in performing Site Plan Approval under Section 9.5, upon the Boards determination that the alternative more effectively reduces traffic hazard and disturbance to resi-dential environs. 

2.	Shared Drives.  Where feasible, driveways shall be shared with adjacent uses so as to reduce the number of points of entry onto streets.

3.	Street.  Driveway access shall be only onto a street zoned non-residentially. If that is not feasible, then access shall be onto that abutting street (if two or more exist) where traffic will disturb the smaller number of dwellings.

4.	Buffer Area.  In the RDO district, no portion of any parking lot of twenty (20) or more spaces serving a use not allowed in an abutting Single or General Residence District shall be located within forty (40) feet of the boundary of such district, ex-cept that on lots established by plan or deed prior to the effective date of this Bylaw (April 8, 1996), that buffer space may be reduced by the Planning Board acting through Site Plan Approval which is sufficient to achieve visual separation and amenity equivalent to that under the basic separation and landscaping require-ments.

5.1.11  Construction Delay 
If, in the sole and exclusive discretion of the Planning Board, the construction or paving of the entire parking lot shown on the approved site plan shall not be needed initially, the Planning Board may grant an authorization for a specified delay of up to two years in paving portions of the parking lot, not exceeding 40 per cent thereof, which shall be identified on the plan and shall remain vacant, landscaped, and available for parking. The authorization for such a stay may be extended by the Planning Board for additional periods not to exceed twelve months each upon an express finding by the Planning Board that such further extension is in the public interest and consistent with the intent of this subsection. Nothing herein shall be construed to allow any reduction in the hori-zontal area for parking required by this section or its use for any other purpose.	

5.1.12  Waiver 
The Planning Board may grant a waiver from any provision of this Section 5.1, provid-ed that such waiver shall not cause substantial detriment to public safety. In granting such waivers, the Planning Board may require as a condition of approval the use of mit-igating measures such as carpools, shuttles from an off-site lot, assigned employee parking spaces with reduced stall dimensions, or the designation of compact car park-ing spaces with reduced dimensions.  In these instances, the Planning Board shall make detailed written findings of 1) those specific conditions that render literal compliance with the terms of this subsection 5.1 impracticable or infeasible, 2) the specific nature of alternative means of complying with the terms of this subsection 5.1, and 3) why and how such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of this subsection 5.1.

5.1.13  Loading Requirements
5.1.13.1  General 
Adequate off-street loading spaces or loading areas shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property for each nonresidential building or use which is erected, enlarged, or altered after the effective date of this Bylaw, according to the following regulations.  

5.1.13.2  Required Loading Space  
Where off-street parking is required by this Section, loading berths or bay shall be provided for the loading and unloading of stock and other materials as set forth in Table 3.

5.1.13.3  Same Lot  
All loading spaces or loading areas required by this Bylaw shall be on the same lot as the building or use which they are intended to serve, and in no case shall any required loading area be part of an area used to satisfy the off-street park-ing requirements of this Bylaw.

5.1.13.4  No Queues or Backing onto Street  
No loading facility shall be designed to require trucks to queue on a public way while awaiting off-loading.  No loading facility shall be designed to re-quire vehicles to back onto a public way; all turning maneuvers shall be ac-commodated on the premises.

5.1.13.5  Shared Loading 
No part of an off-street loading area required by this Bylaw for any nonresi-dential building or use shall be included as part of an off-street loading area similarly required for another building or use, unless the type of buildings or uses indicates that the usage of such loading area would not occur simultane-ously, as determined by the Planning Board.

5.1.13.6  Screening 
	                   Loading areas shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.3.

5.1.13.7  Size   
Loading bays shall not be less than twelve (12) feet in width, fifty five (55) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of driveway and maneu-
vering space.

5.1.13.8  Location  
No loading dock or bay shall be located within twenty (20) feet of the   boundary of any residential district. 

5.1.13.9  Waiver   
Any loading requirement set forth herein may be reduced by the grant of a waiver by the Planning Board if the Board finds that the reduction is not   in-consistent with public health and safety, or that the reduction promotes a public benefit. In these instances, the Planning Board shall make detailed writ-ten findings of 1) those specific conditions that render literal compliance with the terms of this subsection impracticable or infeasible, 2) the specific nature of alternative means of complying with the terms of this subsection, and 3) why and how such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of this subsection.

5.2 	LANDSCAPING 
5.2.1 	Applicability 
The requirements of this subsection shall apply to any proposed outdoor parking lot for 10 or more parking spaces and to any alteration of an existing parking lot which will contain 10 or more spaces. However, a lot of any size abutting a parcel used for 
residential purposes shall provide a minimum of a 5 (five) foot landscaped buffer strip, or other type of screening as determined by the Board, along all property lines of such parking lot abutting the residential use. The Planning Board acting through Site Plan Approval may require additional buffer. The specific requirements and standards for landscaping is within Site Plan Approval Design Manual as most recently amended.

1.	Existing parking lots covered by Section 5.1 may proportionally reduce the re-quirements of this subsection to the ratio of the existing unbuilt-¬upon space to the space needed to meet the requirements of this Section; or take any action relative thereto.


5.2.2	Landscaped Areas 
1.	Frontage Strip:  Only landscaping shall be allowed in the landscaped buffer zone which extends across the entire frontage of the lot on a street or highway and for a depth of twenty (20) feet in the Highway Business and Research Development and Office districts, and five (5) feet in the Local Business, General Business, and Lim-ited Manufacturing districts, or of the required minimum front yard, whichever is less. Any commercial, industrial, institutional, or other nonresidential use located in a residential district shall provide a landscaped buffer zone of twenty (20) feet in Single Residence A districts, ten (10) feet in Single Residence B districts, and five (5) feet in General Residence districts. Existing healthy trees and shrubs shall be pre-served within this landscaped buffer zone and planted to supplement and not pre-vent existing vegetation from surviving. Shrubs shall be planted between each two trees. The specific requirements and standards for landscaping are within Site Plan Approval Design Manual as most recently amended.

2.	Lot Interior:  Trees and shrubs shall also be preserved or planted in the interior of the parking lot (defined as the space enclosing the parking spaces, maneuvering ar-eas, and aisles) so that such landscaped space shall comprise not less than fifteen (15) percent of the paved parking area. This interior landscaped area shall not in-clude the landscaping provided in the frontage strip. Trees and shrubs shall be planted near the middle of rows of parking spaces extending more than one hun-dred eighty (180) feet and to separate parts of the parking lot, and shrubs shall be planted in the landscaped rounding between the end of a row of parking and the curved wedge-shaped spaces or narrow strips not large enough for a tree. The in-terval between trees shall not be more than twenty-five (25) feet, and the distance from a tree to the paved area shall be at least five (5) feet. The distance from a shrub or other vegetation to a paved area shall be at least two (2) feet.  Landscaping that is less than two (2) feet from the paved area shall not block the line of sight.  Other unpaved areas on the lot shall be suitably landscaped with trees, grass, hedg-es, occasional trees, and flower beds or benches and ornamental structures. The specific requirements and standards for landscaping are within Site Plan Approval Design Manual as most recently amended.

3.	Perimeter.  Parking areas, except those associated with single and two-family res-idences, shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the side and rear lot lines. This required setback shall consist entirely of landscaped open space. The Planning Board, acting through Site Plan Approval, may increase the perimeter landscaping where the Planning Board deems it necessary to protect the single and two-family residences adjacent to the site.

5.2.3	Planting Requirements   
Screening by trees, especially evergreens, and shrubs shall be provided between park-ing lots and residential areas, highways or streets, and buildings on abutting lots, as specified herein.  Trees to be planted shall have a minimum height of twelve (12) feet and a minimum diameter of three (3) inches at four (4) feet height at the time of plant-ing, and shall be planted in one cubic yard of loam, wrapped and guyed to facilitate sur-vival. They shall be of species characterized by rapid growth, hardiness, and suitable for New England climate.  Shrubs to be planted shall be of at least five (5) gallon size, and suitable for the purpose of visual screening.

5.2.4	Seasonal Planting Waiver
Landscaping may be delayed due to seasonal changes with the approval of the zoning enforcement officer for up to six (6) months from the date of issuance of a building permit. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued if the record owner of the prop-erty upon which the landscaping is to be completed posts a bond or other acceptable security with the Town Treasurer, such bond to be in the amount of one-and-a-half times the estimated cost of such delayed landscaping construction, as indicated on the approved parking or site plan. Upon completion of all landscaping, substantially in ac-cordance with the approved plan, the zoning enforcement officer shall authorize in writing the release of said security and shall issue a permanent occupancy permit. The owner shall be responsible for the continued vitality of landscaped areas.

5.2.5	Waiver of Landscaping and Planting Requirements
Where soil conditions, lot shape, topography, architectural or structural conditions make literal compliance with the terms of this Section 5.2 impracticable or infeasible, the Planning Board may approve a site plan showing alternative means of complying with the objectives of this Section 5.2 and may allow the use of ground cover and or-namental screening or buffers, as long as such action is in the public interest and not in-consistent with the intent and purpose of this Section 5.2. In these instances, the Plan-ning Board shall make detailed written findings of 1) those specific conditions that ren-der literal compliance with the terms of this Section 5.2 impracticable or infeasible, 2) the specific nature of alternative means of complying with the terms of this Section 5.2, and 3) why and how such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purposes of this Section 5.2.

5.3 	ENCLOSURE OF USES
5.3.1 	General 
All commercial uses permitted as of right, by special permit, or by a variance, and all re-lated uses, except principal or accessory residential and agricultural uses, shall be con-ducted wholly within enclosed buildings, except the following:

1.	Plants, landscaping, natural features of the land, minor ornamental or utility system structures requiring no building permit, pedestrian and vehicular ways, parking lots, fences and screening or ornamental walls, utility and light poles and wiring, signs and sign supports, structures and devices required by government for traffic control or other purposes.

2.	Areas and facilities for outdoor sports, athletic, or recreational activities, and open air theaters, but only where such activities are permitted as of right or by special permit.


3.	Outdoor eating areas of a restaurant, where permitted by the Board of Appeals or when shown on a site plan approved by the Planning Board.

4.	The dispensing of fuel, lubricants, or fluids at a garage or service station, where oth-erwise permitted.

5.	In all zoning districts, outdoor storage or display of goods, products, materials and equipment, including motor vehicles, boats, and construction materials handling equipment, where accessory to the principal use conducted in an enclosed building and otherwise permitted and subject to the requirements herein, is allowed, pro-vided that such outdoor display or storage shall not exceed 20 percent of the square footage of such building. An automobile sales agency may use an area not exceeding 80 percent of the square footage of its building for outdoor display and storage of new vehicles.

6.	Enclosure of uses by nonconforming buildings shall be governed by the provisions of Section 3.3.

5.3.2 	Special Permit 
The Board of Appeals may grant special permits for other uses, activities, and struc-tures to be located outside of enclosed buildings, provided that such outdoor location is customary, that it will have no adverse effect on adjacent buildings and uses, and that location indoors is not feasible or not practical.

5.4 	SCREENING OF USES
5.4.1 	General 
In any Limited Manufacturing District, all open storage of junk, junk cars, scrap metal, waste paper, concrete products, and similar used materials shall be completely screened from view at normal eye level from any street, or from any premises other than that on which located. Any other use conducted outside a completely enclosed building, except an open use permitted in General Business Districts, shall, if visible at normal eve level from any point within a residence district and less than two hundred (200) feet distant, be completely screened from such view, unless separated from said district by a railroad or by a street having a width of forty (40) feet or more. Notwith-standing the foregoing, any existing open use which, under the terms of Section 3.3 of this Bylaw, is exempted in whole or in part from the enclosure of use requirements in Section 5.3 shall be completely screened from view at normal eye level from any street or from any premises other than that on which it is located, if such open use, in the case of a new use, would be required under Section 5.3 to be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building or occupies an area in excess of that which would be permitted for open use under Section 5.3.  Screening required under this paragraph shall be by a dense evergreen planting, fence, or other suitable visual barrier.

 
SECTION 6.0   SPECIAL REGULATIONS
6.1	ADULT USES OVERLAY DISTRICT
6.1.1	Purpose
1.	The purpose of this Bylaw is to address the well-documented secondary effects of Adult Uses, as defined herein.  Such secondary effects of Adult Uses have been found to include increased levels of crime, blight resulting from the clustering and con-centration of Adult Uses, adverse impacts on the business climate of municipalities, and adverse impacts on property values of residential and commercial properties.  Late night noise and traffic also increase due to the late hours of operation of many of these establishments.  This Section is enacted pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, s. 9A, with the purpose and intent of addressing and mitigating the secondary effects of Adult Uses that are adverse to the health, safety, and welfare of the Town and its inhabit-ants.

2.	The provisions of this Section have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative matter of materials, including sexually oriented matters or materials.  Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this Section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented matter or materials protected by the Constitutions of the United States or of the Common-wealth of Massachusetts, or to restrict or deny rights that distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials may have to sell, rent, distribute, or exhibit such matter or materials.  Neither is it the purpose or intent of this Section to legalize the sale, rental, distribution, dissemination, or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or materials, as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31.

6.1.2	Establishment of Adult Uses Overlay District, and Relationship to Underlying
	Districts

1.	The Adult Uses Overlay District (“AUOD”) is established as a district that overlays the underlying districts, so that any parcel of land lying in the AUOD shall also lie in one or more of the other zoning districts in which it was previously classified, as provided for in this Zoning Bylaw. Land and buildings in the AUOD may be used for any purpose permitted as of right or by special permit in the underlying district, and all requirements of the underlying zoning district shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein. 

2.	The AUOD shall include assessor’s map and block numbers 149-3B, 150-5, 150-7A, 150-7B, 162-1, 162-3, 162-44, and 162-45 in the Research, Development, and Office Zoning District, as depicted on the plan prepared by the Town of Dedham Depart-ment of Infrastructure Engineering titled ‘Enterprise Drive Adult Use Overlay Dis-trict,’ which is incorporated herein by reference and which is on file with the Town Clerk.






6.1.3    DEFINITIONS
ADULT USES
Adult Bookstore, Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Video Store, or Adult Entertainment Establishment, as defined herein.

ADULT BOOKSTORE
An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines, and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual ex-citement as defined in G.L. c. 272, s. 31.

ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER
An establishment used for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G. L. c. 272. s. 31.

ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE
An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade devices, objects, tools, or toys that are distinguished or characterized by their asso-ciation with sexual activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as de-fined in G.L. c. 272, s. 31.

ADULT VIDEO STORE
An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videos, movies, or other film materials that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual ex-citement as defined in G.L. c. 272, s. 31.

ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT  
Any establishment which provides live entertainment for its patrons, a substantial or significant portion of which consists of entertainers engaging in sexual conduct or nudity as defined in G.L. c. 72, s. 31.

SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION  
This term as used herein shall mean any of the following: 
a.	Twenty percent (20%) or more of the business inventory or stock or merchan-dise for sale, rental, distribution, or exhibition during any period of time.
 
b.	Twenty percent (20%) or more of the annual number of gross sales, rentals, or other business transactions 



c.	Twenty percent (20%) or more of the annual gross business revenue

d.	Twenty percent (20%) or more of the hours during which the establishment is open.

6.1.4	Scope of Permitting Authority 
Adult Uses, as defined in this Section, may be permitted in the AUOD upon the granting of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals, subject to requirements, conditions, and limitations as specified in this Section.  Adult Uses are not allowed in the Town, other than in the AUOD.

a.	Adult Uses shall not be considered accessory uses.

b.	A Public Hearing shall be held on an application for a Special Permit for an Adult Use, and the Board of Appeals shall act on the application in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, ss. 9, 9A, and 11; provided, however, that the hearing shall be closed no later than sixty (60) days after the opening of the hearing, and the Board of Appeals shall act on the application within thirty (30) days after the hear-ing is closed, unless the applicant consents in writing to an extension of such time periods.

6.1.5	Special Permit Submittal Requirements 
1.	A completed application and form shall be submitted pursuant to the rules and reg-ulations of the Board of Appeals.  The completed application must also include all of the following:

a.	Name, address, business address, and telephone numbers of the legal owner or owners of the proposed Adult Use

b.	Name, address, business address, and telephone number of the manager of the proposed Adult Use

c.	Name, address, business address, and telephone numbers of all persons having any equity, including beneficiaries or other interest in such Adult Use, including but not limited to security interest, liens, mortgages, or other interest.  In the event that a corporation, partnership, trust, or other entity is listed, the name, address, business address, and telephone number of every person who is an of-ficer, director, shareholder, or trustee of the entity must be listed, in order that the Board of Appeals may know who are the persons who actually own and control that Adult Use

d.	A sworn statement that neither the application, the manager, nor any person having any equity or other interest in the Adult Use has been convicted of vio-lating the provisions of G.L. c. 119, s. 63 or G.L. c. 272, s. 28, or similar laws in other states



e.	The total number of employees


f.	Proposed revisions for security within and without the Adult Use

g.	The physical layout of the interior of the structure in which the Adult Use will be located

h.	A full description of the intended nature of the business.

6.1.6	Special Permit Requirements and Conditions 
1.	General  
A Special Permit for an Adult Use shall be granted by the Board of Appeals upon its written determination that the requirements and conditions of this Section 6.1.6 have been satisfied.  The Board of Appeals may impose such reasonable conditions on the operation of the Adult Use as the Board of Appeals deems appropriate for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, including reasonable limits on the hours of operation. Section 9.3.2 of the Bylaw shall not apply to the consideration of an application for a Special Permit for an Adult Use.

2.	Location 
No Adult Use may be located less than 150 feet from a residential use or residential zoning district, school, library, church or other religious use, child-care facility, park, playground, recreational areas where large numbers of minors regularly trav-el or congregate, any establishment licensed under the provisions of G.L. c. 138, s. 12, or another Adult Use.  The distance specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the structure in which the Adult Use is to be located to the nearest boundary line of a residential zoning district, or the nearest property line of any of the designated uses set forth herein.

3.	Display  
No signs, graphics, pictures, publications, videotapes, movies, covers, merchandise or other implements, items, or advertising depicting, describing, or relating to sexu-al content or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c.272, s. 31 shall be displayed in the windows of, or on the building of, any Adult Use, or be visible to the public from the pedestrian sidewalks or walkways or from other areas outside such Uses.  No exterior display of product or services is allowed.

4.	Screening 
All building openings, entries, and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access by the public to the interior of the Adult Use.  The Board of Appeals may impose conditions requiring that fencing or plantings be installed along rear and side lot lines to screen the premises from adjoining properties.



5.	Building Appearance  
The appearance of the building in which the Adult Use is to be located shall be con-sistent with the appearance of buildings in similar (but not specifically “adult”) use in the Town, and shall not employ unusual colors or building design that would at-tract attention to the premises.

6.	Interior Booths  
If the Adult Use allows for the showing of films or videos within the premises, the booths in which the films or videos are viewed shall not be closed off by curtains, doors, or screens.  All such booth openings shall be clearly seen from the center of the establishment.

7.	Minors 
No Adult Use shall be allowed to disseminate adult matter to minors, to cause Adult Use displays to be viewed by minors, or to allow minors to linger on the premises.

8.	Parking  
Adult Uses are subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.1 of the Zoning By-law.

9.	Lighting  
No exterior lighting (or internal lighting visible from the exterior of the building) shall be flashing or intermittent in nature.

10.	Owners And Managers  
A Special Permit for an Adult Use shall not be granted if the Adult Use is owned by or to be managed by any person or persons convicted of violating the provisions of G.L. c. 119, s. 63 or G.L. c.272, s. 28, or similar laws in other states.

6.1.7	Termination of Special Permit for Adult Uses
1.	A Special Permit for an Adult Use shall be issued to the owner of the Adult Use, and is not transferrable upon a sale, transfer, or assignment of the Adult Use, except with the approval of the Board of Appeals.

2.	If there is a change in the identity of the manager of the Adult Use, the Building Commissioner and the Board of Selectmen shall be notified of such change. Failure to comply with this provision shall terminate the Special Permit.

3.	A Special Permit for an Adult Use shall be terminated if the owner or manager of the Adult Use is found to have been convicted of violating G.L. c. 119, s. 63, or GL c. 272, s.28, or similar laws in other states.


6.1.8	Severability
If any provision of this Section is ruled invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the Section.


6.2 	HOSPITALS AND RELATED FACILITIES
6.2.1	General
A facility specified in Section B.6. of the Principal Use Regulations may be allowed by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals upon determination that all of the conditions set forth below have been met. The following conditions are the minimum which must be met for the approval of a Special Permit. This list is not intended to ex-clude the imposition of any additional conditions by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board.

6.2.2	Infrastructure
1.	Water and Sewer.  The facility shall be connected to municipal water and sewer 
systems. All costs associated with the extension of these services shall be borne by the developer or applicant.

2.	Roads.  All traveled ways shall be privately maintained with respect to roadway upkeep and snow and ice removal.

3.	Refuse.  Collection and disposal of all refuse shall be provided privately.

4.	Utilities. All utilities on the site shall be installed underground pursuant to ap-proved methods of installation and construction.

5.	Safety.  The facility shall have an integrated emergency call, security, telephone, and other communication system to provide monitoring for its residents and direct line connection to the Dedham Fire Department.

6.	Bonding procedures and requirements for roadways, utilities, structures, and site amenities for a facility shall be the same as those established by the Planning Board for subdivisions in the Town of Dedham.

6.2.3	Dimensional Regulations 
	The following dimensional regulations shall apply:
1.	Minimum Lot Area:  4 acres.

2.	Minimum Lot Frontage:  125 feet.

3.	Maximum Lot Coverage:  15 percent.

4.	Minimum Yard:  100 feet. 

5.	Proximity to Existing Residence:  100 feet (if an existing residence is within 25 feet of the lot line, an additional 25 foot distance is required).

6.	Maximum Height:  40 feet or three (3) floors, whichever is less.

6.2.4	Landscaping Requirements 
1.	The side and rear lot lines shall be screened by a ten (10) foot width of dense nat-ural growth.

2.	All outdoor refuse collection and loading areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting residential properties by a visually impermeable six foot high landscape screen or fence.

3.	   All parking areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting properties. 

6.2.5 	Buffer Zone 
The 50 feet closest to the abutting lot line shall be landscaped as follows:
1.	 Materials.  Plant materials characterized by dense growth which will form an ef-fective year-round screen shall be planted to form the screen. Screening shall con-sist of natural materials. To the extent practical, existing trees and vegetation shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this section.

2.	 Height. Natural screening shall be at least 10 feet in height when planted. Height shall be measured from the finished grade.

3.	 Maintenance. All required plant material shall be maintained by the owner in healthy condition and replaced with new plantings whenever necessary to insure continued compliance with screening requirements.


6.3 	PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
6.3.1 	General
A Planned Commercial (PC) Development is a special permit option for land in the LMA, LMB, HB, GB, CB, and RDO Districts. It is intended to provide flexibility for com-mercial or mixed-use development in accordance with a comprehensive site plan ap-proved by the Planning Board as Major Nonresidential Project (MNP). In approving such site plan, the Planning Board may approve development standards unique to a particular location and not necessarily applicable to other locations, and shall monitor conformance to the site plan and any special permits. The uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the PC Development are as designated on the Use Regulation Table (see Table 1). All plans shall conform to the following standards.




6.3.2	Standards 
1.	 The overall layout shall follow the accepted principles of correct land use pat-terns, good planning, and sound engineering, including ample landscaping and screening, spatial or visual separation of incompatible uses, adequate utilities and municipal services secured prior to plan approval, the creation, maintenance and preservation of natural or landscaped open space, and protection of wetlands and environmentally sensitive areas. Dimensional requirements including height, parking, landscaping, and density for each PC Development shall be determined and specified in the MNP Special Permit.

2.	Building and occupancy permits for each building shall be required in accordance with the applicable state and town regulations.

3.	Planned commercial development may be constructed in phases.  The perfor-mance bond or other security shall ensure the integrity of the development lay-out and the restoration of the site by removing unfinished construction and un-sightly appearance in the event the project is abandoned for any reason.

4.	Conveyances and leases of properties within the planned commercial develop-ment tract shall refer to and be subject to terms and conditions of approval.

5.	Specific impacts of planned commercial development on the streets, and service demands beyond the boundaries of the tract may be compensated for through impact fees as provided in the site plan review provisions of the Zoning Bylaw.

6.4	TEMPORARY USES
In any district, the Board of Appeals in the case of a declared emergency, a catastrophe, or the substantial destruction of an existing building and in no other circumstance, may authorize a temporary building, structure, or use not in conformity with the provisions of this Bylaw, pro-vided that such use will not be detrimental or injurious to persons, property, or improvements in the vicinity over more than a total of three (3) years, whether or not consecutive.  Said Board may require a bond or other security for compliance with the terms of its authorization.  Under the provisions of this Section 6.4, the Board may authorize the removal of sod, loam, sand, gravel, or other earth products from a premise where such removal is not permitted as an accessory use.  In such cases, the Board may impose conditions relative to the hours of opera-tion, the routes for transporting the material through the Town, and requirements for regard-ing and planting the area to suitable cover when operations are completed.

6.5	EARTH REMOVAL AND RETAINING WALLS
6.5.1	Earth Removal
Removal of sod, loam, sand, gravel, or other earth products from the premises may be done when required for and incidental to:


1.	Lawful construction of a building or other structure, or of a driveway, parking ar-ea, sidewalk, or path accessory to a permitted use, provided that the amount of such material removed shall not exceed that contained before construction in the particular space to be occupied by the foundation of such building or structure or by such driveway, parking area, sidewalk, or path.

2.	Construction of any street or way, or the installation of utilities therein, in any subdivision in accordance with a definitive plan approved by the Planning Board and duly recorded with the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or the Norfolk Registry Dis-trict of the Land Court.

3.	Municipal or other public use of the parcel of land involved. 

4.	Said removal of sod, loam, sand, gravel, or earth shall be permitted only during construction of a building or structure for which a permit has been granted.

6.5.2 	Retaining Walls
No retaining wall more than four (4) feet in height shall be erected or constructed without first obtaining a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals.


6.6	SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT CENTER
6.6.1	A Substance Abuse Treatment Center specified in Section B.8 of the Principal Use Regu-lations may be allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals upon de-termination that all of the conditions set forth below have been met. The following conditions are the minimum which must be met for the approval of a Special Permit. This list is not intended to exclude the imposition of any additional conditions by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board.

6.6.2	Adjacent properties are adequately protected from noise, odors, or unsightly appear-ance.55-58

6.6.3	The hours of operation will not negatively impact surrounding areas in terms of traffic flow, nor create increases in traffic volume during peak periods in surrounding areas.

6.6.4	Such facilities are located not less than 1,000 feet from properties used for public or private kindergartens, elementary schools, or secondary schools unless the substance abuse treatment center is located within an existing medical center.


 
SECTION 7.0  SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS

7.1	PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
7.1.1	General
Planned Residential Development is intended to be a well-defined area of higher de-velopment density than other residential developments.  It is intended to accommo-date dwelling units for small households in a variety of dwelling types, all in a planned setting.  In order to establish such a development, a comprehensive concept plan was reviewed and recommended to Town Meeting by the Planning Board, in-cluding revisions recommended for approval by Town Meeting. The Planning Board will monitor conformance to the concept plan and Town approval.

All concept plans and the detailed development plans evolving therefrom shall con-form to the following standards.

7.1.2	Standards
1.	The overall density in dwelling units shall not exceed 1.5 times the number of dwelling units, which should be located within the boundaries of the planned residential development tract in accordance with the applicable conventional zoning, and at least twenty (20) percent of such tract shall be maintained as natural open space in which the existing vegetation and topography shall be preserved to the extent possible, subject only to additional planting and land-scaping, but no paving, parking, or buildings.

2.	A detailed site development plan conforming to the approved concept plan shall show and identify all changes and construction to the extent required for site plans, including all existing and proposed buildings and structures, and the plans, elevations, and use of all buildings other than one and two family dwellings. The procedure for the review and approval of the detailed development plans shall follow, so far as apt, the approval regulations and procedures for a definitive subdivision plan, including the requirement for a covenant or security to guar-antee the performance of all work in accordance with the plan and the schedule approved by the Planning Board.  Plan changes not increasing in number, floor area, or intensity or type of use of buildings, and not reducing the open space may be approved from time to time by the Planning Board; other changes shall require submittal of a new concept plan for Town Meeting approval and of a re-vised development plan. Building and occupancy permits for each building shall be required in accordance with the applicable state and town regulations.

3.	The construction of a planned residential development may proceed in phases, provided that higher intensity or occupancy uses shall not exceed at any time the overall ratio of such uses to one-family dwellings in the entire planned de-velopment, and conveyances or leases of all or any part of a planned residential development shall be subject to and shall refer to the conditions of approval of such planned residential development.

4.	Performance bond or other security shall provide for the restoration so far as possible of the development or any part thereof not completed in accordance with the approved plan and schedule to pre-development condition.

5.	Building facing residential lots conforming to conventional residential zoning across a street shall conform in type and spacing to the applicable conventional zoning standards or shall be located at least 100 feet from such conventional residential lots and be separated therefrom by a dense vegetation or other ap-proved visual screen.

7.2 	CONVERSION OF SINGLE FAMILY TO TWO FAMILY DWELLING
7.2.1	General 
In the SRA and SRB Districts such conversion shall be subject to the following condi-tions:

1.	Such house is located on a lot which has an area at least 50 percent larger than required for the construction of a single family home in that district.

2.	No exterior enlargement is made which together with any changes made during the preceding five years increase the cubic content of the house by 20 percent or more.

3.	No exterior change is made which, in the opinion of the Board of Appeals, alters the single family character of the dwelling.

7.3 	MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX
7.3.1 	General  
A Multifamily Residential Complex shall be allowed only in a Single Residence A (SRA) or Single Residence B (SRB) Zoning District and only by Special Permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon a determination that the following conditions and criteria have been satisfied:

1.	Conversion of Existing Buildings/Structures: Except as provided in Para-graph 2 below, all dwelling units in a Multi-Family Residential Complex must be located within buildings or structures in existence as of the effective date of this Bylaw (April 12, 1999). The floor area of such existing buildings or structures may be expanded provided that such expansion does not increase the floor area by more than 10% of such building or structure being so expanded and provided further that with respect to any abutting lots not included within the Multi-Family Residential Complex any such expansion shall conform to the minimum front, side or rear yard requirements for the applicable zoning district.

2.	New Construction:  Construction of a new building for a single dwelling unit may be allowed as part of a Multi-Family Residential Complex, provided that with respect to any abutting lots not included within the Multi-Family Residen-tial 

Complex, such new building must satisfy the minimum front, side, and rear yard requirements for the applicable zoning district.

3.	Dimensional Regulations  Notwithstanding any other section of the Zoning Bylaw, the requirements set forth in Table 5 shall be applicable to a Multi-Family Residential Complex:

TABLE 5 – MULTI-FAMILY TABLE

Minimum Lot Area	SRA:  6 acres
SRB:  100,000 square feet 

Minimum Lot Frontage	SRA:  400 linear feet
SRB:  400 linear feet

Maximum Number of Dwelling Units	SRA:  The number of dwelling units which could be located in a subdivision within the boundaries of the Multi-Family Residential Complex in accordance with conventional zoning, or six units
SRB:  24 units

Distribution of Dwell-ing Units	SRA:  60% of all dwelling units must be located within a single building or structure
SRB:  60% of all dwelling units must be located within a single building or structure

Minimum Front, Side, and Rear Yard Re-quirements	SRA:  None for existing buildings or structures; with respect to abutting lots not included within the Multi-family Residential Complex, additions to existing buildings or structures and any new buildings or structures shall comply with the requirements of the applicable Zoning District 
SRB:  None for existing buildings or structures; with respect to abutting lots not included within the Multi-family Residential Complex, additions to existing buildings or structures and any new buildings or structures shall comply with the requirements of the applicable Zoning District 

Maximum Height



	SRA:  38 feet for any new buildings or structures; existing build-ings or structures and any additions thereto shall not exceed the current height of such buildings or structures 
SRB:  38 feet for any new buildings or structures; existing build-ings or structures and any additions thereto shall not exceed the current height of such buildings or structures

Parking	SRA:  At least 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit, which may include parking in enclosed structures
SRB:  At least 1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit, which may include parking in enclosed structures

4.	Infrastructure:
a.	Water and Sewer:  The Multi-Family Residential Complex shall be connect-ed to municipal water and sewer systems if the same are present in the abut-ting street.  All costs associated with the costs of these services shall be borne by the developer or applicant.

b.	Roads:  All traveled ways within the Multi-Family Residential Complex shall not be considered streets or ways as defined in Section 10.0, and shall be pri-vately maintained with respect to roadway upkeep and snow and ice remov-al.  No such ways shall connect to two or more public streets or ways.

c.	Refuse and Recycling:  Collection and disposal of all refuse and recycling material shall be provided privately.

5.	Landscape Requirements: 
a.	All outdoor refuse collection and loading areas shall be screened from adjoin-ing streets and abutting properties by a visually impermeable six foot high landscape screen or fence.
b.	All outdoor parking areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abut-ting properties by an opaque fence at least five feet high or by a densely planted landscaped buffer at least five feet wide.

6.	Open Space:   
In the SRB zoning district, a contiguous area of not less than five (5%) per cent of the total land area of the Multi-Family Residential Complex shall be created and maintained as landscaped open space. Such landscaped open space shall be de-signed, developed, and maintained for the use and enjoyment of all residents in common, shall be restricted by deed and covenant to be used primarily for rec-reational, park, conservation or other open space uses, and shall be conveyed to the Town and accepted by it for park or open space use, or to a non-profit organ-ization the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space, or to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of the dwelling units within the Multi-Family Residential complex. Notwithstanding the conveyance of such open space, the Multi-Family Residential complex shall continue to be re-sponsible for the maintenance of such open space. In the SRA Zoning District, at least 20% of the total land area of the Multi-Residential Complex shall be main-tained as natural open space in which existing vegetation and topography shall be preserved to the extent possible.

7.3.2 	Site Plan Review  
Site Plan Review shall be applicable to a Multi-Family Residential Complex.



7.3.3 	Accessory Uses 
a.	Private garage for more than three automobiles.

b.	Garages for the common use vehicles owned by the Multi-Family Residential Complex.

c.	One single-story building to house snow removal, lawn, maintenance and recrea-tional equipment.

d.	Any and all other uses normal accessory, or incidental to a Multi-Family Residen-tial Complex.


7.4 	MIXED USE DEVELOPMENTS
7.4.1 	Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to: 
1.	Encourage and allow a mixture of complementary land uses to create eco-nomic and social vitality, and to address the housing needs of the Town.

2.	Develop mixed-use areas and buildings which are safe, comfortable, and at-tractive to pedestrians.

3.	Provide flexibility in the siting and design of new developments and redevel-opments to anticipate changes in the marketplace.

4.	Encourage efficient land use by facilitating compact, high-density develop-ment and minimizing the amount of land needed for surface parking.

7.4.2	Special Permit Requirement/Special Permit Granting Authority 
1.	A Mixed Use Development may be allowed only upon issuance of a Special Per-mit by the Planning Board. 

2.	If such application or project also requires other Special Permits, the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for all such Special Permits. 

7.4.3	Conditions, Restrictions, and Requirements
1.	All dwelling units in a Mixed Use Development shall be located above the ground floor, shall have a separate entrance, and shall not share stairs or hallways with commercial uses, except that a fire escape or exit used only in emergencies may be available at all time to both.


2.	Each dwelling unit in a Mixed Use Development shall have a complete set of sani-tary facilities, cooking, and living space that includes sleeping facilities independ-ent from another dwelling unit in a Mixed Use Development. A Mixed Use Devel-opment may share common storage, laundry facilities, and other customary shared facilities located within a Mixed Use Development. Each dwelling unit cannot be less than four hundred (400) square feet and not more than one thou-sand five hundred (1,500) square feet in total gross floor area, and must meet all occupancy and Building Code requirements. The maximum number and type of allowable residential dwelling units shall be determined by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit and site plan review process; provided, however, there may not be more than two (2) residential dwelling units in a Mixed Use Devel-opment in the LB Zoning District. 

3.	All Mixed Use Development shall provide at least one parking space per dwelling unit. In all zoning districts except the CB Zoning District, Mixed Use Develop-ments shall provide additional parking for the nonresidential uses per the re-quirements set forth in Table 3 (Dedham Parking Table). Mixed Use Develop-ments in the CB Zoning District shall provide such additional parking, if any, for the nonresidential uses as determined by the Planning Board to be sufficient to meet the needs of such Mixed Use Developments, taking into consideration com-plementary uses and activities having different peak demands, joint parking ar-rangements, the availability of on-street and public parking, and such other miti-gating factors and measures as may be appropriate.

4.	A Mixed Use Development in the RDO or HB Zoning District with twelve (12) or more apartments shall have maximum lot coverage of 80% and a maximum floor area ratio of 1.0. In the RDO Zoning District, there shall not be more than thirty (30) apartments located on any lot or on any abutting lots held in common ownership on the date of the adoption of this provision.

7.4.4	Site Plan Review

Applications under this Section 7.4 shall be subject to the provisions of Section 9.5 pertaining to Site Plan Review which, if required, shall be conducted by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit process. 










 
7.5	ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
7.5.1	General 
An Assisted Living Residence may be allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals upon determination that all of the conditions set forth below have been met.  The following conditions are the minimum which must be met for the approval of a Special Permit for an Assisted Living Residence.  This list is not intend-ed to exclude the imposition of any additional conditions by the Zoning Board of Ap-peals or the Planning Board under Site Plan Review.

7.5.2 	Conditions – Infrastructure
a.	Water and Sewer:  The Assisted Living Residence site shall be connected to municipal water and sewer systems. All costs associated with the extension of these services shall be borne by the developer or applicant.

b.	Roads:  All traveled ways shall be privately maintained with respect to roadway upkeep and snow and ice removal.

c.	Refuse:  Collection and disposal of all refuse shall be provided privately.

d.	Utilities:  All utilities on the site shall be installed underground pursuant to ap-proved methods of installation and construction.

e.	Safety: The Assisted Living Residence shall have an integrated emergency call, security, telephone and other communication system to provide monitoring for its residents and direct line connection to the Dedham Fire Department.


7.5.3 	Dimensional Regulations: See Table 6
TABLE 6 - ASSISTED LIVING DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Lot Area	4 acres 
Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit	4,000 square feet 
Minimum Lot Frontage	125 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage	15 percent
Maximum Number of Units in an ALR Facil-ity	115 units
Minimum Yard	100 feet
Proximity to Existing Residence	100 feet (if an existing residence is within 25 feet of the ALR lot line, an additional 25 foot distance is required)
Maximum Height	40 feet or 3 floors, whichever is less

7.5.4 	Landscaping Requirements
a.	The side and rear lot lines shall be screened by a 10 foot width of dense natural growth.

b.	All outdoor refuse collection and loading areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting properties by a visually impermeable six foot height land-scape screen or fence and through the use of appropriate landscaping.

c.	All parking areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting proper-ties. 

7.5.5	Buffer Zone
The fifty (50) feet closest to the abutting lot line shall be landscaped as follows:
a.	Materials:  Plant materials characterized by dense growth which will form an ef-fective year-round screen shall be planted to form the screen.  Screening shall consist of natural materials. To the extent practical, exiting trees and vegetation shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this section.

b.	Height:  Natural screening shall be at least ten (10) feet in height when planted. Height shall be measured from the finished grade.

c.	Maintenance:  All required plant material shall be maintained by the owner in healthy condition and replaced with new plantings whenever necessary to insure continued compliance with screening requirements.

7.5.6	Accessory Uses
a.	Garages for common use vehicles owned by the operating entity.

b.	One single-story building to house snow removal, lawn maintenance, and recrea-tional equipment.  Such building shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.

c.	Outdoor swimming pools, tennis and other recreational courts, playing fields, putting greens, bocce courts, gardens, residential greenhouses of not more than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet, covered and uncovered sitting areas.

d.	Any and all other uses normal accessory, or incidental to an ALR.  Accessory uses shall comply with principal density, dimensional, and buffering requirements.

7.5.7	Non-Residential Uses
The operator of an Assisted Living Residence may also provide optional services on the site including but not limited to local transportation, barber/beauty services, sundries for personal consumption, and other amenities, provided:

a.	Such uses serve the residents and employees of the ALR only

b.	Such uses are conducted within and may be entered only from within a principal building 

c.	There is no external evidence of such uses visible beyond the development site 

d.	The appearance and character of the commercial uses are compatible with a res-idential development


7.6	SENIOR CAMPUS DISTRICT
7.6.1 	Character and Purpose 
The Senior Campus (SC) District is intended to promote the well-planned develop-ment of large parcels of land to serve the housing and health care needs of senior cit-izens, to serve the educational needs of children, and to foster intergenerational rela-tionships and social interaction among different age groups in the SC District via shared or interconnected facilities and common areas, with emphasis upon (i) the continuum of care required as people age, (ii) the availability of supportive services to different types of senior housing and accommodations, (iii) the creation of an ap-propriate educational environment for children, (iv) the preservation of open space and natural features, and (v) the protection of any adjoining single-family residential areas by increased buffer zones and similar measures.

7.6.2 	Establishment
To be eligible for inclusion in the Senior Campus District (the SC District), a parcel or parcels of land must be (i) located in a Single Residence A District, and (ii) at the time that the land in question is included in or submitted to the SC District contain at least 100 acres of land which are either contiguous or separated only by public or private streets. A separate vote of Town Meeting shall be required to place such an area in the SC District.

7.6.3 	Applicability 
The provisions of the SC District shall apply to all land within the SC District. Any matter not addressed herein shall be governed by the Single Residence A District provisions of the Dedham Zoning Bylaw. To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of the SC District and any other provisions of the Dedham Zoning By-law, the provision of the SC District shall govern. Uses allowed by right in the Single Residence A District shall also be allowed by right in the SC District.

7.6.4 	Use Regulations

a.	Except as provided herein, all uses allowed by right in the Single Residence A Dis-trict shall be allowed by right in the SC District and all uses allowed by special permit in the Single Residence A District shall be allowed by special permit in the SC District. Without limiting the foregoing, schools (owned or leased by a reli-gious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation) and child care facilities shall be allowed by right in the SC District.

b.	Senior Supportive Housing shall be allowed by special permit in the SC District in accordance with Section 9.3.

c.	Where a use in the SC District requires a special permit, the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority.  

d.	The following accessory uses shall be allowed in the SC District if the principal use is allowed by right or by Special Permit as applicable:

i.	Garages for common use vehicles owned by the operating entity and related to campus uses.

ii.	Single-story building or buildings to house snow removal, lawn maintenance, and recreational equipment.

iii.	Fitness facilities including, without limitation, outdoor swimming pools, ten-nis and other recreational courts, playing fields, walking paths, putting greens, bocce courts, gardens, recreational greenhouses, covered and uncov-ered sitting areas, and similar facilities. 

iv.	The operation of any facility permitted in the SC District may also provide optional and/or supportive services on the campus including, but not limited to, local transportation, food and meals, nursing care, personal care, home health care, barber-beauty services, banking services, coffee shop, cafeteria, medical services, sale of sundries for personal consumption and other simi-lar amenities and supportive services, provided:

a.	Such services are available primarily to the residents, students, faculty, users, and employees of the campus.

b.	The appearance and character of any accessory uses are compatible with a senior campus and/or educational development.

c.	Any and all uses reasonably accessory or incidental to the principal uses.  Accessory uses shall comply with the density, dimensional, and buffering requirements applicable to the principal use.

e.	Section 8.1 shall not be applicable if the work in the SC District is subject to an Order of Conditions issued by the Conservation Commission.

f.	Section 6.5.2 shall not be applicable for any retaining walls in the SC District un-less such retaining walls are located within the first one hundred (100) feet of the Buffer Zone, measured from the property line of an adjacent parcel outside the SC District.

g.	The following infrastructure requirements shall apply to Senior Supportive Housing and to the Uses described in A.6 (Assisted Living Residence) and B.6 (e.g., hospital, nursing, or convalescent home) of the Use Regulation Table (Table 1), and shall supersede any contrary or inconsistent requirements in the Zoning Bylaw including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in 6.2 and 7.5.

i.	Water and Sewer:  The site shall be connected to municipal or Massachu-setts Water Resources Authority water and sewer systems.  All costs associ-ated with the extension of these services shall be borne by the developer or applicant.

ii.	Roads:  Roads and all traveled ways shall be privately maintained with re-spect to roadway upkeep and snow and ice removal.

iii.	Refuse and Recycling:  Collection and disposal of all refuse shall be provid-ed privately.

iv.	Utilities:  All utilities on the site shall be installed underground pursuant to approved methods of installation and construction.

v.	Safety:  A nursing or convalescent home, non-acute chronic disease hospital or Assisted Living Residence (but not Senior Supportive Housing) each shall have a personal emergency response system. In addition, the campus shall be equipped with fire detection systems which shall be monitored in at least one central location.

vi.	When required by the Department of Health regulations, building code, or lo-cal authorities, a direct line connection to the Dedham Fire Department shall be provided.

7.6.5 	Dimensional and Related Controls
The following dimensional and related controls shall govern within the SC District for the uses listed in the Table of Dimensional Requirements for the Senior Campus District.  Within the SC District, these requirements shall supersede any contrary or inconsistent requirements in the Zoning Bylaw including, but not limited to, the re-quirements set forth in Sections 4.0, 6.2 and 7.5, and Table 6 (Assisted Living Table). Except as set forth below, the dimensional controls set forth in the Table of Dimen-sional Requirements (Table 2) shall continue to apply to all other uses allowed in the SRA District.

 
Table 7
TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS -
SENIOR CAMPUS HOUSING DISTRICT





USE	


ASSISTED
LIVING
RESIDENCE	


NURSING OR 
CONVALESCENT HOME/HOSPITAL	


SENIOR SUP-PORTIVE HOUSING	EDUCATIONAL OR 
RELIGIOUS 
INSTITUTIONAL USE/  CHARITABLE OR 
PHILANTHROPIC
INSTITUTIONAL USE/CHILD CARE 
FACILITY
Minimum Frontage (feet)	50	50	50	50
Minimum Lot Area
Acres/Square Feet	
4 acres1	
4 acres1	
4 acres1	
40,0001
Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit (Square Feet)	
4,000	
0	
4,000	
0
Minimum Lot Width (feet)	50	50	50	50
Minimum Front Yard (feet)	0	0	0	0
Minimum Side Yard (feet)
  See Footnote 2	
0	
0	
0	
0
Detached Accessory Building	0	0	0	0
Minimum Rear Yard (feet)	0	0	0	0
Maximum Lot 
Coverage (%)	15	15	15	30
Space Between Buildings (feet)	0	0	0	0
Maximum Height (feet)	403	403	403	423
Proximity to 
Adjoining 
Residential District (feet)	
2004	
2004	
2004	
2004
Maximum Number of Units	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

See Footnote Explanations in Section 7 

NOTES TO TABLE 7:
1.	More than one principal building shall be allowed on the same lot, whether character-ized as residential or non-residential.

2.	Buildings may be connected across internal lot lines within the SC District.

3.	Height shall be measured from the average finished grade around the building at the foundation to the high point of the eave line of a hip, pitched, gable or gambrel roof, or to the high point on a flat roof. There shall be no human occupancy above the eave line. The height of an exposed parking level beneath a building shall be deducted from the height of a building in determining the height of such building, but only if the exposed parking level is not visible from a single-family residence situated outside the SC Dis-trict at the time the land in question is included in or submitted to the SC District. For purposes of this Section, buildings or sections of buildings divided by a firewall shall be considered separate buildings and the height shall be separately measured. Height may increase to 55 feet if the structure is either (a) situated more than 600 feet from a single family residence situated outside the SC District at the time the land in question is in-cluded in or submitted to the SC District, or (b) separated from such a single family res-idence by a river or a major highway at the time the land in question is included in or submitted to the SC District. The provisions of Section 4.2.3 shall apply to all buildings the SC District.

4.	The 200-foot setback of principal structures shall be measured from the nearest prop-erty line of a parcel situated outside the SC District at the time the land in question is in-cluded in or submitted to the SC District, provided that there shall be no setback re-quirement if said parcel is separated from the SC District by a river or a major highway at the time the land in question is included in or submitted to the SC District. The first 100 feet of the 200-foot setback area shall be left in its natural state; if not already densely planted, the first 50 feet of the 200-foot setback area from the nearest property line of the parcel must be landscaped as described in Section 2 (Landscaping Require-ments) below. The second 100 feet of the 200-foot setback area from the nearest prop-erty line of the parcel shall not contain any principal buildings; provided that such sec-ond 100 feet may contain accessory uses, driveways and surface parking.

7.6.6  	Landscaping Requirements
1.	All outdoor refuse collection and loading areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting properties by a visually impermeable six foot high landscape screen or fence or through use of appropriate landscaping, unless enclosed by build-ing walls.

2.	All parking areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting properties. 

3.	Buffer Zone:  Unless already densely planted in its natural state, the 50 feet closes to the lot line of any residential district outside the SC District shall be landscaped as follows:

a.	Materials.  Plant materials characterized by dense growth which will form an effective year-round screen shall be planted to form the screen.  Screening shall consist of natural materials. To the extent practical, existing trees and vegeta-tion shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this section.

b.	Height. Natural screening shall be at least ten (10) feet in height when planted.  Height shall be measured from finished grade.

c.	Maintenance. All required plant material shall be maintained by the owners in healthy condition and replaced with new plantings whenever necessary to in-sure continual compliance with screening requirements.

7.6.7	Off-Street Parking and Related Requirements
Within the SC District, development shall comply with the Off-Street Parking Require-ments of Section 5.1 and the Landscaping and Screening Requirements of Section 5.2 of the Zoning Bylaw, subject to the following modifications and exceptions.

1.	General Regulations
The adequacy of parking arrangements shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as part of Site Plan Review.

2.	Parking Lot Design
a.	Design Standards
Lots for three hundred (300) or more parking spaces shall have more than one 2-way access, located so as to serve different parts of the parking lot.

b.	Construction Standards
All areas to be used for parking, driveways, or aisles, access ways to streets open to public travel, pedestrian walks, and safety islands shall have a pave-ment, designed and maintained to provide a firm surface, safe traction, and clean walking conditions in wet, freezing, or other inclement weather. Except for lots designed to serve five or fewer cars, for which compacted water-bound macadam may be used, pavement shall consist of bituminous concrete, 2.5 inches deep after rolling, or of an equivalent cement, concrete brick, masonry, or other permanent all weather material laid on a well-rolled and compacted granular base and a firm gravel sub-base from which all organic and unstable materials have been removed. Paved areas shall be graded so as to avoid pond-ing and to channel surface water to catch basins or to landscaped unpaved areas and to avoid excessive surface drainage to the streets. Parking and maneuvering spaces shall have grades between 1 and 5 percent whenever possible.  Parking spaces and driveways shall be marked by white striping, and pedestrian paths, fire lanes, and safety zones shall be marked by yellow striping, four (4) inches wide and/or by curbing, barriers, and retaining walls.  Large parking lots de-signed for 300 cars or more shall be laid out in several areas separated by land-scaping, fencing, or space buffers.  Pavement markings and directional signs shall be used for circulation guidance and safety. Surface runoff shall not have to travel more than 150 ft. to reach a catch basin or landscaped area, and con-taminated surface runoff shall not be discharged directly into a wetland or a water body, except with specific approval of the Conservation Commission. All artificial lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public way or other property. All parking facili-ties which are used at night shall be lighted as evenly and fully as possible with-in the maximum wattage limits established by the State Building Code. 

c.	Location of Parking Area 
Parking serving any building in the SC District may be located anywhere within the SC District.

d.	Parking Under Buildings
In order to preserve open space and to decrease the amount of surface parking, parking under buildings shall be allowed in the SC District.

3.	Landscaping and Screening
In order to encourage the preservation of existing vegetation and natural features within the SC District, large screening buffers between the SC District and Adjoining residential districts, and the clustering and compact development of buildings and parking facilities within the SC District, the following shall apply:

a.	Landscaped Areas (Frontage Strip) 
Except for access driveways, only landscaping shall be allowed in the land-scaped buffer zone which extends across the entire frontage of the lot on a street or highway and for a depth of 10 feet in the SC District.

b.	Landscaped Areas (Lot Interior)
Trees and shrubs shall be preserved or planted in the interior of the parking ar-ea (defined as the space enclosing the parking spaces, maneuvering areas, and aisles) so that such landscaped space shall comprise not less than 

five percent (5%) of the paved parking area.  The five percent (5%) interior landscaped area shall not include the landscaping provided in the frontage strip. All other provisions of Section 5.2.4.3 shall apply.

c.	Landscaped Areas (Perimeter)
Subject to the setback requirement in Section 7.6.5.1, Footnote 4 above, there shall be no setback requirement from internal lot lines for parking areas within the SC District.

d.	Planting Requirements
Required trees shall have a minimum caliper size of 3 inches at the time of planting, as measured by the America Nursery and Landscape Association ANSI Z60.1 Standard (Nursery Stock).  Shrubs to be planted shall be of at least 2 to 2.5 feet in height.

1.	Required Parking
Within the SC District, the number of required parking spaces shall be as follows:

TABLE 8 – PARKING REQUIREMENTS

RESIDENTIAL AND RESIDENTIAL CARE USES
One, two, or multi-family residence	1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit (2 spaces minimum)
Hospitals, nursing or convalescent homes, living care, or other quasi-medical and institutional facilities providing residential care, including group homes	1 parking space per two persons rated or design capacity
Assisted living Residence	0.3 parking spaces per dwelling unit; plus, 1 parking space per average number of employees on the largest work shift
Senior Supportive Housing	1.0 parking space per dwelling unit

INSTITUTIONAL USES
Child Care Facilities	One (1) space for every teacher and employee, one (1) space for visitors, plus one (1) space for every six children based on the largest enrollment on the site at any given time; the Planning Board may allow a reduction in the number of required spaces for the purposes of improving site utilization, but not to increase permit-ted enrollment if the number of spaces is adequate to provide one space for every teacher and employee, and to support, without detriment to the neighborhood, drop-off and pick-up areas for the maximum number of children arriving and departing the facility at any one time in accordance with a parking and traffic management plan approved by the Planning Board. In the case of a parking and management plan, the Planning Board shall have the authority to monitor compliance and to amend the plan as necessary to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in the plan.
Elementary and middle schools, and oth-er educational institutions for children under 16 years of age	1.0 parking space per 16 children design or licensed capacity, but not less than 5 spaces. The Planning Board may reduce the parking requirements to reflect the shared nature and off-peak usage of parking areas on the campus. There shall be no separate, addition-al parking spaces required as a result of or in connection with oth-er uses, including, without limitation, a school gymnasium, audi-torium, playing fields, or similar areas for large gatherings.

5.	Common Driveways

Within the SC District, there shall be no limit on the number of lots meeting the street frontage requirement which may share an access driveway.




7.6.8	Site Plan Review in SC District

Within the SC District, the following requirements shall supersede any contrary or in-consistent requirements of the Zoning Bylaw, including, without limitation, the re-quirements set forth in Sections 5.1.2, 9.4, and 9.5; further, a project within the SC Dis-trict, or any component thereof, shall not be construed as a Major Non-Residential Pro-ject under Section 9.4 of the Zoning Bylaw.

1.	Purpose of Site Plan Review  

For the purpose of insuring that there shall be no development in the SC District ex-cept in conformity with the provisions of this section, in the SC district, no structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, or used, and no improvements to any lot shall be made unless such development is in conformity with a site plan which has been reviewed by the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions hereof.  The purpose of this review is to protect the health, safety, convenience, and general wel-fare of the Town by providing for a review of plans for uses and structures in the SC District which may have impacts on traffic, municipal and public services and utili-ties, environmental quality, community economics, 

and community values in the Town. One or two family dwellings, farms on parcels of more than five (5) acres, and land or structures used for religious purposes or educational purposes and owned by or leased to the Commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions, or bodies politic, or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation, or the use of land or structures for the pri-mary, accessory, or incidental purpose of operating a child care facility shall not be subject to the provisions of this Section.  

2.	Site Plan Requirements

Site plans shall be prepared by a registered architect, surveyor, or professional en-gineer. Individual site plans may be prepared and amended from time to time for each lot in the SC District.  Site plans shall show:

a.	The boundaries of the parcel or parcels for which the applicant is seeking site plan review. Lot numbers, dimensions of lots in feet, size of lots in square feet, and the width of the abutting street and ways shall be shown.  The plans shall include a scale (which may not be greater than one inch equals 50 feet), north arrow, legend, name of record owners of parcel or parcels for which approval is sought, and names of owners of all abutting land as appearing on the current tax assessor’s list.

b.	The location of existing wetlands, water bodies, wells, and 100-year flood plain elevations with the area subject to review.

c.	The location of existing and proposed structures, as well as the distance be-tween those structures and the lot lines and the distance between buildings on the 



same lot. Also, the percent of existing and proposed building lot coverage and the average finished grade of each proposed building the base of each such building.

d.	All principal landscape features, such as fences, walks, walls, exterior lighting, and planting areas.

e.	All easements within and abutting the parcel or parcels for which approval is being sought.

f.	The location and number of all parking and loading spaces.

g.	The location of all driveway openings and driveways, as well as the proposed traffic circulation patterns within the parcel or parcels for which approval is being sought.

h.	Provision for and the location of all facilities for sewages, drainage, electric, and water service.

i.	Topography indicating existing and proposed contours at intervals of not more than two (2) feet.

j.	Location and intensity of outdoor lighting systems.

k.	Location, type, and size of signs.

l.	A written statement by the applicant that shall disclose:
i.	A description of the proposed uses to be located on the site

ii.	The total land area of the site, and the total floor area and ground coverage of each proposed building and structure

iii.	General summary of existing and proposed easements or other burdens now existing or to be placed on the property

iv.	Method of handling proposed solid waste disposal

v.	The applicant’s calculation of requirements and evaluation of the availabil-ity and adequacy of off-site public facilities including sewer, water, drain-age, and streets

vi.	A description of any problems of drainage or topography, or a representa-tion that, in the opinion of the applicant, there are none

vii.	An estimate of the time period required for completion of the development shown on the site plan.


m.	A traffic impact assessment, the purpose of which shall be to document the ex-isting traffic volumes, capacities, controls, road condition, hazards, and level of service on the site and the streets adjacent to the site; to project changes due to the site development and to the background traffic growth or decline; to assess the projected impact of such changes; and to propose and to discuss manage-ment and structural improvements and mitigation measures, both on and off the site.

n.    An environmental impact assessment, which shall include a substantiated as-sessment of the existing and expected post-development environmental condi-tions, including air and water quality, pollution of ground water and air, noise levels, harmful or noxious emissions, damage or threat to wetlands and flood plain, plants, and animals, and the visual environment. The potential for erosion or sedimentation and the proposed or existing control measures shall be dis-cussed.  Glare, smoke, odors, vibration, electromagnetic radiation, effects on groundwater supply, streams, water bodies, unique or valuable vista, symbiotic ecological relationships of animal and plant communities, and compatibility of the project with the existing and future natural and manmade environment shall be considered, and any expected changes and preventive or corrective ac-tions shall be discussed.  Waste disposal, snow removal, maintenance of land-scaped and paved areas, off-site environmental impacts, and drainage shall be discussed, and pre- and post-development drainage calculations for 10 and 100 year storm shall be included. Such an assessment may include similar materials filed by the applicant with a Notice of Intent to the Conservation Commission or an Environmental Notification Form and/or an Environmental Impact Report under the Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act.

o.    A community and fiscal impact assessment, which shall consider the existing and projected demand for public or municipal services (such as schools and cultural institutions, fire and police, medical and social services, water and sew-er, waste disposal, administrative and inspection services), historical and visual compatibility, revenues to the town, voluntary contributions and services, and the effects of the project failing, not living up to the projections, or having to modify structures and uses for economic reasons.  The assessment shall also consider fiscal or economic impacts, and compatibility with the town Master Plan and other plans and development policies, and shall explain and evaluate any zoning changes or variances sought or obtained.

3.	Procedure
Any person desiring review of a site plan under this Section shall submit eight (8) copies of said plan to the Planning Board. Upon receipt of all required items, the Planning Board shall distribute copies thereof to the Conservation Commission, Chief of Police, Chief of Fire Department, Public Works Commissioner, Building Commissioner, Design Review Advisory Board, Board of Selectmen, and other boards or officials believed by the Planning Board to be affected.  Such agencies shall, within 35 days of receiving said copy, report to the Planning Board on (1) the adequacy of the data and the methodology used by the applicant to determine im-pacts on the 


proposed development, and (2) the effects of the projected impacts of the proposed development.  Said agencies may recommend conditions or remedial measures to accommodate or mitigate the expected impacts of the proposed development.

Failure by any such agency to report within the allotted time shall constitute ap-proval by that agency of the adequacy of the submittal and also that, in the opinion of that agency, the proposed project will have no adverse impact.

The Planning Board shall not render a decision on said application until it has re-ceived and considered all reports requested from Town departments and board, or until the 35-day period has expired, whichever is earlier. Where circumstances are such that the 35-day period is insufficient to conduct an adequate review, the Plan-ning Board may, at the written request of the applicant, extend such period to 60 days.

The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on any properly completed applica-tion within 65 days after filing, shall properly serve notice of such hearing, shall render its decision within 90 days of the close of said hearing, and shall file its deci-sion in accordance with G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9.  The hearing and notice re-quirements set forth herein shall comply with the requirements of G.L. Chapter 40A, Sections 9 and 11.  All costs of the notice requirements shall be at the expense of the applicant.  In the aspects not covered by this Bylaw, the procedure for review and approval of site plans shall be as provided in General Laws, Chapter 40A for Special Permits, with the Planning Board being the Special Permit Granting Authori-ty. The application for Special Permit(s) and the application for site plan review may be one application, shall be submitted at the same time, and shall be reviewed by town boards, noticed and heard at the same public hearing following the proce-dures set forth herein.  The Planning Board shall issue one written decision address-ing compliance with both the Special Permit criteria in Section 9.3.2 and the criteria under Section 7.6.7(8) herein.

4.	Site Plan Fee

The Planning Board shall adopt and may, from time to time, revise by vote at a du-ly-posted meeting it’s processing, filing, and consultant review fees for site plan re-views in this District. The cost of consultant review and inspections shall be borne by the applicant, who shall be billed for costs in excess of the initial review fee, and shall be refunded any part of the fee not used, together with any interest accrued thereon.  The schedule of Planning Board fees shall be available at the offices of the Town Clerk and the Planning Board.

5.	Approved Plan Prerequisite to Issuance of Building Permit

No building permit shall be issued under this Section until a final site plan, or ami-cable components thereof, have been approved or deemed to have been approved by the Planning Board.




6.	Expiration of Approval Prior to Commencement of Development

Any approval of a site plan which has been granted pursuant to this Section shall lapse if initial construction of a development which has been approved by the Plan-ning Board has not commenced, except for good cause, within twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval of the site plan and, in such case, the approval shall be deemed expired and the building inspector shall forthwith take the neces-sary steps to enforce this Subsection; provided, however, the Planning Board may furtherextend the expiration of such approval by an additional twenty-four (24) months for good cause. If initial construction timely commences for a project, ap-proval of the site plan for the entire project shall not thereafter lapse or be deemed expired and the building permits shall not be revoked, notwithstanding that the construction of the project is in phases or does not continue uninterrupted through completion.

7.	Modifications to Approved Site Plans

If an owner wishes to modify an approved site plan, he may submit a revised site plan to the Planning Board for review and approval, and the same standards and procedures applicable to the review of the original site plan shall apply to such re-vised site plan; provided, however, that the Planning Director may approve minor modifications to an approved site plan or determine that the change is so significant that review by the Planning Board is required.

8.	Standards and Criteria for Review and Final Action

In acting under this Section, the Planning Board shall review a site plan to ensure that the public health, safety, and welfare are best served in light of the following criteria:

a.	The provisions for vehicular loading and unloading, parking, and for vehicular circulation on the site and onto adjacent public streets and ways will promote safety and safe traffic control and flow;

b.	The bulk, location, density, setback, and height of proposed buildings and struc-tures, and paved areas and the proposed uses thereof are in conformity with the requirements of this Section 7.6 and of the Zoning Bylaw.

c.	The provisions for on-site landscaping will provide a visual buffer to neighbor-ing properties;

d.	Provisions for pedestrian ways will provide safe and convenient access and egress (1) within the area of the site plan review, and (2) to the boundary of such area in light of existing or proposed pedestrian ways beyond such bounda-ry;

e.	The site plan will provide for adequate and proper drainage, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal, and recycling, and water supply;



f.	The provisions for exterior lighting will promote safety to motorists traveling on adjacent public streets;

g.	The proposed development will provide adequate access to the site, or to the buildings on the site, for emergency vehicles;

h.	Other environmental impacts will be adequately mitigated; and 

i.	Impacts upon municipal services will be adequately addressed.

9.	Findings and Decisions

All findings of the Planning Board shall be in writing, and its determination with re-spect to site plans shall either be (a) that the site plan conforms to the criteria set forth above, or (b) that the site plan does not conform and specifying with particu-larity how it does not conform and how it may be modified to conform.  The fore-going procedure is intended to afford the Planning Board the opportunity to assure that the dimensional and other requirements of the Zoning Bylaw have been met and to impose reasonable conditions to mitigate anticipated impacts.  It is pre-sumed that a site plan submitted to the Planning Board which complies in all re-spects with the dimensional, use, and other requirements of this Section will be ap-proved by the Planning Board or will be approved only with such reasonable and specific suggested modifications or conditions specified by the Planning Board which will cause the site plan to conform with the criteria set forth above. As part of this site plan review procedure, the Planning Board may modify the design, land-scaping, and screening requirements for parking lots set forth in Section 5.1 and 5.2 of the Zoning Bylaw if deemed consistent with the objectives and overall appear-ance of the campus. The Planning Board may not modify the setback requirements from adjoining residential districts required by Section 7.6.5.1, Footnote 4 above.

10.	Appeal

Any person aggrieved by any action of the Planning Board under this Section 7.6.7 (and under Section 9.3 if a Special Permit is being requested at the same time) shall be entitled to appeal therefrom to a court of competent jurisdiction within twenty (20) days following the Planning Board’s filing of its decision with the Town Clerk pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17.

7.7		SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS

An accessory dwelling unit may be created by Special Permit from the Board of Ap-peals in Single Residence A and Single Residence B upon the determination that all of the following conditions have been met:

a.	No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed per lot.

b.	The lot on which the dwelling unit is located contains at least ten percent greater land area than required by the dimensional regulations for its district.


c.	The proposed dwelling unit is accessory to the principal residence and either the proposed dwelling unit or the principal residence is occupied by the owner of the lot on which the dwelling unit is located.

d.	The proposed dwelling unit shall be designed for two persons and shall not be oc-cupied by more than two persons.

e.	The building in which the proposed dwelling unit is to be located existed on the date of the adoption of this subsection of the Bylaw.

f.	The Special Permit, if granted, shall clearly state that it is not transferable to a pur-chaser of the lot, and shall require, as a condition of its validity, that a certified copy of the permit be filed with the Registry of Deeds by the applicant.

g.	Exterior alterations required to meet applicable building, fire, or health codes are permitted and must be designed to conform to the architectural integrity of the structure and the residential character of the neighborhood.

h.	The accessory dwelling unit created shall be a minimum of 350 square feet and a maximum of 1,000 square feet or 33 percent of the total building size in the dwell-ing structure, whichever is less.

i.	One parking space shall be provided and designated for each accessory apartment established in addition to the prior requirements for the property. Such parking space shall be created in conformance with all applicable dimensional require-ments and screened appropriately from abutting properties.

j.	Alterations to the building dwelling unit shall be designed to be compatible with the surrounding residential district, and shall not create a second entrance in the front of the building.

k.	The Board shall review and approve the septic system on site as part of the approv-al process.

l.	Any Special Permit granted pursuant to this section shall require that the applicant request certification of the permit every three years, and failure to request such certification shall cause the permit to lapse.

 
SECTION 8.0   OVERLAY DISTRICTS

8.1	FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT

8.1.1.	Purpose 

The purpose of the Flood Plain Overlay District (FPOD) is to preserve and maintain the ground water table to protect the public health and safety of persons and property against the hazards of flood or ground water inundation, for the protection of the community against the cost which may be incurred when unsuitable development oc-curs in swamps, marshes, along water courses, or in areas subject to floods, and to con-serve natural conditions, resources, wild life, open spaces for the education, recreation and general welfare of the public.

8.1.2	Location

The Flood Plain Overlay District is herein established as an overlay district. The District includes all special flood hazard areas in the Town of Dedham designated as Zones A and AE on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The map panes of the Norfolk County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Dedham are panel numbers 25021C0038E, 25021C0039E, 25021C0043E, 25021C0044E, 25121C0177E, 25021C0181E, 25021C0182E, 25021C0183E, and 25021C0184E, dated July 17, 2012. The exact boundaries of the District are defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Study report dat-ed July 17, 2012. The FIRM Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Study report are in-corporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Department, and Conservation Commission.

8.1.3 	Applicability

The underlying zoning district's requirements governing permitted usage and setbacks apply to areas within the FPOD except as further restricted by this section.

8.1.4 	Reference to Existing Regulations 

The FPOD is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the following:

1.	Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR), as may be currently in effect, that address construction in floodplain areas;  

2.	Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00);



3.	Inland Wetland Restriction, DEP (currently 302 CMR 13.00);


4.	Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP (cur-rently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).

8.1.5	Procedures

Any work within a FPOD shall require a Special Permit issued by the Board of Appeals. Notice of each such Flood Plain special permit application shall be given to the Town Public Works Department, to the Town Administrator, the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Health, the Planning Board, and the Conservation Commission, as well as all other parties deemed necessary by the Board of Appeals.

1.	The Board of Appeals, in hearing such application, shall consider, in addition to any other factors said Board deems pertinent, the following aspects with respect to flooding and FPOD zoning provisions; that any such building or structure shall be designed, placed, and constructed to offer a minimum obstruction of the flow of water; and that it shall be firmly anchored to prevent floating away.

2.	If any land in the FPOD is proven to the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals after the question has been referred to the Planning Board, the Conservation Commis-sion, the Board of Health, and the Board of Selectmen, and reported on by all three boards or the lapse of thirty (30) days from the date of referral without a report, as being in fact not subject to flooding or not unsuitable because of drainage condi-tions for any use which would otherwise be permitted if such land were not, by op-eration of this section, in the FPOD, and that the use of such land for any such use will not interfere with the general purposes for which FPOD have been established, and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, the Board of Ap-peals may, after a public hearing with due notice, issue a permit for any such use.  If an applicant feels that he has sufficient evidence to prove that an area identified as floodplain by FEMA is not subject to flooding, there are formal procedures which allow FEMA to review such individual cases and, if appropriate, remove the area in question from the floodplain.

8.1.6	Base Flood Elevation Data

Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 10 lots or 2.5 acres, whichever is lesser, within unnumbered A zones.

8.1.7 	Watercourse Alteration and Relocation 

In cases where a project will alter or relocate a watercourse, the following must be no-tified:

1.	Conservation Commissioner of the City of Boston
Town of Canton 
Town of Westwood 
Town of Needham


2.	NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Office of Water Resources 
100 First Avenue
Charlestown, MA 02129-2043

3.	NFIP Program Specialist
FEMA Region 1, Rm. 462
J. W. McCormack Post Office & Courthouse 
Boston, MA 02109

8.1.8 	Review of all Project Proposals 

All projects shall be reviewed to assure the following:

1.	Such proposals minimize flood damage.
2.	All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or elimi-nate flood damage.

3.	Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
8.1.9 	Permitted Uses 

The following activities are permitted within the FPOD upon receipt of a building per-mit, where required: 

1.	Development for recreational purposes, including but not limited to: walking trails and bicycle paths, athletic fields, parks, beaches, and boat landings.

2.	Horticultural and Agricultural purposes, including those associated with commer-cial farming. 

3.	Construction of a structure provided that the following criteria are met:

a.	Structure shall not be utilized for residential purposes.

b.	The lowest floor of the structure shall be located at least one foot above the 100 year flood elevation for the site as noted on the FEMA map referenced above.

c.	The structure shall not impede the flow of flood waters.

d.	Volumetric flood compensation at a ratio of 2:1 for every cubic foot of fill, structure, or other obstructions placed within the Flood Plain District.  Calcula-tions prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals as part of the permit application.

e.	Any structure shall have direct pedestrian access to uplands area located out-side of the FPOD.  Such access shall be reviewed and approved by the Dedham Fire and Police Departments.

f.	Any public works projects, including but not limited to: drainage, sewerage, or flood control project, including any associated structures.

8.1.10	Prohibited Uses

	The following uses are prohibited within a FPOD:

1.	No land fill or dumping in any part of the District without proper volumetric com-pensation at a ratio of 2:1 for every cubic foot filled.  This includes fill utilized for landscaping purposes.

2.	No damming or relocation of any water course except as part of an overall drainage basin plan proposed by a public authority.

3.	No permanent outside storage of materials or equipment.  This includes storage of materials for retail sale.

4.	No land, building, or structure shall be used for sustained human occupancy except dwellings theretofore lawfully existing, or land, buildings, or structures which com-ply with the provisions of this Bylaw.

5.	Storage of fertilizers, chemicals, or manure associated with agricultural uses.

6.	Motor vehicle storage, sales, or maintenance facilities. This includes parking areas designated for temporary storage of vehicles awaiting repairs or unregistered vehi-cles, whether stored or for sale.

7.	Underground storage tanks other than storage or septic tanks associated with a sub-surface disposal system or sewerage pumping station.

8.	Storage of any chemical or material classified as hazardous by Local, State, or Fed-eral statutes and regulations.

8.1.11 	Portion of Parcel within FPOD 

The above prohibitions will only apply to the portion of a parcel which is located within a FPOD, and not the entire parcel.

8.1.12 	Federal Flood Insurance Program

1.	The Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall be, for purposes of administra-tion of and conformity with the requirements of the Federal Flood Insurance Pro-gram, placed on file with the Town Clerk and Building Inspector, and shall be con-sidered an appendix to this Bylaw.

2.	Until such time as a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, sub-stantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within 



Zones A and AE on the FIRM unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the community or along the regulated section of the waterway.

3.	Where a specific area or parcel of land appears on the FIRM as being within the 100 year flood elevation and an applicant, having satisfied the intent of Section 8.1.12.2 above, wishes to seek relief from the placement of the area or parcel within a flood hazard zone, or a release from the mandatory purchase of flood insurance, said ap-plicant shall follow the procedures contained in a Letter of Map Amendment as out-lined in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 70.  

8.2 	AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT

8.2.1 	Purpose 

The purpose of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District is to protect the town’s water resources by preserving and maintaining the quality and volume of existing and poten-tial groundwater supply and groundwater recharge areas within the town.

8.2.2	DEFINITIONS

1.	AQUIFER: Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that contains significant amounts of potential recoverable potable water.

2.	DISPOSAL:  The deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration or plac-ing of any material into or on any land or water so that such material or any con-stituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater.

3.	GROUNDWATER: All the water found beneath the surface of the ground, including, without limitation, the slowly moving subsurface water present in aquifers and re-charge areas.

4.	HAZARDOUS WASTES: A waste, or combination of wastes, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in serious or incapacitating illness, or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used, or dis-posed of, or otherwise managed. These wastes shall include, but not be limited to, any wastes which fall within the definitions of hazardous waste under the Hazard-ous Waste Regulations promulgated by the Hazardous Waste Board, the Water Re-sources Commission, and the Division of Water Pollution Control under the provi-sions of Sections 27(8), 52, 57, and 58 of Chapter 21 of the General Laws.

5.	IMPERVIOUS SURFACE:  Material or structures on, above, or below the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil.


6.	LEACHABLE WASTES:  Waste materials including, without limitation, solid waste sewage, sludge, and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the surrounding environment.

7.	MINING OF LAND:  The removal or relocation of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand, gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock.

8.	POLLUTANT:  Any element, or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial, or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter which is or may be discharged, drained, or otherwise introduced into any surface or subsurface disposal or conveyance system, or water of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

9.	PROCESS LIQUIDS:  Liquids used in cooling, cleaning, or in manufacturing process-es which contact raw materials, products wastes, or machinery, and which, because of that contact, may contain pollutants.

10.	RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS:  Any of the materials which have a concentration which exceeds the limits set forth in Appendix B, Table II of 10 CFR Part 90 (Stand-ards for Protection Against Radiation), or any other applicable provisions of federal or state law or regulation.

11.	RECHARGE AREAS:   Areas composed of permeable stratified sand and gravel and certain wetlands that collect precipitation or surface water and carry it to aquifers.

12.	SOLID WASTES:  Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing.  This includes, but is not limited to, rubbish, gar-bage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material, combustion residues, demoli-tion debris, construction wastes, and landscape refuse.

13.	TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:  Any substance or mixture of such physi-cal, chemical, or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual, or poten-tial hazard to water supplies, environmental quality, or to human health if such sub-stance or mixture was discharged to land or waters of this town.  Toxic or hazard-ous materials include, without limitation, petroleum products, heavy metals, radio-active materials, pathogenic or infectious wastes, solvents, thinners, and other ma-terials which are listed as toxic, hazardous or a priority pollutant by the United States Environmental Protection Agency under any of the following laws: (1) Toxic Substances Control Act 15 U.S.C. s.2601 et seq.; (2) Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act 7 U.S.C. s.136 et seq.; (3) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 42 U.S.C. s.6901 et seq. (4) Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 49 U.S.C. s.9601 et seq., and (5) Federal Wa-ter Pollution Control Act 33 U.S.C. s.1251 et seq.

8.2.3 	Location 

The locations of the Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts shall be as shown on the maps entitled Bridge Street Wellfield, Aquifer Protection District/Zone II Boundary, Dedham Massachusetts, and Fowl Meadow Aquifer, Aquifer Protection District/Zone II Bounda-ry, 


Dedham, Massachusetts, both prepared by Weston and Sampson Engineers, Inc., which maps shall be deemed to be part of the Zoning Map of the Town of Dedham. The bound-aries of the Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts are shown on a Geographic Infor-mation System Map prepared for the Dedham Planning Board, signed by the Planning Board by the Town of Dedham Engineering Department Geographic Information Sys-tem Division at a scale of 1 inch = 750 feet dated January 26, 2012.
8.2.4 	Scope of Authority 
The Aquifer Protection Overlay District shall be considered to be superimposed as an overlay district over any other district established by this Bylaw. Any requirement of this Section 8.2. shall be in addition to the requirements of other sections of this Bylaw.
8.2.5 	Permitted Uses 
The following uses are permitted as of right within the Aquifer Protection Overlay Dis-trict provided that all necessary permits, orders, or approvals required by local, state, or federal law are also obtained and further provided that no permit is required for said use pursuant to (a) the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit pro-gram established pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342, (b) the Surface Water Discharge Permit Program established pursuant to M.G.L. c.21, s.43, or (c) the Ground Water Discharge Permit Program established pursuant to M.G.L. c.21, s.43:
1.	Residential development, if permitted in the underlying district, provided that no more than twenty-five (25) percent of a building lot (including the portion of any new street abutting the lot to the center line of such street) is rendered impervious. Larger parking areas, if required, must be constructed with permeable paving. All dwellings in the Aquifer Protection Overlay District constructed after the effective date of this Section shall be connected to the public sewer system. The foregoing requirement shall apply, to single family dwellings only if (a) if a sewer has been in-stalled in any street on which the subject lot has a frontage, and (b) if the sewer in such street extends as far as the subject lot.
2.	Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife.
3.	Outdoor recreation, nature study, boating, fishing, and hunting where otherwise le-gally permitted.

4.	Foot, bicycle and/or horse paths and bridges.

5.	Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splash boards, and other water control supply and conservation structures and devices.

6.	Maintenance and repair of any existing structure provided there is no increase in impermeable pavement.

7.	Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting, and grazing, pro-vided that fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, manure, and other leachable materials are not stored outdoors.  If these activities do involve the use of fertilizers, herbi-cides, or pesticides, the town may require the installation of test wells to monitor for contamination by herbicides, pesticides, or fertilizers.

8.2.6	Prohibited Uses

	The following uses are prohibited:

1.	Sanitary landfills and open dumps, as defined in 310 CMR 19.006.

2.	Land application and storage of sludge and septage, as defined in 310 CMR 32.05.

3.	Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in M.G.L. c. 140B, s.1.

4.	Storage of liquid petroleum products of any kind, except those incidental to (1) normal household use and outdoor maintenance or the heating of a structure, (2) waste oil retention facilities required by M.G.L. c.21, s. 52A, or (3) emergency gen-erators required by statute, rule, or regulation; provided that such storage is either in a free-standing container within a building or in a free-standing container above ground level with protection adequate to contain a spill the size of the container’s total storage capacity.

5.	Facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste which is subject to M.G.L. c.21C and 310 CMR 30.00, including, without limitation, solid wastes, haz-ardous wastes, leachable wastes, chemical wastes, radioactive wastes, and waste oil, except for waste oil retention facilities required by M.G.L. c.21, s. 52A, that meet the standard set forth in 310 CMR 22.22(2)(a)(4).

6.	Manufacture, use, storage, or disposal of toxic or hazardous wastes or materials ex-cluding normal household activities or those permitted by Special Permit hereun-der.

7.	Industrial or commercial uses which discharge process liquids on-site.

8.	Storage of sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically treated abrasives, or other chemicals used for the removal of snow or ice on roads.

9.	Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing sodium chloride, cal-cium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the re-moval of snow or ice on roads which has been removed from highways and streets located outside of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District.

10.	Storage of pesticides, as defined in M.G.L. c.132B, s.2, unless such storage is within a building or structure that pursuant to a Special Permit, the Board of Appeals finds is so designed as to prevent an accidental release onto or below the land surface.

11.	Storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners, as defined in M.G.L. c.128, s.64, except in a structure with an impermeable cover and liner which pursuant to a Special Permit, the Board of Appeals finds is so designed to prevent the generation of contaminated run-off or leachate.

12.	Stockpiling of animal manures, except in a structure with an impermeable cover and liner which pursuant to a Special Permit, the Board of Appeals finds is so de-signed to prevent the generation of contaminated run-off or leachate.

13.	Onsite sewage disposal systems subject to 3 10 CMR 15.00 except as permitted for single family dwellings under subsection 8.2.5.1.

14.	Except for excavations for the construction of building foundations or the installa-tion of utility works, the removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, or any other mineral substances within four (4) feet of the historical high ground or surface water level (as determined from monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data compiled by the USGS), unless the substances removed are deposited on site to achieve a final grading greater than four (4) feet above the historical high ground or surface water mark within forty-five (45) days of removal.

15.	Land uses which result in the rendering impervious of more than twenty-five (25) percent of any lot (including the portion of any new street abutting the lot to the centerline of such street) unless a system for artificial recharge of precipitation that will not result in groundwater pollution is provided, the design of which is ap-proved by the Board of Appeals pursuant to a Special Permit.

16.	Any other use not permitted as of right or by Special Permit.
8.2.7 	Uses Permissible by Special Permit 
The following uses are permitted, if authorized by the Board of Appeals by special per-mit in each specific case, subject to such conditions as the Board may impose to protect the aquifer:
1.	The application of fertilizers for non-domestic or non-agricultural uses provided that such application shall be made in such a manner as to minimize adverse im-pacts on surface and groundwater due to nutrient transport and deposition and sed-imentation.
2.	Those commercial and industrial activities permitted in the underlying district with a Special Permit site plan review to prevent compaction and siltation, loss of re-charge, exfiltration from sewer pipes, and contamination by oil, chemicals, nutri-ents, or any other adverse impact on the groundwater resources delineated within the Aquifer Protection Overlay District.
3.	The use or storage of toxic or hazardous materials required for treatment of drink-ing water at public water treatment facilities, provided those materials are protect-ed to prevent their release to the environment.
4.	Any use that requires a permit under (a) the National Pollutant Discharge Elimina-tion System permit program established pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342, (b) the Surface Water Discharge Permit Program established pursuant to M.G.L. c.21, s.43, or (c) the Ground Water Discharge Permit Program established pursuant to M.G.L. c.21, s.43.
5.	Residential uses permitted in the underlining district, the maintenance, repair, or al-teration thereof and additions thereto, when the resulting impervious surface would exceed twenty-five (25) percent of lot area (including the area to the center line of any new street abutting the lot), provided that the Board of Appeals, in addi-tion to the findings required under Section 8.2.8, makes the finding that there is no feasible alternative available and the design is such that no contamination or deple-tion of aquifer recharge will result.
6.	Any use herein where explicit provision is made for a Special Permit.
8.2.8	Criteria for Approval by the Board of Appeals
In addition to the notice otherwise required under this Zoning Bylaw, the Board shall give written notice of any Special Permit application within the Aquifer Protection Overlay District to the Dedham-Westwood Water District, the Board of Health, and the Conservation Commission, and request a report and recommendation from each of the same. After notice and public hearing in accordance with the procedures as prescribed by law, and after due consideration of the reports and recommendations of the Ded-ham-Westwood Water District, the Board of Health, and the Conservation Commission, the Board of Appeals may grant such a permit provided that it finds that the proposed use:

1.	Is in harmony with the purposes and intent of this Bylaw and will promote the pur-poses of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District

2.	Is appropriate to the natural topography, soils, and other characteristics of the site to be developed

3.	Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse environmental impact on the aquifer or recharge area 

4.	Will not adversely affect the quality or quantity of an existing or potential water supply
8.2.9 	Other Boards 
If the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, or the Water District, within four-teen (14) days of the Board of Appeals’ request for comments, opposes the grant of the Special Permit or recommends conditions and limitations on the grant, the Board of Appeals must either (a) follow such recommendations, or (b) state in writing as part of its findings the reasons for not following such recommendations.
8.2.10 	Reimbursement of Costs 
It is contemplated that, in most cases, it will be necessary for the Board of Appeals to hire consultants (e.g. geologists, engineers, etc.) in connection with the review and evaluation of applications for Special Permits under this Section. The Board of Appeals will be reimbursed by the applicant for the reasonable fees and expenses of such con-sultants, and each application for a Special Permit hereunder shall contain an agree-ment by the applicant to that effect regardless of the decision on his appeal.
8.2.11 	Design and Operations Guidelines 
Except for single family dwellings, each applicant for a Special Permit shall file as part of his application a report prepared by a geologist, earth scientist, other qualified spe-cialist in the field of chemistry and land disposal, or registered professional engineer which shall describe how the proposed use and/or structures satisfy the following items:
1.	Safeguards. Provision shall be made to protect against toxic or hazardous materi-als discharge or loss resulting from corrosion, accidental damage, spillage, or van-dalism through measures such as: spill control provisions in the vicinity of chemi-cal or fuel delivery points; secured storage areas for toxic or hazardous materials; and indoor storage provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials. For opera-tions which allow the evaporation of toxic or hazardous materials into the interiors of any structures, a closed vapor recovery system shall be provided for each such structure to prevent discharge of contaminated condensate into the groundwater.
2.	Location. Where the premises are partially outside of an Aquifer Protection Over-lay District, site design shall to the maximum degree possible locate such potential pollution sources as on-site disposal system outside of the District.
3.	Disposal.  For any toxic or hazardous wastes to be produced in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use, the applicant must demonstrate the availability and feasibility of disposal methods which are in conformance with Ch. 21C, MGL.
4.	Drainage.  All runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site and diverted towards areas covered with vegetation for surface infiltration to the ex-tent possible.  Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are not feasible, and shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of con-taminants.
The Board of Appeals may also require the preparation and filing of Operations Plans for particular uses, which plans may be incorporated as conditions of a Special Permit.
8.2.12	Violations
1.	Written notice of any violation of this Bylaw shall be given by the Building Inspec-tor to the responsible person within forty-eight (48) hours of detection of a viola-tion or a continuing violation. Notice to the assessed owner of the property shall be deemed notice to the responsible person. Such notice may be oral, if confirmed in writing within five (5) days.  Such notice shall specify the requirement or re-striction violated and the nature of the violation, and may also identify the actions necessary to remove or remedy the violations, preventive measures required for avoiding future violations, and a schedule of compliance. A copy of such notice shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner, the Water District, the Board of Health, and the Conservation Commission.  The cost of containment, cleanup, or other ac-tion of compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of the premises.


2.	For situations that require immediate remedial action to prevent adverse impact to the groundwater resources within the Aquifer Protection Overlay District, the Town of Dedham, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, and any of their agents or the Dedham/Westwood Water District may order the owner or operator of the premises to remedy the violation and, if said owner and/or operator does not immediately comply with said order, the Town of Dedham, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, any of their agents or the Dedham-Westwood Water 
3.	District, if authorized to enter upon such premises under the terms of a Special Permit or otherwise, may act to review the violation. For the purposes of this sec-tion, the term “immediately” shall mean within a 24-hour period.  Remediation costs shall be the responsibility of the owner and operator of the premises. Any vio-lation of this Bylaw shall result in the levying of a fine of $300 on the owner of the property where the violation occurred, and on the operator or person causing the violation, with each day, during which a violation persists being considered a sepa-rate violation.

8.3	WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES OVERLAY DISTRICT
8.3.1 	Purpose 

The purpose of this Bylaw is to accommodate within Dedham the necessary infrastruc-ture for wireless communications services while protecting the general public from the impacts associated with wireless communications facilities.
8.3.2 	Establishment 
The Wireless Communications Services Overlay District includes all land located in the Research Development and Office (RDO) district; and all land located in Limited Manu-facturing (LMA) districts LM-20, LM-21, LM-22, LM-23, and Limited Manufacturing Type B (LMB) district LMB-1, and all land located in the Highway Business district (HB-1). The Wireless Communications Services District shall be construed as an Overlay District with regard to said locations. All requirements of the underlying zoning district shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein.
8.3.3 	Applicability 
Other provisions of this Zoning Bylaw notwithstanding, the regulations set forth herein shall apply to the construction, erection and/or placement of Wireless Communica-tions Links within the Town of Dedham. Replacement of existing Wireless Communica-tion Link reception and transmission devices, accessory mechanical, electronic, or tele-phonic equipment, fixtures, wiring, and protective covering customary and necessary to operate such wireless communication equipment, except for monopoles and lattice towers that support such Wireless Communication Link devices, shall be exempt from review by the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Design Review Advisory Board; howev-er, they are subject to Section 8.3.5 review. These provisions shall be effective as of April 14, 1997, provided that a Wireless Communication Link shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section and shall be governed by the rest of the Bylaw if application to the Building Commissioner or Zoning Board of Appeals for a building permit or zon-ing relief has been made prior to the first notice of hearing before the Planning Board for adoption of this Section, and either (a) no zoning relief is required, or (b) any re-quired zoning relief is 

thereafter granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals; provided construction work under such building permit is commenced within six (6) months of the date of such permit and proceeds in good faith continuously so far as is reasonable practicable.

8.3.4 	Use Regulations 

In the Wireless Communications Services Overlay District the following Use Regula-tions will apply:

TABLE 9 – USE REGULATIONS
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS 

Indoor Wireless Communications Link	Allowed *
Accessory Wireless Communications Link	Special Permit **
Building Mounted Wireless Communications Link	Special Permit **
Wireless Communications Link mounted on Existing, Free-standing Structure	Special Permit **
Free-standing, Exterior Wireless Communications Link	Special Permit **

*     Allowed as of right subject to dimensional and performance requirements.
         Allowed within an existing structure in the Central Business District.
**   May be permitted by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.

8.3.5	Site Plan Review  
The construction, erection, installation of new listed communications devices and ap-purtenant structures, except Indoor Wireless devices, are subject to Site Plan Review. For Replacement of existing Wireless Communication Link reception and transmission devices, accessory mechanical, electronic, or telephonic equipment, fixtures, wiring, and protective covering customary and necessary to operate such wireless communi-cation equipment, the guidelines of this section shall be administered by the Building Department. In review of applications, the Planning Board shall employ the following guidelines:

1.	Screening, Landscaping, and Preservation of Existing Vegetation:  
a.	Whenever possible, devices shall be sited so as to minimize the visibility of such devices from adjacent property, and shall be suitably screened from abutters and residential neighborhoods.  To the extent feasible, installation of free-standing devices shall minimize the removal of existing trees and other vegetation.

2.	Height:  A device shall be designed and installed at the minimum height neces-sary for the proper functioning of the telecommunications services to be provid-ed by the device at that location. Free-standing devices shall not exceed 50 feet in height. 



3.	Color:  Free-standing, wall-mounted, and roof-mounted devices shall be painted or otherwise colored or finished in a manner which aesthetically minimizes the visibility of the devices in the surrounding landscape or on the building or struc-ture to which they are attached.

4.	Fencing: Any fencing necessary to control access to devices shall be compatible with the character of the area.

5.	Signs: There shall be no advertising permitted on or in the vicinity of the devices. There shall be a sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area at each installation which shall display a phone number where the person responsible for the maintenance of the installation may be reached on a 24-hour basis.  All other signage shall be consistent with the Sign Code.

6.	Lighting: Night lighting of installations shall be prohibited except for such light-ing as may be necessary for emergency repair purposes.

7.	Parking: Free-standing device installations shall provide one (1) off-street park-ing space for service vehicles.

8.	Personal Safety: When devices are mounted in locations above or in the vicinity of pedestrian areas or other areas open to the public, such installations shall be made in a manner that does not impede or restrict the movement of pedestrians nor pose a hazard to any person.

9.	Bond:  Any wireless communications company seeking to erect a free-standing wireless communications link shall provide to the Town of Dedham a bond in the amount of $250,000 to guarantee any and all obligations regarding the installa-tion, operation, and removal of such facility. Any wireless communications com-pany seeking to erect a building-mounted communications link or co-locate on existing free-standing link shall provide to the Town of Dedham a bond in the amount of $50,000 for the same purposes.  The Board may reduce the amount of the bond required after one (1) year of operation upon request by the communi-cations company. All bonds shall remain in full force and effect for the life of said operation.
8.3.6 	Dimensional Requirements 
In the Wireless Communications Services Overlay District, the following dimensional regulations will apply:
1.	Building Mounted Wireless Communications Link - a maximum of 10 feet above the rooftop or structure as described in Section 4.0 of this Bylaw.
2.	Wireless Communications Link mounted on Existing, Free-Standing Structure may be installed at any point upon such existing structure.

3.	Free-standing, Exterior Wireless Communications Link - 50 feet above ground.
4.	No free-standing communications facility shall be located within one mile of an-other such facility unless located: on a co-location site, or within the Route 128 me-dian.
5.	No free-standing communications facility shall be located within 500 feet of a resi-dential dwelling with the exception of locations within the Route 128 median.
8.3.7 	Performance Standards 
All Wireless Communications Links erected, installed and/or used shall comply with the following performance standards:

1.	Compliance with Federal and State Regulations;

2.	All Wireless Communications Links shall be erected, installed, maintained and used in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations, in-cluding radio frequency emission regulations as set forth in Section 704 of the 1996 Federal Telecommunications Act.
8.3.8 	Co-Location of Wireless Communications Equipment 
All owners and operators of such Wireless Communications Link shall, as a continuing condition of installing, constructing, erecting, and using a Wireless Communications Link, permit other public utilities or FCC-licensed commercial entities seeking to oper-ate a Wireless Communications Link to install, erect, mount, and use compatible Wire-less Communications equipment and fixtures on the equipment mounting structure on reasonable commercial terms, provided that such co-location does not materially in-terfere with the transmission and/or reception of communication signals to or from the existing Wireless Communications Link, and provided that there are no structural or other physical limitations that make it impractical to accommodate the proposed additional Wireless Communications equipment or fixtures.

8.3.9	Coexistence with Other Uses

A Wireless Communications Link may be located on the same lot with any other struc-tures or uses lawfully in existence and/or lawfully undertaken pursuant to this Bylaw.

8.3.10	Exemptions

The following types of wireless communications facilities are exempted from this By-law:
1.	Amateur radio towers used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio ser-vice license issued by the Federal Communications System, provided the tower is not used or licensed for any commercial purpose.

2.	Facilities used for the purposes set forth in M.G.L., Chapter 40A, Section 3.


8.4	HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT (HPOD)
8.4.1	Purpose
1.	Encourage the preservation and continued use of buildings and structures of histor-ic and architectural significance.

2.	Encourage the adaptive re-use of such buildings and structures by broadening and modifying use and dimensional regulations that may otherwise impede historic and architectural preservation efforts.

8.4.2	Establishment

1.	The Historic Preservation Overlay District (HPOD) is established as a district that overlays the underlying districts, so that any parcel of land lying in the HPOD shall also lie in one or more of the other zoning districts in which it was previously classi-fied, as provided for in this Zoning Bylaw. Land, building, and structures in the HPOD may be used for all purposes permitted as of right or by Special Permit in the underlying district, and all requirements of the underlying district shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein.

2.	The HPOD shall include the following Dedham Board of Assessors’ map and block (parcel) numbers:

Map/Block	Map/Block	Map/Block	Map/Block	Map/Block
91-4
91-5
91-7-1020
	91-8
91-9
91-26A
91-26B	91-42
91-44
91-45
91-47	91-48
107-58
107-64
107-65	107-66
107-105
107-108
107-109

8.4.3	Applicability and Eligibility

Conversion of an existing historic building or structure for multi-family residential use may be allowed by Special Permit under this Section 8.4 only if such building or struc-ture or the lot upon which such building or structure is located satisfies the following:

1.	The original building or structure was constructed prior to 1900.

2.	The lot contains a minimum of 20,000 square feet of land and was established by plan or deed recorded prior to the adoption of this Section 8.4.

3.	The building or structure contains a minimum of 12,000 gross square feet of floor area.



8.4.4	Special Permit Granting Authority 

The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for all  appli-cations and projects under this Section 8.4. If such application or project also requires other Special Permits, the Planning Board shall be the SPGA for all such Special Permits.

8.4.5	Historic Preservation Special Permit 

The SPGA may grant a Special Permit for the conversion of an eligible building or struc-ture for multi-family residential use upon a determination that the following conditions and criteria have been satisfied:

1.	All dwelling units must be located within a single eligible building or structure, pro-vided, however, that the floor area of said building or structure may be expanded by not more than ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area existing on the date of the adoption of this Section 8.4. New construction of elevators or stairways shall be ex-cluded from the calculation of the percentage of such expansion.

2.	Not more than six (6) dwelling units shall be allowed in any such eligible building or structure.

3.	Except as otherwise provided herein, the dimensional requirements set forth in the Table of Dimensional Requirements (Table 2) and the off-street parking require-ments of Section 5 shall not be applicable but shall be determined and specified by the SPGA in the Special Permit after due consideration of the historical and archi-tectural preservation efforts, the unique characteristics of the lot and building or structure, and adequate protection of abutting properties and uses.

4.	1.5 parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit which may include park-ing within the enclosed structures.

5.	With the exception of elevators or stairways, any additions or expansions to such el-igible building or structure shall comply with applicable yard requirements for the SRB Zoning District.

6.	Maximum height requirements shall not apply to such eligible building or structure, provided, however, any additions or enlargements shall not exceed the current height of the eligible building or structure or 38 feet, whichever is greater.

7.	Collection and disposal of all refuse and recycling material shall be provided pri-vately.

8.	The building or structure shall be connected to municipal water and sewer systems if the same are present in the abutting street. All costs associated with the installa-tion of such services shall be borne by the developer or applicant.


9.	One-story detached accessory buildings or structures to be used as private garages and/or to house snow removal, lawn, maintenance, and recreational equipment may be allowed subject to Section 8.4.5.3 above.

8.4.6	Site Plan Review

All applications under this Section 8.4 shall be subject to Minor Site Plan Review which shall be conducted by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit process.




 
SECTION 9.0 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
9.1 	ADMINISTRATION
9.1.1 	Execution 
The Inspector of Buildings shall execute the provisions of this Bylaw, except where oth-erwise provided, and, in so doing, shall have the same powers as are provided for the execution of the State Building Code. He shall issue no permit for the construction, al-teration, enlargement, reconstruction, moving, or raising up of any building or struc-ture which would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Bylaw. Where authori-zation by the Board of Appeals is required pursuant to the provisions of this Bylaw, the Inspector of Buildings shall issue no permit until so directed in writing by the Board, and any conditions imposed by the Board shall be made a part of said permit. The In-spector of Buildings shall not issue a new permit or license for a change of use of a building, structure, or land which use would be in violation of any zoning Bylaw. Whenever the term Inspector of Buildings is used in this Bylaw, such term shall include the Assistant Building Inspector and authorize said Assistant Building Inspector to act in the absence or illness of the Inspector of Buildings or Building Commissioner, however the position may be designated.
9.1.2 	Enforcement 
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Bylaw, or any of the conditions under which a permit is issued, or any decision rendered by the Board of Appeals, shall be lia-ble to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each violation, and each day shall be considered a separate violation. It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Buildings to enforce this Bylaw, and for this purpose he may make criminal complaints or apply for injunctions to any court of competent jurisdiction.
9.1.3 	Emergency Powers Granted to Building Inspector 
In case of fire or explosion or destruction by other means in part or in whole of the liv-ing quarters of a resident or residents of the Town of Dedham, the Building Inspector may issue a permit for temporary housing for a period of not more than sixty (60) days, provided the applicant has filed an application for a permit with the Board of Ap-peals.
9.2 	BOARD OF APPEAL
9.2.1 	Establishment 
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals. The Board shall include five (5) mem-bers, residents of Dedham, one of whom shall be an attorney at law, one a civil engi-neer, one an architect, structural or mechanical engineer, or a master builder, or a per-son with ten (10) or more years of experience in construction or supervision of con-struction of buildings. The Board of Selectmen shall annually in April appoint one member to the Board of Appeals to serve for the term of five (5) years commencing with the first day of May following, to succeed the member whose term will then ex-pire. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms in the same manner as in the case of the original appointment. The Board of Appeals shall elect annually a chairman and a clerk from its own number. There shall be two (2) associate members of the Board of Appeals, residents of Dedham, appointed annually by the Board of Selectmen.  The Chairman of the Board of Appeals may designate either or both associate members to sit as a member of the Board of Appeals in case of absence, inability to act, or interest on the part of a member thereof, or in the event of a vacancy on said board, may desig-nate either associate member to sit as a member on the Board until such vacancy is filled in a manner provided by this section.
9.2.2	Powers
The Board of Appeals shall have and exercise all the powers granted to it by Chapters 40A, 40B, and 41 of the General Laws and by this Bylaw.  The Board’s powers are as fol-lows:
1.	To hear and decide applications for Special Permits.  Unless otherwise specified herein, the Board of Appeals shall serve as the Special Permit granting authority.
2.	To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the terms of this Bylaw, with respect to particular land or structures, as set forth in G.L. c.40A, s.10. The Board of Appeals shall not grant use variances.
3.	To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer under the provisions of G.L. c.40A, ss. 8 and 15.
4.	To hear and decide comprehensive permits for construction of low or moderate in-come housing, as set forth in G.L. c.40B, ss. 20-23.
9.2.3	Rules and Regulations
The Board by annual vote shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure consistent with the General Laws of the Commonwealth pertinent thereto.
9.2.4	Fees
The Board of Appeals may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for petitions for variances, administrative appeals, and applications for compre-hensive permits.
9.2.5	Quorum
Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative votes of four members shall be necessary to reverse any order or decision of any administrative of-ficial or to effect any variance in the application of this Bylaw.  No member of the Board shall vote on any matter in which he has any financial interest.

9.2.6	Meetings and Records
The Chairman may and at the request of the Board shall from time to time call meetings of the Board. All hearings will be held in open session of which there shall be kept by the Clerk as public records minutes recording the vote, abstention, or absence of each member on every question presented and other official action. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the Board shall, at the discretion of the Select-men, render any such member liable to immediate removal from office by the Select-men.
9.3	SPECIAL PERMITS
9.3.1	Special Permit Granting Authority
Unless specifically designated otherwise, the Board of Appeals shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA).
9.3.2 	Criteria 
Special permits shall be granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority, unless oth-erwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the adverse effects of the proposed use will not outweigh its beneficial impacts to the town or the neighbor-hood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. In addition to any specific factors that may be set forth in this Bylaw, the determination shall include consideration of each of the following:
1.	Social, economic, or community needs which are served by the proposal;
2.	Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
3.	Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
4.	Neighborhood character and social structures;
5.	Impacts on the natural environment; and 
6.	Potential fiscal impact, including impact on town services, tax base, and employ-ment.
9.3.3 	Procedures 
An application for a special permit shall be filed in accordance with the rules and regu-lations of the Special Permit Granting Authority.
9.3.4 	Other Boards 
Complete copies of petitions, appeals, or applications for Special Permits and any sup-porting materials shall forthwith be transmitted by the SPGA to the:

1.	Planning Board 
2.	Board of Health  
3.	Conservation Commission 
4.	Historic District Commission 
5.	Board of Selectmen 
6.	Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer 
7.	Department of Public Works 
8.	Fire Department 
9.	Police Department 
10.	Such other board, department, or agency as the Board of Appeals deems appropri-ate.

Any board, agency, or department to which such petitions, appeals, or applications for Special Permits are transmitted shall make such recommendations as they deem ap-propriate and shall forward copies thereof to the SPGA. The SPGA shall transmit copies of such recommendations to the applicant. The failure of any such board or agency to make recommendations within thirty-five (35) days of receipt by such board or agency of the petition shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto. All responses received from any board, department, or agency shall be entered in the minutes of the meetings at which action is taken upon any such petition, application, or appeals.

9.3.5	Conditions

Special Permits may be granted with such reasonable conditions, safeguards, or limita-tions on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the Special Permit Granting Authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this Bylaw.

9.3.6	Plans
The applicant for a Special Permit shall submit a plan in substantial conformance with the requirements specified in the Rules and Regulations of the Special Permit Granting Authority.

1.	The provisions of this Section shall not apply to applications for Special Permits to reconstruct, extend, alter, or structurally change a nonconforming single or two-family structure.


9.3.7	Regulations

The Special Permit Granting Authority may adopt rules and regulations for the admin-istration of this section.

9.3.8	Fees

The Special Permit Granting Authority may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for applications for Special Permits.

9.3.9	Lapse

Special Permits may lapse if a substantial use thereof or construction thereunder has not begun, except for good cause, within 24 months following the filing of the Special Permit approval (plus such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred to in G.L. c.40A, s.17, from the grant thereof) with the Town Clerk.

9.4	SPECIAL PERMIT FOR MAJOR NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECT

9.4.1	Purpose
	
The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by providing for a review of plans for uses and structures which may have significant impacts on traffic, municipal and public services and utilities, environmental quality, community economics, and community values in the Town.
9.4.2 	Applicability 
A Special Permit from the Planning Board for a Major Nonresidential Project shall be required for all developments which trigger the criteria set forth in Section 10.0. In construing such definition, the calculation of increase in floor area shall be based on the aggregate of all new structures, improvements, alterations, or enlargements, calculated from the date of enactment of Article 25 of the warrant for the 1988 Annual Town Meeting. Where the floor area of a building has been reduced by demolition so that the net increase after reconstruction is less than 25,000 square feet, Major Nonresidential Project will not be applicable.
9.4.3	Application and Review Procedure
1.	Prior to the formal filing of an application and the required exhibits under this section, the applicant shall submit seven (7) copies of a plan showing the exist-ing and proposed buildings and structures, parking spaces, access way, land-scaping, and uses with the Planning Board, and shall request a meeting with the Board for a scoping session to define the scope of the project, the specific in-formation that may be needed, and any waivers from the procedural and tech-nical requirements 

of this Section, or shall request that a scoping session be waived because the scale and scope of the project do not warrant it or because the pro-ject is a modification of a previously approved site plan.
2.	After the scoping session, or after the scoping session was waived by the Plan-ning Board, the applicant shall submit the number of copies required by the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board of the items specified in subsection 9.4.4. hereof, except for those waived by the Board. The Board shall forthwith distribute copies thereof to the Building Commissioner, Board of Health, Con-servation Commission, Police and Fire Departments, Town Planner, Public Works Commissioner, Dedham-Westwood Water District, Board of Selectmen, and such other departments and boards as the Planning Board may deem ap-propriate.
3.	Such agencies shall, within 35 days of receiving said copy, report to the Plan-ning Board on (1) the adequacy of the data and the methodology used by the applicant to determine impacts of the proposed development, and (2) the ef-fects of the projected impacts of the proposed development. Said agencies may recommend conditions or remedial measures to accommodate or mitigate the expected impacts of the proposed development. Failure by any such agency to report within the allotted time shall constitute approval by that agency of the adequacy of the submittal and also that, in the opinion of that agency, the pro-posed project will have no adverse impact.
4.	The Planning Board shall not render a decision on said application until it has received and considered all reports requested from Town departments and boards, or until the 35-day period has expired, whichever is earlier. Where cir-cumstances are such that the 35-day period is insufficient to conduct an ade-quate review, the Planning Board may, at the written request of the applicant, extend such period to 60 days. 
5.	The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing on any properly completed ap-plication within 65 days after filing, shall properly serve notice of such hearing, and shall render its decision within 90 days of the close of said hearing. The hearing and notice requirements set forth herein shall comply with the re-quirements of G.L. Chapter 40A. Section 11.  All costs of the notice requirements shall be at the expense of the applicant. 
6.	If the Major Nonresidential Project also requires other Special Permits, the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for all such Spe-cial Permits.

9.4.4	Contents and Scope of the Application
An application under this Section shall comprise the following drawings, exhibits, and statement prepared by and bearing the seals and signatures of qualified professionals, such as a registered professional engineer, architect, land surveyor, landscape architect, and others, as necessary, and shall include a completed application form signed by the 


owner of the site, and the required back-up information or exhibits, processing, and re-view fees.  The Planning Board shall require substantive compliance with these re-quirements and with the following requirements for impact statements, and may, by regulation or vote, impose additional requirements, interpret and apply these require-ments, and grant waivers therefrom when warranted by the scope of the project or other special circumstances, and the ability to review the project is not affected ad-versely by the waiver:

1.	A site plan at a scale of 1” = 40,’ unless a different scale has been approved  by the Planning Board, showing the recorded boundaries and area of the parcel of land, and the location, size, and material of all buildings and structures; public utilities or services; parking areas, paved walks, drives, and other spaces, landscaped areas; wooded areas and major free-standing trees; outdoor lights; streams, water bodies, wetlands, and flood plains, and topography of the site and of abutting areas for at least 100 feet. All above features shall be identified as existing or proposed (includ-ing changes of grade), and zoning district boundaries, names of abutting owners ac-cording to Assessor’s records, names and widths of streets, and purposes and di-mensions of easements on or within 100 feet of the site shall be shown.

2.	 Landscaping and planting, including plant species and size, outdoor lighting, and il-luminated signs, fences, and screening, shall be shown on a separate sheet or sheets in sufficient detail to permit evaluation.

3.	 A perspective view or isometric drawing of the proposed development shall be provided, unless this requirement is waived by the Planning Board.

4.	 Building elevations and floor plans, showing the proposed uses, outside material, and color of all buildings, unless no exterior or floor plan change is planned. A tabu-lation of proposed employees, occupants, and floor areas to be devoted to various uses, and of the existing, required and proposed parking spaces for such uses shall be provided on the floor plan drawing (show all floors and basement).

5.	 A locus plan at a scale of 1" =100' or 200' showing streets, lots, buildings, and to-pography at 5 or 10 ft. contour interval, respectively, for at least 500 ft. from the site, shall be included on the cover sheet or separately.

9.4.5 	Statements

The following impact assessment statements shall be submitted with the application:

1.	Traffic impact assessment: 

Its purpose shall be to document the existing traffic volumes, capacities, controls, road condition, hazards, and level of service on the site and the streets adjacent to the site; to project changes due to the site development and to the background traf-fic growth or decline; to assess the projected impact of such changes; and to pro-pose and discuss management and structural improvements and mitigation measures, both on and off the site.


2.	Environmental impact assessment: 

It shall include a substantiated assessment of the existing and expected post-development environmental conditions, including air and water quality, pollution of ground, water, and air, noise levels, harmful or noxious emissions, damage or threat to wetlands and flood plain, plants and animals, and the visual environment. The potential for erosion or sedimentation and the proposed or existing control measures shall be discussed. Glare, smoke, odors, vibration, electromagnetic radia-tion, effects on groundwater supply, streams, water bodies, unique or valuable vis-tas, symbiotic ecological relationships of animal and plant communities, and com-patibility of the project with the existing and future natural and manmade envi-ronment shall be considered, and any expected changes and preventive or correc-tive actions shall be discussed. Waste disposal, snow removal, maintenance of land-scaped and paved areas, off-site environmental impacts, and drainage shall be dis-cussed, and pre- and post-development drainage calculations for 10 and 100 year storm shall be included.

3.	Community and fiscal impact assessment: 

The assessment shall consider the existing and projected demand for public or mu-nicipal services (such as schools and cultural institutions, fire and police, medical and social services, water and sewer, waste disposal, administrative and inspection services), historical and visual compatibility, revenues to the town, voluntary con-tributions and services, and the effects of the project failing, not living up to the projections, or having to modify structures and uses for economic rea-sons. The assessment shall also consider fiscal or economic impacts, and compati-bility with the town Master Plan and other plans and development policies, and shall explain and evaluate any zoning changes or variances sought or obtained.

9.4.6 	Development Impact Standards 

The following standards shall be used by the applicants in preparing plans and by the Planning Board in reviewing them. The required standards must be substantially met in order for a Special Permit to be granted, the recommended standards are intended as a flexible guide and not meant to discourage creativity and innovation.

9.4.7	Required Traffic Standards

1.	The net effect of the project and the mitigating measures or improvements (the execu-tion of which must be guaranteed) shall be no worsening of the level of service (LOS) by more than one level or level D or E on the streets providing access to or egress from the site and within the nearest public street intersections in either direction.

2.	Traffic signs and signals, storage and turning lanes and movements, curbs and curb cuts, pavement widths and grades, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, sight dis-tances, directional signs, and markings shall all conform to the professional norms and design standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and to the accepted pro-fessional standards.


3.	All required permits and approvals shall be in hand or otherwise assured before the Special Permit may be granted.

4.	Binding provisions shall be made to compensate for errors in projecting the potential traffic volumes and travel routes.

5.	The traffic study shall be based on actual counts on any street or intersection likely to be affected by the development taken within twelve (12) months prior to the filing of the application.

9.4.8	Recommended Traffic Standards

1.	Make legally binding arrangements to reduce traffic by single occupancy cares and to promote public transportation, carpools, off-site parking for employees, and oth-er traffic-reducing measures.

2.	Minimize traffic conflict points between vehicles and pedestrians by adhering to the subdivision street design standards of the Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land in Dedham.

3.	Locate access and exit points so as to route site-generated traffic so far as practica-ble away from residential streets. 

9.4.9	Required Environmental Standards

1.	The proposed development shall not cause significant environmental harm or haz-ard through emissions of noise, dust, fumes, toxic or noxious gases, electromagnetic radiation, water pollution, soil contamination, excessive smoke, vibration, or other toxic, harmful, or hazardous agents.

2.	The proposed development shall not increase the potential for sedimentation, ero-sion, or flooding, raise the water table, either on site or on adjacent properties and streets, to an appreciable extent, and shall not increase the rate of runoff from the site, unless such increase is deemed by the Planning Board to be beneficial.

3.	Exterior lighting shall be arranged to minimize glare and objectionable spillover on-to adjacent properties.
4.	No unique environmental features, habitats, or vistas shall be endangered or de-stroyed.
5.	Proper mitigation measures shall be taken to minimize any unavoidable harmful impacts, and replication or relocation shall be used, where appropriate, to preserve valuable environmental features, parts of which may be adversely affected or dam-aged by the proposed development.



9.4.10 	Recommended Environmental Standards
1.	Locate proposed structures so as to minimize obstruction of sunlight during day-light hours and to allow the use of solar energy panels.
2.	Use planting and landscaping to create a visually pleasing setting and to screen parking and service areas, especially from residential neighborhoods.
3.	Where possible, recharge uncontaminated water to the ground and minimize dis-charges to public storm and sanitary sewers.
9.4.11 	Required Community and Fiscal Standards
1.	The revenue and service fees from the projected development shall equal or exceed the projected cost of public services attributable to it as its share of the total munic-ipal cost of such services.
2.	In the event that the projected development does not materialize as envisioned, provisions shall be made to minimize adverse financial, social, and visual impacts and to prevent deterioration and blight.
3.	If the proposed development will require or accelerate off-site capital expenditures to provide the needed facilities and services or to mitigate adverse impacts, the ap-plicant (owner) shall be responsible for the payment of impact fees at least equal to the share of the total cost attributable to the project, but excluding any part of such capital expenditures coming from federal or state grants and any part of operating costs.
9.4.12	Recommended Community and Fiscal Standards
1.	Make the development conform, so far as feasible, to any adopted plans for the town or the neighborhood, including plans for land use and zoning, open space and conservation, circulation, and the expansion of water, sewer, and other services and facilities.
2.	Make the development consistent or compatible with the neighborhood as regards the size, materials, style, and treatment of elements of structures. This shall not be interpreted to mandate uniformity or discourage creativity.
3.	Minimize grading and destruction of the natural ground cover by adapting devel-opment to the environment, rather than changing the environment more than nec-essary.
4.	Design to keep low the cost of operation and maintenance of public services and fa-cilities.
9.4.13	Planning Board Findings and Action
Prior to approving, approving with modifications and conditions, or disapproving a Special Permit, the Planning Board shall make written findings whether the application 

meets each of the required traffic, environmental, community, and fiscal standards, and to what extent the various recommended standards are applicable and are met by the proposal. The Planning Board shall also make a written finding whether the application as a whole substantially conforms to the intent of this Bylaw and proposes an appropri-ate and beneficial development of the site.  The findings shall be included in the certifi-cate of action which the Planning Board shall transmit to the applicant, the Town Clerk, the public agencies which submitted written comments on the site plan, and to any per-son attending the public hearing who has requested a copy of the decision. If the Board approves the Special Permit, the certificate of action shall also list any waivers granted by the Planning Board and any modifications, conditions, and safeguards imposed at the time of approval.
1.	Except where the required standards are clearly inapplicable or have no effect, or where the impact would be as severe if the site were developed in a way requiring no Special Permit review and permissible as of right, the Planning Board shall not grant waivers from the required standards or grant a Special Permit not meeting some of the required standards. A Special Permit application not meeting two or more recommended standards may be disapproved, or the Planning Board may find that the standards do not apply, are of no significance, or their intent is ade-quately met by other means.
2.	Approval may be conditional on the applicant modifying the plan or meeting other requirements before the Special Permit is granted by the Planning Board.
3.	Approval may be conditioned on the applicant meeting certain requirements after the appeal period has expired, either before construction work begins or by the time a specified stage is reached. Such conditions may be enforced by refusal by the Building Commissioner to issue an occupancy permit, or by realizing on any surety posted by the applicant to ensure satisfactory performance.

9.4.14 	Conditions, Limitations, and Safeguards 

In granting a Special Permit, the Planning Board may impose conditions, limitations, and safeguards which shall be in writing and shall be a part of such special permit. Such conditions may include, among other matters and subjects:

1.	Controls on the location and type of access to the site;

2.	Controls on the number of vehicles that arrive or depart during the morning and/or evening peak hours (including controls on the maximum number of vehicles which may use the off-street parking areas during said periods);

3.	Requirements for off-site improvements to improve the capacity and safety of roads, intersections, pedestrian ways, water, sewer, drainage, and other public facil-ities which are likely to be affected by the proposed development;

4.	Requirements for donation and/or dedication of land for right-of-way to provide for future roadway and/or intersection widenings or improvements;



5.	Requirements for securing the performance of all proposed work, including pro-posed off-site improvements, by either or both of the following methods: (1) a per-formance bond, a deposit of money, negotiable securities, letter of credit, or bank passbook in an amount determined by the Planning Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements required as conditions of approval; (2) a covenant running with the land, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, whereby the required improvements shall be completed before the proper-ty may be conveyed by other than a mortgage deed.

6.	Conditions to minimize off-site impacts on traffic and environmental quality during construction.
9.4.15	Administration 
The Planning Board shall establish and may periodically amend rules and regulations relating to the administration of this section, including additional regulations relating to the scope and format of reports required hereunder. The Planning Board shall establish and may periodically amend a schedule of fees for all applications under this section. No application shall be considered complete unless accompanied by the required fees.
1.	The Planning Board shall be responsible for deciding the meaning or intent of any provision of this section which may be unclear or in dispute.


9.5	SITE PLAN REVIEW
9.5.1	Purpose
The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by providing for a review of plans for uses and structures which may have significant impacts on traffic, municipal, and public ser-vices and utilities, environmental quality, community economics, and community val-ues in the Town. The site plan review process provides for a comprehensive review of proposed projects within an expedited time frame.
9.5.2	Applicability
Site plan review and approval by the Planning Board shall be required before a building or occupancy permit can be issued. Site plan review has two (2) levels:  MINOR site plan review and MAJOR site plan review:
Threshold for MINOR site plan review:
1.	For any construction or additions to any structure which increases its usable floor space or parking requirements 
2.	For any change to a use which increases parking requirements 

3.	For increases or changes in outdoor uses subject to parking requirements, such as outdoor sales or spectator sports
4.	For the construction, alteration, or expansion of a parking lot or parking structure, including changes to parking spaces, circulation aisles, driveway access, location of landscaped areas, or any other feature comprising a part of the parking plan
5.	For any modification not shown on a parking or site plan previously approved by the Planning Board.
Threshold for MAJOR Site Plan Review:
1.	Any new construction, addition, or alteration of a building so as to create or result in more than 5,000 square feet gross floor area, even where a part of the building is being demolished.
2.	Any change of use to more than 5,000 square feet gross floor area which requires the addition of more parking spaces irrespective of existing parking spaces or the relocation of existing parking spaces.
3.	Any new parking area for a multifamily dwelling with three or more dwelling units; or take any action relative thereto.
9.5.3	Exemptions
The following are exempt from Section 9.5:
1.	One or two family dwellings;
2.	Farms on parcels of more than five (5) acres or two (2) qualified acres as set forth in G.L. c. 40A, s.3;
3.	Buildings devoted to a religious use or educational use and owned by or leased to an agency or political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, a religious denomination, or a nonprofit educational corporation, or a child care center; pro-vided, however, that such entities shall be subject to minor site plan review limited to the imposition of reasonable conditions as set forth in G.L. c. 40A, s.3;
4.	Premises subject to Section 9.4.
9.5.4	Application
The applicant, who shall be the owner of the building, or a prospective purchaser under a binding purchase-and-sale agreement, or a lessee having the authority to make the modifications and to comply with the conditions which may be imposed by the Plan-ning Board, shall submit a completed application, processing and review fees, a plan or plans, all as set forth in the rules and regulations of the Planning Board. The plan shall show the following information:
1.	Legal boundaries of the parcel with dimensions, bearings, and radii, including any easements on the property and its area, and showing boundaries of zoning districts, including flood plain
2.	Abutting owners and streets
3.	Material or planting species where applicable
4.	Existing or proposed:  buildings and structures
5.	Parking spaces and aisles or driveways
6.	Pavement and curbs
7.	Landscaping and vegetation
8.	Topography existing and proposed with two (2) foot contours (grading)
9.	Water and sewer lines
10.	Drainage in detail
11.	Wetlands
12.	Traffic signs, easements, and rights of way
13.	Access and curb-cuts
14.	Safety provisions
15.	Loading berths
16.	Dumpster and snow storage areas
17.	Utilities and electrical service
18.	Pedestrian ways
19.	Polar diagram showing the direction and intensity of outdoor lighting
20.	Zoning district boundaries
21.	Elevations and floor plans of existing and proposed buildings; location and design of all signs and exterior lighting; materials list of all exterior finishes
22.	A tabulation of floor areas (and outdoor areas, where this is applicable) devoted to various principal uses, the applicable parking requirements, the estimated cost of construction and of landscaping meeting the requirement for parking plans
23.	Title block, showing address, scale, north arrow, seal and signature of the registered architect, engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect responsible for a particu-lar component of the site plan, and a locus plan at 1" = 200' scale showing abutting lots
24.	The location, showing distances from property lines, dimensions, and use of exist-ing and proposed buildings, structures, additions, and demolitions, also fences, streams, and other conduits
25.	The location and size of underground utilities, including water, sewer, and drain piping, the inverts of manholes and drain catch basins, underground or overhead electric and other conduits
26.	The location and size of existing and proposed vegetation
27.	The location and size of any proposed signage on the site
28.	Information required to determine compliance with parking requirements shall be shown on the plan in a tabular form, including lot area, floor area ratio (FAR), and the existing and the proposed total floor area and floor areas dedicated to various uses, the parking spaces required for each principal use, the numbers of existing and proposed parking spaces, and the maximum legal occupancy, where required 
29.	Other information needed or helpful for verifying compliance with the applicable parking requirements, and any waivers requested shall be noted on the parking plan.
9.5.5	Major Site Plan:  Additional Information
1.	A separate traffic and access report may be required by the Planning Board shall be submitted, citing and substantiating the number of cars and trucks expected to en-ter and leave the premises in a 24-hour period and during the morning and after-noon peak hours; traffic volumes, pavement width, and Level of Service on each road abutting or serving the site; signalization and turning movements for any in-tersection abutting or within 500 feet of the site; any special conditions affecting it; and mitigating measures proposed.
2.	The applicant may also submit other explanatory or relevant exhibits and materials to assist the Planning Board in evaluating the site plan and its effect on the neigh-borhood.
9.5.6	Procedures
Upon receipt of all required items, the Planning Board shall distribute copies thereof to the Conservation Commission, Chief of Police, Chief of Fire Department, Public Works Commissioner, Building Commissioner, Board of Selectmen, and other boards or offi-cials believed by the Planning Board to be affected, with the request for a review or comment within 35 days, and failure to do so comment shall be deemed to indicate no ob-
jection. Site plan review for lots requiring nine (9) or fewer parking spaces shall be submitted to the Planning Director for review and report to the Planning Board. Site plan review for lots requiring ten (10) or more parking spaces shall be submitted to the Planning Board’s Peer Review Consultant for review and report to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall determine whether or not site plan modifications in accord-ance with Section 9.5.9 Modification Site Plan Review for lots requiring 10 or more parking spaces will require peer review.
The Planning Board shall not be required to hold advertised public hearing on site plan review, but shall, within 30 days of receipt of the complete plans, application, and fees, contact the applicant to schedule a review meeting and provide written notice to own-ers of property abutting the site. The Planning Board shall in writing within 90 days of said meeting approve, with or without conditions and modifications, or disapprove the site plan. In the event of disapproval, the Planning Board shall state in writing where the site plan fails to conform, to the letter or intent of this Bylaw or of any other laws or regulations, or to the applicable professional standards.
9.5.7	Approval
Site plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the Board that the plan meets the following objectives. The Board may impose reasonable conditions at the ex-pense of the applicant, including performance guarantees, to promote these objectives. Any new building construction or other site alteration shall provide adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Planning Board’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations. New building construction or other site al-teration shall be designed to address the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design of the building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of the development, in order to:
1.	Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees 6” caliper or larg-er, the length of removed stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil erosion, and threat of air and water pollution
2.	Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety, both on the site and accessing and exiting the site
3.	Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations
4.	Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned
5.	Minimize glare from headlights, minimize light glare into the night sky, and mini-mize overspill into adjacent properties; and installation of lighting to minimize glare into the night sky and spill into adjacent properties
6.	Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of build-ings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places
7.	Minimize contamination of groundwater from on-site waste-water disposal sys-tems or operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or con-tainment of hazardous substances
8.	Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, including parking and landscaping
9.5.8	Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt and may from time to time revise by vote at a duly posted meeting its regulations for site plan reviews and the processing and consultant review fees for site plan reviews. The cost of consultant review and inspections shall be borne by the applicant, who shall be billed for costs in excess of the initial review fee, and shall be refunded any part of the fee not used, together with any interest accrued thereon. The schedule of Planning Board fees shall be available at the offices of the Town Clerk and the Planning Board.
9.5.9	Modification Site Plan Review
A modification to an approved site plan or an approved parking plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board with a written description of the proposed modification, along with the necessary plans that show the modification in accompanying detail. Modified site plans or approved parking plans will, in most instances, be subject to the same re-view and procedures of Section 9.5.6.  However, upon an express request made as part of the application for modification, the Planning Board may determine by its vote that a particular modification is insignificant and does not warrant a notice to abutters and/or require peer review, and may act on the insignificant modification at such time as the determination is made. 
For modifications that do require notice and/or peer review, the Planning Board shall act on the modification within 45 days of receipt or, if a determination of insignificant is requested and denied, within 30 days of the vote of the Planning Board denying such determination. A copy of the determination and revised plan shall be filed with the Town Clerk, Building Commissioner, and Engineering Department.
9.5.10 	Lapse
Any approval of a site plan which has been granted pursuant to this Bylaw shall lapse, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced, except for good cause, within two (2) years from the grant thereof or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construc-tion has not begun, except for good cause, within such two (2) year period.


9.5.11	Appeal
The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Any appeal shall be filed in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, s.17 to a court of competent jurisdiction. If 20 days elapse without the Town Clerk being notified that an appeal has been filed, the Planning Board shall endorse its approval and any required conditions or modifications on the plans and distribute copies thereof to the applicant and to the Building Commis-sioner.

9.6	DESIGN REVIEW ADVISORY BOARD

9.6.1	Establishment
There shall be a Design Review Advisory Board comprised of five unpaid voting mem-bers, including two members qualified by education or training and experience in de-sign professions (architecture, landscape architecture, graphic design, or urban plan-ning), appointed one each by the Board of Selectmen and the Planning Board; one member qualified by education or training and experience in historic preservation, de-sign, or a related field appointed by the Historic District Commission or Civic Pride Committee; one member, who shall be a building contractor or an engineer experi-enced in commercial or industrial building construction, appointed by the Planning Board; and one member owning retail or other commercial business in town, appoint-ed by the Board of Selectmen. The Planning Director shall be ex-officio non-voting member of the Design Review Advisory Board. The members shall be appointed for 3-year alternating terms. The Board may from time to time designate as non-voting asso-ciate members for a period not exceeding one year persons nominated by civic organi-zations that hold an interest in or have special knowledge of specific projects, issues, or areas of Dedham and are willing and able to actively participate in the work of the De-sign Review Advisory Board. 
9.6.2	Duties
The Board shall develop, with assistance and input from local civic organizations and interested citizens, design guidelines for areas of town having different visual and func-tional character. It shall meet at the call of the chair to review and make recommenda-tions for building projects defined in Subsection 9.6.3 hereof. Administrative and lo-gistic support for the Design Review Advisory Board shall be provided by the Planning Board, but the Board may also seek support and advice from the Historical Society and other entities and individuals concerned about Dedham’s visual character.
9.6.3	Jurisdiction
The following projects shall be submitted to the Design Review Advisory Board for their review and advisory report:
1.	All new construction, and additions to and exterior alterations of existing buildings in the Central Business (CB), General Business (GB), Highway Business (HB), Local Business (LB), Limited Manufacturing (LMA), Limited Manufacturing Type B (LMB), and Research, Development, and Office (RDO) districts.

2.	Any project subject to site plan review or Major Nonresidential Project. 
9.6.4	Applicability
A copy of preliminary or conceptual architectural plans shall be transmitted to the Board for review and advisory report. The Design Review Advisory Board shall consid-er the size or scale, bulk, architectural style, material, texture, color, location, orienta-tion, signs, lighting, landscaping, and site layout in relation to the surrounding area and the visual character of the neighborhood and the town, and shall make written recom-mendations to the applicant or owner, to the approving town agency, and to the Build-ing Commissioner, referring to the applicable design guidelines. Such recommendations shall be advisory and shall be given due weight by the owner and the Planning Board or other approving agency or official. 
9.6.5	Exemptions
Any project subject to Section 9.6.3.2 that does not include any new building construc-tion, addition to existing building, and/or any new or changes to landscaping.
9.6.6	Procedures
1.	Whenever possible, the owner or applicant shall make an appointment and consult with the Design Review Advisory Board prior to the formal submission of prelimi-nary plans to the Planning Board, and the recommendations may be voluntarily adopted by the applicant. Projects subject to Section 9.6.3 shall be transmitted to the Design Review Advisory Board by the Planning/Zoning office for its review and recommendations within 35 days of transmittal or such longer period of time that may be needed to review and make a recommendation. A longer period of time to review a projected shall be agreed to be extended by the applicant. An official deci-sion, action, or approval required by law to be taken within a certain time period or by a certain date shall not be postponed beyond the required date while awaiting Design Review Advisory Board comments.
2.	Town agencies and officials may consult the Design Review Advisory Board rela-tive to construction projects not subject to its mandatory review, and the Board shall select projects for its review and recommendations based on time availability and their importance to the image and visual character of Dedham.
 
SECTION 10.0 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Bylaw, the following terms and words are hereby defined, explained, or lim-ited, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular, and the present tense includes the future tense. Unless these definitions or the context clearly shows a different meaning, the meaning assigned to them in Section 201 of the State Building Code, and in the Zoning Act (G.L. c. 40A) and the Subdivision Control Law (G.L. c. 41, ss. 81L to 81GG, shall also be used.

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: 
A separate dwelling unit located in a building originally constructed as a single-family dwelling or in a detached building located on the same lot as the single-family dwelling provided that such separate unit has been established pursuant to the provisions of this Bylaw.

ACCESSORY USE: 
Either a subordinate use of a building, or other structure or tract of land, or a subordinate build-ing or other structure: (1)Whose use is customary in connection with the principal building or other structure or use of land, and (2) Whose use is clearly incidental to the use of the principal building, other structure or use of land, and (3) Which is located on the same lot with the prin-cipal building, other structure or use of land, or on a lot adjacent to such lot if in the same own-ership or part of the same establishment, and (4) Which does not constitute, in effect, conver-sion of the principal use of the premises to one not permitted.

ACCESSORY WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LINK: 
Any wireless communication link located on the same lot with and customary and incidental to a use permitted as of right, by special permit, by variance, or as a preexisting nonconforming use including without limitation, any home-mounted wireless transmission/reception box and any fixtures and equipment customary and incidental to a private business exchange also known as a PBX Wireless Campus.

ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY: 
A social day care or adult day health facility as those terms are defined by the Commonwealth's Department of Elder Affairs as an accessory use.

ANIMAL OR VETERINARY HOSPITAL:
A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment, or the boarding of ani-mals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic or hospital use.

ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE:
Any residential development owned and operated by an entity, where conducted for profit or not for profit, which meets all of the following criteria:

1.	Provides room and board

2.	Provides directly by employees of the entity or through arrangements with another organ-ization, which the entity may or may not control or own, assistance with activities of daily 

living for three or more adult residents who are not related by consanguinity or affinity to the care provider

3.	Collects payments or third party reimbursements from or on behalf of residents to pay for the provision of assistance with the activities of daily living or arranges for same

4.	Is eligible for certification as an Assisted Living Residence by the Executive Office of Elder Affairs pursuant to G.L. c. 19D and all of applicable requirements

This definition shall not include any other forms of group living quarters such as group foster care group homes, single room occupancy residences, rooming, or lodging houses, and other facilities as listed in Commonwealth of Massachusetts Regulations (651 CMR 12.01).

BREWERY, DISTILLERY, OR WINERY WITH TASTING ROOM:

A business located in a building where the primary use is for the production and distribution of malt, spirituous, or vinous beverages which includes warehousing, bottling, and distribution of the product. A tasting room is permitted as an accessory use. The facility may host marketing events, special events, and/or factory tours and serve food for the events and tours. The facility may only sell beverages produced by, and commercial goods branded by, the brewery, distill-ery, or winery. The facility may sell permitted beverages to consumers for consumption off the brewery premises.

BUFFER ZONE:
Areas of land maintained in a landscaped fashion or in a natural state that are open, unpaved, unbuilt upon, and not used for buildings, parking areas, or storage of any kind.

BUILDING:
A structure having a roof and designed, intended, or used as a shelter for occupancy, by persons, animals, or things, provided that any other building, structure, or part thereof sharing a wall with, touching, or having a permanent above-ground structural connection to a building shall be considered part of such building.

BUILDING-MOUNTED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LINK:
Any out-of-doors Wireless Communications Link mounted on, erected on, or supported in whole or in part by an existing building or structure (including without limitation, buildings, water towers, smoke stacks, and the like) occupied and/or used primarily for other purposes.

BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICE:
Office use primarily for the following activities:  accounting, architecture, data processing, edit-ing, engineering, law, landscape architecture, research and science, administrative offices, or like enterprise.

CHILD CARE FACILITY:
A day care center or school age child care program, as those terms are defined in G.L. c.28A, s.9.



COMMERCIAL STORAGE:
Storage in a building of contractor’s equipment and building supplies, hardware, metal, pipe, furniture, shop supplies, wood, paper, tools, tobacco, or any product of manufacturing activi-ties permitted in the district, whether or not produced on the premises, but no retail sales or services in the premises.

CONTRACTOR'S YARD: 
Premises used by a building contractor or subcontractor for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies, and parking of wheeled equipment.

DRIVE THROUGH FACILITIES: 
Business establishments that are designed to allow customers to access sales or services with-out leaving their motor vehicles in so-called drive-through or drive- up facilities, including but not limited to banking, dry cleaning, pharmacies, photo processing or similar customer ser-vices.

DWELLING UNIT:
One or more rooms constituting independent living quarters for a single family, including cook-ing, sleeping, and bathroom facilities, and physically separated from any use not accessory to such dwelling, and from any other dwelling unit by open space, party wall, or hallway.

ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
Services provided by a public service corporation or by governmental agencies through erec-tion, construction, alteration, or maintenance of gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems and collection, communication, supply, or disposal systems whether un-derground or overhand, but not including wireless communications facilities. Facilities neces-sary for the provision of essential services include poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment in connection therewith.

EXTERIOR STREET LINE: 
The boundary of street right-of-way or layout, or, where the boundaries are not a matter of record, a line parallel to and 25 feet distant from the center line of pavement or vehicular trav-eled way.

FAMILY: 
One person or several individuals living together as a single and separate housekeeping unit and related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and not more than three individuals not so related (in-cluding domestic employees), provided that for the purposes of this Bylaw, a single and sepa-rate housekeeping unit comprising one of the following shall be deemed a family: (1) a congre-gate housing unit consisting of persons with disabilities or persons 60 years of age or older, sharing cooking and living facilities, and not more than one other person performing house-keeping, nursing, or other care and assistance functions. (2) A family day care home or a family and not more than six foster children.

FAMILY DAY CARE: 
Large or small family day care as defined in G.L. c. 28A, s. 9.

FENCE: 
An enclosure or barrier, such as wooden posts, wire, iron, etc. used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening or confinement, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees or other natural growth. Any fence installation proposed to be in excess of six (6) feet six (6) inches in height shall require a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.

FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): 
The ratio of the net floor area to the gross area of the lot on which such building is located, ex-clusive of land in Flood Plain districts or wetlands subject to General Laws Chapter 131, Section 40.

FREE-STANDING, EXTERIOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LINK: 
Any out-of-doors Wireless Communications Link mounted on, erected on, or supported by any free-standing monopole, lattice tower, or any other similar free-standing structure.

FRONTAGE: 
A continuous segment of the exterior street line between intersections with lot side lines or other lot boundaries, including an intersection of street lines, or street lines extended with an interior angle of 135 degrees or less.  If a lot is bounded by more than one street, as defined herein, the lot owner may designate any of them as the frontage street, if it provides legal and physical access to the lot for the requisite distance and if the building on the lot is numbered on that street.

GENERAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: 
Nonexempt business or trade school, blueprinting or copying establishment, catering service, clothing rental establishment, dancing or music school, meeting hall for hire, funeral home, re-pair shops for bicycles, typewriters, televisions, electronic and household appliances, or like enterprise.

HOME OCCUPATION: 
The use of a room or rooms in a dwelling or building accessory thereto as an office, studio, or workroom for a lawful home occupation by a person resident on the premises, provided that: a) Such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises as a dwelling, and b) Not more than one person other than residents of the premises regularly provided paid services in connection with such use, and c) No commodity or service is sold or provided to another person who is on the premises, and d) The public is not invited onto the premises in the usual course of business, and e) No offensive noise, traffic, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, or glare is produced as a result of the home occupation, and f) There is no exterior display or exterior sign except as permitted under the Sign Code, and g) There is no exterior storage of materials or equipment (including the exterior parking of more than one commercial vehicle), and no other exterior indication of such use or variation from the residential character of the premises, and 


h) All parking for such home occupation, other than for residents of the premises, shall be pro-vided off street.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provi-sions of the Zoning Bylaws, and i) Such use has been approved in writing by the Building Com-missioner.

INDOOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LINKS:
An indoor Wireless Communications Link mounted inside, erected inside, or supported within an existing building or structure (including, without limitation, buildings, cupolas, church spires, inactive smoke stacks, and the like) occupied and/or used primarily for other purposes.

KENNEL:  
A commercial establishment in which more than three (3) dogs or domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold located on at least five (5) acres of land.

LIMITED MANUFACTURING:
Fabrication, processing, or assembly employing only electric or other substantially noiseless and inoffensive motor power, utilizing hand labor or quiet machinery and processes, and free from agents disruptive to neighborhoods. Such agents include, but are not limited to air or wa-ter pollution, odors, gas fumes, smoke, cinders, flashing or excessively bright lights, discharge or accumulation of refuse, electromagnetic radiation, heat, or vibration.

LODGING HOUSE:	
A building, including any DWELLING UNIT within such building, where lodgings are let to four or more persons unrelated, which shall include fraternity houses, but shall not include a hotel or motel, dormitories of charitable or philanthropic institutions or convalescent homes li-censed under Section 71 of Chapter 111, or rest homes so licensed, or group residences licensed or regulated by agencies of the Commonwealth.

LOT: 
An area of land in single ownership with definite boundaries, established by a recorded plan or deed, including a lot created by combining several previously recorded lots, and used or availa-ble for use as the site of one or more buildings or for any other purpose.

LOT AREA:
The horizontal area of a lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. At least eighty (80) percent of the lot area required for zoning compliance shall be contiguous land other than that under any water body, or wetland as defined in G.L. c. 131, s. 40.

MAJOR HIGHWAY:
Route 1A, Providence Highway, or any other street designated as a numbered highway by the Commonwealth if having at least two travel lanes in each travel direction.



MAJOR NONRESIDENTIAL PROJECT (MNP): 
a.	Any new structure, or group of structures under the same ownership on the same lot or contiguous lots, with at least 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or requiring the pro-vision of 100 or more additional parking spaces under this Bylaw 
b.	Any improvement, alteration, or change in use, which either results in an increase of at least 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or requires an addition of 100 or more park-ing spaces to the amount required by this Bylaw prior to such improvement, alteration or change in use.
Where a use is developed as a MNP, and such use requires a special permit as set forth in the Use Regulation Table, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall be the Planning Board.

MANUFACTURING:
A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials, or the manufacture from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products.

MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS:
All types of nonmedical “marijuana establishments” as defined in G.L. c.94G, §1, including mari-juana cultivators, independent testing laboratories, marijuana product manufacturers, mariju-ana retailers, or any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, which estabishments shall, consistent with G.L. c.94G, §3(a)(2), be prohibited in all districts in the Town as shown in Section 3.1.3, Use Regulations Table, Principal Use E. Commercial Ues, under number 16

MEDICAL OFFICE: 
Office of a doctor or dentist not conducted in the home of the resident professional.

MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT:
A building containing lower floor commercial and other nonresidential uses allowed in the zon-ing district by right or by special permit with residential dwelling units on upper floors. The gross floor area of the commercial and other nonresidential uses in a Mixed Use Development must be at least 10 percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the entire building. All Mixed Use Developments are authorized by a Special Permit issued pursuant to Section 7.4 of this Bylaw.

MOTEL OR HOTEL: 
A building or buildings intended and designed for transient, overnight or extended occupancy, divided into separate units within the same building with or without a public dining facility. If such hotel or motel has independent cooking facilities, such unit shall not be occupied by any guest for more than four (4) continuous months, nor may the guest reoccupy any unit within thirty (30) days of a continuous four-month stay, nor may the guest stay more than six (6) months in any calendar year. No occupant of such hotel or motel may claim residency at such location.



MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX: 
Buildings and structures or a group of buildings and structures containing three or more dwell-ing units and the lots upon which the same are located authorized by a Special Permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals under Section 7.3.

MUNICIPAL FACILITIES:                            
Facilities owned or operated by the Town of Dedham.

NET FLOOR AREA:
The sum, in square feet of the occupiable or habitable area in a building which shall be deter-mined by excluding the following from calculation of gross floor area:

1.	Areas used for parking or loading

2.	Areas devoted exclusively to the operation and maintenance of a building, irrespective of its occupants, such as heating, ventilating, or cooling equipment, electrical and telephone facil-ities, fuel storage, elevator machinery, or mechanical equipment

3.	The thickness of load-bearing walls, at each floor

4.	Elevator shafts and common stairways, and common hallways at each floor

5.	Porches, balconies, which are unroofed

6.	Fire escape

NONCONFORMING BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE:
An existing legally established or erected building, structure, lot, or use which predates and does not conform to the current requirements of the district in which it is situated as regards the size, dimensions, location, or use of building or land.

NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME:
Any building with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.

PARKING LOT:
An area dedicated and exclusively used, in whole or in part, for parking of motor vehicles on a lot, in a garage, or on a parking deck, including aisles, accessory structures, and landscaping, Provided that the horizontal area on the lot available for parking, whether paved or not, and the parking layout meet the provisions of this Bylaw applicable at the time of approval, and further provided that any increase in the required parking due to a change in use or to an in-crease in building floor area or outdoor area served by such parking shall require approval or a revised parking or site plan.




PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT:
Barber or beauty shop, self-service laundry and/or a collection station for laundry and dry cleaning not done on the premises, photographic studio, shoe or hat repair shop, shop for cus-tom work by a dressmaker, furrier, milliner, or tailor, frozen food locker, news dealer, tanning salon, or like enterprise.

REAR LINE:
A lot boundary separating it from other lots and located most nearly parallel to and opposite lot frontage, provided that a triangular or wedge-shaped lot may have no rear line.

REGISTERED QUALIFYING PATIENTS OR PERSONAL CAREGIVERS:
	
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES: 
Facilities used primarily for research, development, and/or testing of innovative information, concepts, methods, processes, materials, or products. This can include the design, development, and testing of biological, chemical, electrical, magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical compo-nents in advance of product manufacturing. The accessory development, fabrication, and light manufacturing of prototypes, specialized machinery, and devices integral to research or testing may be associated with these uses.

RESTAURANT:
A building or portion thereof containing tables and/or booths for at least two-thirds (2/3) of its legal capacity, which is designed, intended, and used for the indoor sales and consumption of food prepared on the premises, except that food may be consumed outdoors in landscaped ter-races designed for dining purposes, which adjuncts to the main indoor restaurant facility.

RETAIL BUSINESS:
	Any retail operation with a gross floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet. 
 
ROW HOUSE OR TOWN HOUSE: 
A dwelling unit in a multi-unit building containing three to eight such units side-by-side, sepa-rated by party walls, with each unit not more than two rooms deep front to back and, unlike apartments, with separate entrances and stairways serving each unit exclusively.

SENIOR SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: 
Any residential development with supportive services available to the occupants including, without limitation, assistance with the activities of daily living (at a minimum including sup-port for bathing, dressing and ambulation), assistance with instrumental activities of daily liv-ing, food, transportation, nursing care, personal care or home health care. Such supportive housing may consist of a single building or group of buildings for residential dwelling purposes. Each dwelling or unit must be occupied by at least one person who is 62 years of age or older, and all occupants must be 55 years of age or older. Such supportive housing may or may not be licensed as an Assisted Living Residence under applicable state law.



SIDE LINE: 
A lot boundary separating it from other lots that is not a frontage or a rear lot line.

SMALL RETAIL BUSINESS: 
Bookstore, delicatessen, dry goods store, drugstore, florist, gift shop, grocery or fruit store, hardware store, jewelry store, tobacconist, variety store, wearing apparel store, or like enter-prise, not exceeding a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet.

STREET OR WAY:
A town way, a way laid out by county or state, a way shown on a definitive subdivision plan approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law and constructed or with construc-tion 

secured as provided in said Law, or a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law be-came effective in Dedham which has in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suit-able grades, and adequate construction for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the pro-posed use of land and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the build-ings erected or to be erected thereon. The naming of a private right-of-way, easement or driveway serving one or more lots for the purpose of facilitating emergency access or for any other purpose shall not confer upon it the legal status of a street or way for frontage and zoning purposes. No more than two lots meeting street frontage requirements may share an access driveway.

STRUCTURE:
A combination of materials constructed or erected so as to be permanently attached to and have a fixed location on the ground and including buildings, mobile homes, in-ground pools, billboards, and the like, but excluding for the purposes of this Bylaw boundary walls and fences less than six feet in height, mail boxes, and similar minor structures.

SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT CENTER:
A facility primarily dedicated to providing substance abuse treatment services including, but not limited to, counseling services, therapy sessions, and/or the dispensing of medication to treat substance abuse. The facility does not include staying overnight by any persons receiving services at the facility, and is not considered an outpatient facility.

TRADE SHOP: 
Shop of a cabinet maker, carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber paperhanger, sign painter or upholsterer, or like enterprise.

WAREHOUSE:
Building or plant for storage and distribution of all items, excluding paint and alcoholic bever-ages, which are sold and/or used in retail stores, including supermarkets, department and drug stores, toy, hardware, ice cream, tobacco, and gift stores.

WHOLESALE OFFICE OR SHOWROOM:
A showroom for building supplies, plumbing, heating, and ventilating equipment, with storage limited to floor samples only, or like enterprise.

WIDTH:
The distance between lot lines, measured along a straight line connecting the front corners of the lot for the depth equal to the required minimum frontage.

WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LINK:
A Wireless Communications Link consisting exclusively of fixtures and equipment used by a public utility or FCC licensed commercial entity for the wireless transmission and reception of radio signals including:

1.	Reception and transmission equipment and fixtures such as antennae, communication dishes, and similar devices


2.	Structures that are erected and used primarily to support such reception and transmission equipment including, without limitation, monopoles and lattice towers

3.	Any accessory mechanical, electronic, or telephonic equipment, fixtures, wiring, and pro-tective covering customary and necessary to operate such wireless communications equipment.

A Wireless Communications Link is a transmission and reception substation, not a principal fa-cility for conducting a communications business. Wireless Communications Link shall not in-clude television and radio transmission antennae.
YARD, REQUIRED MINIMUM: 
A strip of uniform depth specified by this Bylaw along and contiguous to frontage, side, and rear lines, measured at right angles or radially to said lines. Within the required minimum yards there shall be no buildings or structures, except for building projections and minor structure al-lowed by the Bylaw, including buildings accessory to residences in side and rear yards and sub-ject to yard requirements for such accessory buildings.
 
SECTION 11.0  MEDICAL MARIJUANA OVERLAY DISTRICT               

11.1	HISTORY

By Initiative Petition 11-11 (Question #3 on the November 6, 2012 ballot) the voters of the Commonwealth approved a law regulating the cultivation, distribution, possession, and use of marijuana for MEDICAL PURPOSES. 

11.2	PURPOSE

Provide for the location/placement of Registered Marijuana Dispensary(ies), in accordance with the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana Act, G.L. c.94C, App. §1-1, et seq., in locations determined suitable for lawful medical marijuana facilities and to minimize adverse impacts of Registered Marijuana Dispensary(s) on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, historic districts, churches and religious facilities, schools, playgrounds, ball fields, recreation areas, and other areas where minors congregate by regulating the siting, design, placement, security, and removal of Registered Marijuana Dispensary(s).

11.3	ESTABLISHMENT

11.3.1	Effective July 1, 2014, the Medical Marijuana Overlay District (“MMOD”) is established as a district that overlays the underlying zoning districts, so that any parcel of land lying in the MMOD shall also continue to lie in one or more of the other zoning districts as it was previously classified, as provided for in this Zoning Bylaw.  Land and buildings in the MMOD may be used for any purpose permitted as of right or by Special Permit in the underlying district, and all requirements of the underlying zoning district shall re-main in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein.

11.3.2	Land within the MMOD may be used either for (1) a Registered Marijuana Dispen-	sary (“RMD”), pursuant to a Special Permit as provided herein, in which case the 	requirements set forth in this section shall apply; or (2) a use allowed in the underly-	ing district, in which case the requirements of the underlying district shall apply.

11.3.3	The boundaries of the MMOD are depicted on the Zoning Map on file with the 	Town Clerk. 

11.3.4	No RMD shall be established except in strict compliance with the provisions of this 	Section.

11.3.5	Nothing in this Bylaw shall be constructed to supersede or alter federal and state 	state laws regarding the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs. 

11.4     DEFINITIONS
11.4.1	Where not otherwise expressly defined in the Zoning Bylaw, terms used in the 	MMOD Bylaw shall be interpreted as defined in the Humanitarian Medical Use of 


Marijuana Act, G.L. c.94C, App. §1-1, et seq. and the Department of Public Health Regula-tions promulgated thereunder, 105 CMR 725.001, et seq., and otherwise by their plan language.

11.4.2	Registered Marijuana Dispensary (RMD): Also known as a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center” (MMTC) means a not-for-profit entity certified by the Commonwealth of Mas-sachusetts Department of Public Health pursuant to 105 CMR 	725.100,    or acquire, cultivate, possess and process, which term includes the development of re-lated products such as edible marijuana-infused products (“MIPs”), tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments, and pursuant to which certification is authorized to transfer, transport, sell, distribute, dispense, or administer marijuana, products containing mari-juana, related supplies, or educational materials “registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.” Unless otherwise specified, RMD refers to the site(s) of dispens-ing, cultivation, and preparation of marijuana included within said certification.

11.5	LOCATION

11.5.1	RMDs shall only be located within the MMOD pursuant to a Special Permit as pro-	vided in §11.6 below, subject to the following limitation:

No RMD may be located within three hundred (300) feet of the following:
a.	Schools, including a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school or a public or private college, junior college, or university

b.	Child care facility

c.	Playground or ball fields

d.	Youth center

e.	Similar facility in which minors commonly congregate

f.	Churches or religious facilities.

11.5.2	The distance under this section is measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the protected use(s) identified in Section 11.5 to the nearest point of the property line of the proposed RMD.

11.5.3	The distance requirement may be reduced by no more than 10 percent (10%), but 	only upon the following specific findings by the Special Permit Granting Authority 	(SPGA):

a.	The applicant demonstrates that the RMD would otherwise be effectively prohibit-ed within the municipality

b.	The applicant demonstrates that the RMD shall employ adequate and sufficient se-curity measures to prevent distribution of medical marijuana to minors who are not qualifying patients pursuant to 105 CMR 725.004.


11.6	PROCEDURE

11.6.1	Special Permit Granting Authority

	The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGAA) for the 	RMD Special Permit.

11.6.2	Application

In addition to the materials required under §9.3 Special Permits, and all material re-quired by §9.5.4 and §9.5.5, the applicant shall submit the following as part of the RMD Special Permit application:

a.	A copy of its current registration as an RMD from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (“DPH”) and, if applicable, whether the application has other licensed registered RMDs; if so, where and whether the applicant has ever had its registra-tion rejected or rescinded, and why

b.	A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed RMD

c.	Identification of the square footage available and description of the functional areas of the RMD, including areas for preparation of any MIP

d.	A complete description of all security measures to be implemented, including em-ployee screening and security policies, as approved by DPH for the RMD in accord-ance with 105 CMR 725.110, which shall be reviewed and approved by the Police Chief prior to issuance of the Special Permit. The Police Department shall be pro-vided a direct connection to the video surveillance for the RMD.

e.	A copy of the emergency procedures approved by DPH for the RMD, and at least a quarterly program for review of such procedures

f.	A copy of the policies and procedures for patient or personal caregiver home-delivery approved by DPH for the RMD

g.	A copy of the policies and procedures for the transfer, acquisition, or sale of mariju-ana between RMDs approved by DPH

h.	A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures

i.	A copy of any waivers from DPH regulations issued for the RMD

11.6.3	The SPGA shall refer copies of the application to the Building Department, Fire De-	partment, Police Department, and Department of Public Works. Such boards or de-	partments shall review the application and shall submit their written recom-	menda-tions. Failure to make recommendations within 45 days of referral of the ap-	plication shall be deemed lack of opposition.




11.6.4	After notice and public hearing and consideration of application materials, consult-	ant reviews, public comments, and the recommendations of other town boards and 	departments, the SPGA may act upon such a permit.

11.7	SPECIAL PERMIT CONDITIONS

11.7.1	General Conditions

The SPGA shall impose conditions as it reasonably deems appropriate and necessary to improve site design, carry out, traffic and parking flow, public safety, protection of wa-ter quality, air quality, and significant environmental resources, preserve the character of the surrounding area and neighborhood, and otherwise serve the purpose of this sec-tion.

In addition, the RMD must be constructed so as to:

a.	Comply with the requirements of the Zoning Bylaw as they relate to dimensional requirements, parking, loading, and landscape requirements, and all other provi-sions of this Bylaw

b.	Provide for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement on the site and for the location of driveway openings in relation to street traffic

c.	Provide for the convenience and safety of vehicular traffic and pedestrian move-ment off the site, if vehicular and pedestrian traffic off-site can reasonably be ex-pected to be substantially affected by on-site changes

d.	Provide adequate arrangements and numbers of parking and loading spaces in rela-tion to the proposed use of the premises, including designated parking for home de-livery vehicle(s), as applicable

e.	Provide appropriate design and appearance of proposed buildings, structures, free-standing signs, screening, and landscaping

f.	Provide adequate water supply, surface, and subsurface drainage and light.

11.7.2	Special Conditions

The following specific conditions shall apply to every Special Permit granted under this Bylaw:

11.7.2.1    No smoking, burning, or consumption of any product containing marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises of an RMD, other than permitted by 105 CMR 725(N)(8).	

11.7.2.2   The hours of operation, including hours for dispatch of home deliveries as de-
                    termined and approved by the SPGA.

11.7.2.3 The RMD shall be designed to minimize any adverse visual impact on             	     	  abutting properties.

11.7.2.4  The permit holder shall file a copy of any Incident Report required under 105CMR 725.110(F) with the Building Commissioner and the SPGA within 24   hours of the incident. Such reports may be redacted as necessary to comply with any applicable state or federal laws and regulations.

11.7.2.5  The permit holder shall file a copy of any summary cease and desist order,       	 cease and desist order, quarantine order, summary suspension order limiting
sales, notice of a hearing, or final action issued by DPH or the Division of Ad-  ministrative Law Appeals, as applicable, regarding the RMD with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and SPGA within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt by the RMD.

	11.7.2.6  The permit holder shall file with the Building Commissioner and Chief of the 
                                                Police Department the name, telephone number, and electronic mail of a con-tact person in the event that such person needs to be contacted after regular business hours to address an urgent issue. Such contact information shall be kept updated kept updated regularly by the permit holder, and if there is a change to the contact person, it shall be updated immediately and forwarded to the Building Commissioner and Chief of Police.

11.7.2.7  This Special Permit shall lapse within five (5) years of its issuance. If the  	   permit holder wishes to renew the Special Permit, an application to renew  	   the Special Permit must be submitted at least 180 days prior to the expira- 	   tion of the Special Permit.

11.7.2.8  Special Permit shall be limited to the current applicant and permit holder,          	              and shall lapse if the permit holder ceases operating the RMD.

11.7.2.9  The Special Permit shall be null lapse upon the expiration or termination of 	             the applicant’s registration by DPH.

11.7.2.10 The permit holder shall notify the Building Commissioner and SPGA in     	                writing within 48 hours of the cessation of operation of RMD or the expira-        	                tion, or immediately upon termination of the permit holder’s registration          	                with DPH. 

11.8	PROHIBITION AGAINST NUISANCE

No use shall be allowed in the MMOD which creates a nuisance to abutters or to the sur-rounding area, or which creates any hazard, including but not limited to, fire, explosion, fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust, vapors, offensive noise or vibration, flashes, glare, objectionable effluent or electrical interference, which impairs the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any property, structure, or dwelling in the area.

  
	 
 
 
12.0	ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT (AOD)
12.1	PURPOSE
The Arts Overlay District (AOD) is established to encourage the development, preservation, and enhancement of Arts-Related Uses, particularly within East Dedham. The district shall preserve and enhance the area as a center for a variety of retail, business services, housing, and office us-es, and promote strong pedestrian character and scale throughout the district.

12.2	AOD BOUNDARIES
The boundaries of the AOD are depicted on the Zoning Map on file with the Town Clerk.

12.3	APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Arts Overlay District (AOD) shall apply to all land within the AOD. Any matter not addressed herein shall be governed by the  Single Residence B, General Residence, General Business, and Limited Manufacturing A provisions of the Zoning Bylaw. To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of the AOD and any other provisions of the Dedham Zoning Bylaw, the provision of the AOD shall govern. Uses allowed by right in the Single Resi-dence B, General Residence, General Business, and Limited Manufacturing A shall also be al-lowed by right in the AOD.

12.4	USE REGULATION
	
12.4.1	Where a use in the AOD triggers site plan review, the Planning Board shall review the project in accordance with Section 9.5 Site Plan Review of the Dedham Zoning Bylaw.

12.4.2	Where a use in the AOD requires a Special Permit, the Planning Board shall be the
Special Permit Granting Authority and follow the procedures of M.G.L. Chapter 40A.

12.4.3	A Special Permit shall be granted by the Planning Board, unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the adverse effects of the proposed use will not outweigh its beneficial impacts to the town or the neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. In addi-tion to any specific factors that may be set forth in this Bylaw, the determination shall include consideration of each of the following:

a.	Social, economic, or community needs which are served by the proposal;
b.	Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
c.	Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
d.	Neighborhood character and social structures;
e.	Impacts on the natural environment;
f.	Potential fiscal impact, including impact on town services, tax base, and employ-ment.



12.5	ARTS-RELATED DEFINITIONS

ART

The production of art or create work either written, composed, created, or executed by a craftsperson, visual artist, musician, photographer, sculptor, woodworker, digital media, litera-ture, illustrator, printmaker, fabric artist, and culinary artist. Such use may include the fine and applied arts including painting or other like picture, traditional and fine crafts, sculpture, food, writing, print, motion picture production, creating animation, the composition of music, cho-reography studio, and the performing art studio.

ART CENTER

A facility where creative arts are produced, exhibited, performed, taught, and sold such as drawing, painting, music, sculpture, metal and woodworker, culinary arts, printmaking, ceram-ics, digital media and broadcasting, textiles, fabric art, performance and dance, literature, illus-tration, industrial art which includes art gallery, art school, artist studio, concert hall, dinner theatre, live theatre, movie theatre with seating capacity of not more than 100, museum, retail sales of goods and services, provided the facility is operated in a unified way under one man-agement.

ART AND COMMUNITY CENTER

A facility containing an Art Center and one or more additional uses such as full service restau-rant, community space open to the general public for community activities, events, and other similar community activities not associated with the arts.

CREATIVE ART HOME OCCUPATION

The use of any portion of a dwelling or building accessory thereto as an office, studio, or work-room for architect, landscape architect, industrial designer, craftsperson, visual artist, musi-cian, photographer, sculptor, woodworker, digital media, literature, illustrator by a person who owns the premises, provided that:  

a.	Such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises as a dwelling.

b.	Not more than two persons other than residents of the premises regularly provided aid services in connection with such use.

c.	Commodity or service can be sold or provided to another person who is not on the premises, provided the space is less than 100 square feet.

d.	No offensive noise, traffic, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, or glare is produced as a result of the home occupation.

e.	There is no exterior display or exterior sign except as permitted under the Town of Dedham Sign Code.


f.	There is no exterior storage of materials or equipment, and no other exterior indica-tion of such use or variation from the residential character of the premises.

g.	All parking for such home occupation, other than for residents of the premises, shall be provided off street. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw.

h.	Such use has been approved in writing by the Building Commissioner.

SPECIALTY ARTISTIC MANUFACTURING/PRODUCTION

An establishment for the preparation, manufacturing, production, display, and sale of individu-ally crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, and related items of unique artistic works.

SPECIALTY ARTISTIC MANUFACTURING/PRODUCTION, SMALL SCALE

An establishment for the preparation, manufacturing, production, display, and sale of individu-ally crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leathercraft, hand-woven articles, and related items of unique artistic works. Such manufacturing shall not be of mass-production or assembly line nature, and will be consistent with an artisan or craftsman custom producing individual items. The maximum amount of space for this use shall be 2,000 square feet or less.


12.6     DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS

The following dimensional requirements shall govern within the AOD for the uses listed in the Table of Dimensional Requirements for the AOD. Within the AOD, these requirements shall su-persede any contrary or inconsistent requirements in the Zoning Bylaw including, but not lim-ited to, the requirements set forth in Section 4.0. Except as set forth below, the dimensional re-quirements (Table 2) shall continue to apply to other uses allowed in the Single Residence B, General Residence, General Business, and Limited Manufacturing A.

TABLE 10 – TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS –
ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Use	Area (sq.ft.)	Frontage
(feet)	Front
Setback (feet)	Side 
Setback
(feet)	Rear 
Set-back
(feet)	Floor 
Area 
Ratio (FAR)
Art Center	N/A	N/A	0	N/A	N/A	.5
Art and Community Cen-ter	120,000	200	25	15	15	.5
Artist in combination with 
dwelling units	16,000	50	0	N/A	N/A	.5
Artist	N/A	N/A	0	10	10	.5
Specialty artistic manu-facturing/production (small)	N/A	N/A	0	10	10	.5
Specialty artistic manu-facturing/production	N/A	N/A	0	15	15	.5


Notes to Table:

1.	More than one principal building is allowed on the same lot, whether characterized as resi-dential or nonresidential.

2.	Buildings may be connected across internal lot lines within the AOD.

12.7     TABLE OF ALLOWABLE USES

TABLE 11 – TABLE OF ALLOWABLE USES
ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT
 

PRINCIPAL USE	
ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT
	SRB	GR	GB	LMA
RESIDENTIAL USES
1.  Creative Art, Home Occupation	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
2.  Building containing 3 dwelling units in
     combination with artist	No	No	Yes	SP
       
EXEMPT AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
1.  Art Center	No	No	SP	SP
2.  Art and Community Center	No	No	SP	No
				
COMMERCIAL USES
1.  Artist 	No	No	Yes	Yes

MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES
1.  Specialty artistic manufacturing/
     production, small	No	No	SP	SP
2.  Specialty artistic manufacturing/
     production	No	No	No	SP

12.8	LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS

12.8.1	All outdoor refuse collection and loading areas shall be screened from adjoining streets and abutting residential properties by a visually impermeable six-foot (6 foot) high landscape or fence, or through use of appropriate landscaping, unless enclosed by build-ing walls.

12.8.2	All parking areas shall be screened from abutting properties and from adjoining streets.

12.8.3	Buffer. Unless already planted in its natural state, a 5-foot buffer shall be provided along the property boundary that abuts a residential property. The buffer shall be landscaped as follows:  


a.	Materials.  Plant materials characterized by dense growth, which will form an effec-tive year-round screen shall be planted to form the screen. Screening shall consist of natural materials. To the extent practical, existing trees and vegetation shall be re-tained and used to satisfy the provisions of this section.

b.	Height.  Natural screening shall be at least 5 feet in height when planted. Height shall be measured from the finished grade.

12.8.4	Except for access driveways, sidewalks, and paths, only landscaping shall be allowed in the landscape buffer.

12.8.5	Parking Lot Interior Landscaping. Trees and shrubs shall also be preserved or planted in the interior of the parking lot (defined as the spaced enclosing the parking spaces, ma-neuvering areas, and aisles) so that such landscaped space shall compromise not less than 10% of the paved parking area. One tree per 10 parking spaces shall be required that are a minimum caliper size of 3 inches at the time of planting, as measured by the American Nursery and Landscape Association ANSI Z60.1 Standard (Nursery Stock). This interior landscaped area shall not include the landscaping provided in the frontage strip. Trees and shrubs shall be planted in the landscaped rounding between the end of a row of parking and the curved wedge-shaped spaces. Where the landscaping area is not large enough for a tree, shrubs and/or perennials shall be planted instead. Shrubs to be planted shall be of at least 2 to 2.5 feet in height. The distance from a shrub or other vegetation to a paved area shall be at least 2 feet. Landscaping that is less than 2 feet from the paved area shall not block the line of sight. Other unpaved areas on the lot shall be suitably landscaped with trees, grass, hedges, occasional trees, and flower beds or benches and ornamental structures.

12.8.6	Where soil conditions, lot shape, topography, architectural, or structural conditions make literal compliance with the terms of this Section 12.8 impracticable or infeasible, the Planning Board may approve a site plan showing alternative means of complying with the objectives of this Section 12.8, and may allow the use of ground cover and or-namental screening or buffers, as long as such action is in the public interest and not in-consistent with the intent and purpose of this Section 12.8. In these instances, the Plan-ning Board shall make detailed written findings of (1) those specific conditions that render literal compliance with the terms of this Section 12.8 impracticable or infeasible, (2) the specific nature of alternative means of complying with the terms of this Section 12.8, and (3) why and how such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purposes of this Section 12.8.

12.9	REQUIRED PARKING

12.9.1	The following required parking shall govern within the AOD for the uses listed in the Table of Required Parking for the AOD. Within the AOD, these requirements shall su-persede any contrary or inconsistent requirements in the Zoning Bylaw including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in Section 5.1.4 Required Parking Spaces Ta-ble 3. Except as set forth below, the parking requirements (Table 3) shall continue to apply to other uses allowed in the Single Residence B, General Residence, General Busi-ness, and Limited Manufacturing A.



12.9.2	Required Parking Table

TABLE 12 – TABLE OF REQUIRED PARKING
ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT


PRINCIPAL USE	
NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
RESIDENTIAL USES
Building containing three (3) dwelling units in combination with artist	1.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit plus 1 parking space per every 250 square feet of gross floor area of nonresidential space
       
EXEMPT AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Art Center	1 parking space per 3 occupants according to occu-pancy rate under the Massachusetts State Building Code, plus 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area for other space not used for assem-bly.
Art and Community Center	1 parking space per 3 occupants according to occu-pancy rate under the Massachusetts State Building Code, plus 1 parking space per 300 square feet of gross floor area for other space not used for assem-bly.

COMMERCIAL USES
Artist 	1 parking space per every 250 square feet of gross floor area
	
MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING USES
Specialty artistic manufacturing/
production, small	1 parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for each 3 employees on largest shift, whichever is greater
Specialty artistic manufacturing/
production	1 parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 1 parking space for each 3 employees on largest shift, whichever is greater

12.9.3	Alternative Parking. The Planning Board may grant a modification of any provision of this Section 12.9 provided that such waiver shall not cause substantial detriment to public safety. In granting a waiver, the Planning Board may require as a condition of approval the use of mitigating measures such as carpools, shuttles from an off-site lot, assigned employee parking spaces with reduced stall dimensions, or the designation of compact car parking spaces with reduced dimensions.  In these instances, the Planning Board shall make detailed written findings of (1) those specific conditions that render literal compliance with the terms of this subsection 5.1 impracticable or infeasible, (2) the specific nature of alternative means of complying with the terms of this subsection 5.1, and (3) why and how such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purposes of this subsection 12.9. 

12.10	MODIFICATION OF LANDSCAPING AND PARKING STANDARDS

Where soil conditions, lot shape, topography, architectural or structural conditions make literal compliance with the terms of Section 12.8 or Section 12.9 impracticable or infeasible, the Planning Board may approve a site plan showing alternative means of complying with the objectives of this Bylaw, and may allow the use of alternative land-scaping, buffers, or parking, provided it determines that such alternatives to be in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of this Bylaw. For any modification, the Planning Board shall make detailed written findings of:

1.	Specific conditions that render literal compliance with the terms of this Bylaw im-practicable or infeasible.

2.	The specific alternative means of complying with the terms of this Bylaw.

3.	An analysis of the manner in which the modification is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purposes of this Bylaw.

 
SECTION 13.0  MORATORIUM ON MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 
13.1:	HISTORY
By vote at the State election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth of Massa-chusetts approved a law regulating the cultivation, distribution, possession, and use of marijua-na for recreational purposes. The law provides that it is effective on December 15, 2016.

13.2:	PURPOSE	
This bylaw is designed to allow the Town of Dedham sufficient time to engage in a planning process to address the effects of Marijuana Establishments and related uses in the Town, and to enact bylaws and regulations, as necessary, in a manner consistent with sound land use and municipal planning goals and objectives.

Currently, Marijuana Establishments are not specifically addressed under the Zoning Bylaw. Regulations required to be promulgated by the State Cannabis Control Commission are ex-pected to provide guidance to the Town in regulation Marijuana Establishments newly author-ized. The regulation of recreational marijuana raises novel and complex legal, planning, and public safety issues, and the Town needs time to study and consider the regulation of Marijuana Establishments and address such novel and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact of the State regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation of Marijuana Establishments and other uses related to the regulation of recreational marijuana.

13.3:	DEFINITION
“Marijuana Establishment” shall mean a “marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, mari-juana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business,” as defined by Massachusetts law only.

13.4	MORATORIUM	
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or struc-tures for Marijuana Establishments and other uses related to recreational marijuana. The mora-torium shall be in effect through December 31, 2018, or six months from the date that final regulations are issued by the Cannabis Control Commission, whichever date is later, until such time as the Town adopts Zoning Bylaw amendments that regulate the uses subject to this mora-torium, whichever occurs earlier. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the Town, con-sider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding Marijuana Establishments and re-lated uses, and shall consider adopting new zoning bylaws to address the impact and operation of Marijuana Establishments and related uses.







	TABLES	
Table 1	Principal Use Regulations ……………………………………………………………………………...
?	Accessory Use Table, Residential ……………………………...………………………..
?	Accessory Use Table, Non-residential ……………………………...…………………	15
19
20
		
Table 2	Table of Dimensional Requirements ……………………………...……………………………....	28
		
Table 3	Dedham Parking Table ……………………………...……………………………...…………………..
?	Residential and Residential Care Uses ……………………………...………………..
?	Commercial, Business, and Office Uses ……………………………...………………..
?	Institutional Uses……………………………...………………..……………………………...
?	Automotive and Related Uses ……………………………...………………..…………...
?	Industrial and Warehouse Uses ……………………………...………………………….
?	Loading and Unloading Requirements ……………………………...………………..	37
37
37
39
40
40
41
		
Table 5	Multi-Family Table ……………………………...………………..……………………………...………	61
		
Table 6	Assisted Living Dimensional Requirements ……………………………...……………………	65
		
Table 7	Table of Dimensional Requirements – Senior Campus Housing ………………………	70
		
Table 8	Parking, Residential and Residential Care Uses ……………………………...………………	74
	Parking, Institutional Uses ……………………………...………………..……………………………	74
		
Table 9	Use Regulations, Wireless Communications ……………………………...……………………	94
		
Table 10	Table of Dimensional Requirements – Arts Overlay District ……………………………	136
		
Table 11	Table of Allowable Uses, Arts Overlay District ……………………………...………………...	137
		
Table 12	Required Parking Table, Arts Overlay District ……………………………...………………...	139
		

MAPS

Adult Use Overlay District
Aquifer Protection Overlay District
•	Bridge Street Wellfields
•	Fowl Meadow
Arts Overlay District
Historic Districts
Historic Preservation Overlay District
Medical Marijuana Overlay District
Wireless Overlay District (3)