CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 1986 
____________ 
1st Replacement Volume Published by Order of City Council, 1988 
2nd Replacement Volume Published by Order of City Council, 1997 
3rd Replacement Volume Published by Order of City Council, 1999 
4th Replacement Volume Published by Order of City Council, 2011 
____________ 
Adopted, January 28, 1986 
Effective, March 1, 1986 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Richard R. Silva 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jane P. Porter, President 
Robert D. McCormack, Vice President 
Everett W. Brown 
John A. Foote 
William T. Holmes 
Edward J. O'Reilly 
Joseph R. Orlando 
Norman C. Ross 
Dorothy M. Tolbot 
City Council 
____________ 
Kathleen A. Hirbour 
General Counsel 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS 
AT THE TIME OF REPLACEMENT, 2011 
____________ 
  
Carolyn A. Kirk 
Mayor 
____________ 
  
Jacqueline M. Hardy, Council President 
Ward 4 Councillor 
  
Sefatia A. Romeo Theken, Council Vice President 
Councillor at Large 
  
Joseph A. Ciolino 
Councillor at Large 
  
Steven A. Curcuru 
Ward 3 Councillor 
  
Paul M. McGeary 
Ward 1 Councillor 
  
Ann C. Mulcahey 
Ward 2 Councillor 
  
Bruce H. Tobey 
Councillor at Large 
  
Greg P. Verga 
Ward 5 Councillor 
  
Robert D. Whynott 
Councillor at Large 
City Council 
____________ 
  
Linda Thomas Lowe 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances and Charter of the City of Gloucester of a general and permanent nature. 
The source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1970 Code, as supplemented through January 16, 1974, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1970 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The first replacement volume of the Code was published in 1988 with the inclusion of ordinances subsequent to the 1986 recodification through Ordinance of Sept. 8, 1987. A second replacement volume was published in 1997 which included the Code as supplemented through Supplement No. 5 along with ordinances subsequent to the publication of the fifth supplement. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2 is numbered 2-1 and the third section of Chapter 6 is 6-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 3-2 and 3-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 3-2.1, 3-2.2 and 3-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgements 
The publication of this Code was under direct supervision of Deborah J. Heath, Editor of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Linda Lowe, City Clerk, and all other city officials who participated in the editorial process for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gloucester, Massachusetts. 2011. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Gloucester, Massachusetts; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Gloucester as Follows, To Wit: 
Section 1. The Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1—26 each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Gloucester, Massachusetts," which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before June 5, 1984, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect from and after March 1, 1986, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City adopted on final passage on or before June 5, 1984, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this Code. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision of the Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued pursuant thereto, shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) as provided in section 1-14 of the Code. 
Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and in section 1-14 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. Any ordinance adopted after June 5, 1985, which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if it amends or refers to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby shall become effective March 1, 1986. 
In City Council, January 28, 1986 (date) 
Passed first and second readings, enrolled and ordained. 
	/s/ Fred J. Kyrouz 
City Clerk 
	Approved by the Mayor: 
	/s/ Richard R. Silva 
 
2-10-1986 
 Date  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Gloucester Home Rule Charter, approved by a referendum held on November 4, 1975, and amended by referendum on November 8, 1983; November 5, 1985; and November 3, 1987. Those sections of the charter which were amended by a referendum are indicated by the presence of a history note in parentheses ( ) following each such section. The absence of such a note indicates that a section has remained unchanged since it was originally adopted. The original arrangement, catchlines and subcatchlines of the charter have been retained herein. Material which has been added for clarity is indicated by brackets [ ]. Obvious errors in spelling and punctuation have been corrected without notation. 
State Law reference— M.G.L.A. Const. Amend. art. II, § 2 et seq.; city charters generally, M.G.L.A. c. 43; home rule procedures, M.G.L.A. c. 43B. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION; FORM OF GOVERNMENT; POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Section 1-1. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the City of Gloucester, within the territorial limits established by law, shall continue to be a body corporate and politic under the name "City of Gloucester."  
Section 1-2. - Short Title. 
This instrument shall be known and may be cited as the Gloucester Home Rule Charter.  
Section 1-3. - Form of Government. 
The administration of the fiscal, prudential, and municipal affairs of the city, with the government thereof, shall be vested in an executive branch, to consist of the mayor, and a legislative branch, to consist of the city council. The executive branch shall never exercise any legislative power, and the legislative branch shall never exercise any executive power. Although each branch has had conferred upon it by State law various areas of responsibility, the legislative branch is also responsible for the enactment of laws for the city, while the administrative branch is charged with the duties of carrying those laws into effect, securing their due observance and conducting the daily business affairs of the city. 
State Law reference— Allocation of powers in city government, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 1.  
Section 1-4. - Powers of the City. 
Subject only to express limitations on the exercise of any power or function by a city in the constitution or statutes of the commonwealth, it is the intent and the purpose of the voters of Gloucester, through the adoption of the charter[,] to secure for the city all powers it is possible to secure under the constitution and statutes of the commonwealth, as fully and as completely as though each such power were specifically and individually enumerated herein. 
State Law reference— Limitation on local powers, M.G.L.A. Const. Amend. art. 2, 89; powers of cities and towns, M.G.L.A. c. 40.  
Section 1-5. - Construction. 
The powers of the city under the charter are to be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers is not intended to limit in any way the general powers of the city as stated in section 1-4.  
Section 1-6. - Intergovernmental Relations. 
Subject only to express limitations in the constitution or statutes of the commonwealth, the city may exercise any of its powers or perform any function, and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise, with the commonwealth or any political sub-division or agency thereof or the United States government or any agency thereof.  
ARTICLE 2. - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 
 
Section 2-1. - Composition; Eligibility; Election and Term. 
(a)  Composition — There shall be a city council consisting of nine members which shall exercise the legislative powers of the city. Four of these members, to be known as councilors at-large, are to be nominated and elected by and from the voters of the city, at-large. Five of the members, to be known as ward councilors, are to be nominated and elected by and from the voters of five city wards, one ward councilor to be elected from each such ward. 
(b)  Eligibility — Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of councilor. A ward councilor, notwithstanding his removal from one ward in the city to another during the term for which he was elected, may continue to serve and to perform his duties until the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(c)  Election and Term — The term of office for councilors shall be for two years beginning the first secular day of January following their election and until their successors are qualified. 
Code reference— City council generally, § 2-20 et seq.  
Section 2-2. - Presiding Officer. 
After a majority of the councilors-elect have been sworn they shall be called together by the city clerk, or in the absence of the city clerk, by the member present senior in years of service, who shall preside. The city council shall then elect, from among its members, by separate roll call votes, a president and a vice-president. A majority vote of the full council shall be necessary for such election. No other business shall be in order until such officers are elected. The president shall preside at all meetings of the city council, regulate the proceedings and decide all questions of order. He shall have such other powers and duties as may be provided by the charter, by ordinance or by vote of the city council. He shall have the same right to vote as any other city councilor. In the event of the absence or disability of the president[,] the vice-president shall act as president. 
State Law reference— Presiding officer of city legislative bodies, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 2.  
Section 2-3. - Compensation. 
The city council shall, by ordinance, establish an annual salary for its members. No ordinance establishing or increasing such salary shall be effective, however, unless it shall have been adopted by a two-thirds vote during the first eighteen months of the term for which councilors are elected and it provides that such salary is to be effective at the commencement of the term of office of the next city council to be elected. 
State Law reference— Municipal salaries, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 6A, c. 43, § 17A.  
Section 2-4. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointment after Expiration of Term — No city councilor shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment during his term and until two years following the expiration of the term for which he was elected. This provision shall not prohibit a city officer or city employee who has taken a leave of absence from such office or employment from resuming his duties as such following service as a city councilor. 
(b)  Interference in Administration — Except as may be otherwise authorized by the charter, no member of the city council, nor any committee of the city council, shall directly take part in the conduct of the administrative business of the city.  
Section 2-5. - Exercise of Powers; Quorum; Rules of Procedure. 
(a)  Exercise of Powers — Except as otherwise provided by law, by-laws or the charter, the legislative powers of the city council may be exercised in a manner determined by it. 
(b)  Quorum — A majority of the city council shall constitute a quorum but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full council shall be necessary to adopt any appropriation order. While a quorum is present, any other motion or measure may be adopted by a majority of not less than four affirmative votes, except as otherwise provided by the charter or by-law. 
(c)  Rules of Procedure — The city council shall from time to time establish rules for its proceedings. 
(i)  Regular meetings of the council shall be held at a time and place fixed by approved City Council Rules of Procedures. 
(ii)  Special meetings of the city council shall be held at the call of the mayor, as provided in section 3-8(b), on the call of the president of the city council, or on the call of any three or more members, by written notice delivered in hand, to the place of residence or business, or receipt confirming electronic mail of each member at least forty-eight hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays, in advance of the time set, and which includes notice of the subjects to be acted upon. 
(iii)  Except as may be otherwise authorized by law, all sessions of the city council, and any committee thereof, shall be open to the public and to the press. 
(iv)  Every matter which comes before the city council shall be put to a vote, the result of which shall be recorded. 
(v)  A full, accurate, up-to-date record of the proceedings of the city council shall be kept and shall be open to inspection by the public. It shall include a record of each roll call vote. 
(vi)  The city council shall, by ordinance, establish and maintain a list of specific kinds of council decisions, which will require an accompanying statement of purpose. The statement of purpose shall contain the reasons why the majority of the council voted, for or against. Such statements shall be entered upon the records of the city council, in full, for the purpose of providing guidance to future city councils regarding matters that might again be brought before the city council, matters that might be the subject of court action, or any other matter requiring an explanation of the intent of the city council when voting. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— City council to adopt rules for its proceedings, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 18(2).  
Section 2-6. - Council Access to Information. 
(a)  In General — The city council may make investigations into the affairs of the city and into the conduct and performance of any city agency, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of evidence. 
(b)  City Officers, Members of Multiple-Member Bodies, and City Employees — The city council may require any city officer, member of a multiple-member body or city employee to appear before it to give such information as the city council may require in relation to the municipal services, functions, powers or duties which are within the scope of responsibility of the said city officer, member of a multiple-member body or city employee. 
(c)  Mayor — The city council may at any time require the mayor to provide it with specific information on any matter within its jurisdiction. The city council may require the mayor to appear before it, in person, to respond to written questions presented to him. The mayor may bring with him on such occasions any assistant, department head, city officer or city employee he deems necessary to assist him in responding to the questions posed by the city council. The mayor shall not be required to answer any questions not relevant to those presented to him in advance and in writing. 
(d)  Notice Requirements — The city council shall give at least five days written notice to any person it shall require to appear before it under the provisions of this section. Notice under this section shall be by delivery in hand. 
(e)  Vote Required — All actions in section 2-6 shall require a two-thirds ( 2/3 's) vote of the full city council. 
(Ref. of 11-3-1987)  
Section 2-7. - City Clerk; City Auditor. 
(a)  Election — Not sooner than ninety days and no more than one hundred twenty days (approved 12/9/2002) following the date on which the city council has organized, it shall elect a city clerk and a city auditor to hold office for terms of two years and until their successors are qualified. The city council may remove either of said officials from office, for cause, before the expiration of their term by majority vote of the full city council. Any vacancies which may exist in said offices shall be filled by the city council for the balance of the unexpired term. The city clerk and auditor report to and are supervised by the city council. The assistant city clerk and assistant registrar of voters report to and are supervised by the city clerk. The assistant city auditor reports to and is supervised by the city auditor. 
(b)  City Clerk — The city clerk shall be the custodian of all records of the city, the keeper of vital statistics, and shall have such powers and duties with respect to the regulation and supervision of elections and the issuance of licenses as are provided by law. The city clerk may have such additional powers and duties as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(c)  City Auditor — The city auditor shall keep and have charge of the accounts of the city. He shall regularly audit the books and accounts of all city agencies and shall have such other powers and duties with respect to the regulation of the financial affairs of the city as are provided by law. The city auditor may have such additional powers and duties as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Code references— City clerk generally, § 2-60 et seq.; city auditor, § 2-100 et seq. 
State Law reference— Manner of election of city officers, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 3, c. 43, § 18; city clerks generally, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 12 et seq.; appointment and term of city clerks, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 18(3); auditors generally, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 48 et seq., c. 43, § 18.  
Section 2-8. - Council Staff. 
(a)  Clerk of the Council — The city clerk shall serve as clerk of the council. The clerk of the council shall give notice of all meetings of the city council to its members and to the public, keep the journal of its proceedings, and perform such other duties as may be assigned by the charter, by ordinance or by other vote of the city council. The city council shall, by ordinance, establish a salary schedule and a job description for the clerk of the council. 
Editor's note— There is no subsection (b) to this section in the present city charter.  
Section 2-9. - Council Standing Committees. 
(a)  Designation of Committees — There shall be three standing committees of the city council: 
(i)  A committee on budget and finance, to which may be referred by a simple majority vote of the full city council every matter which would involve an expenditure by the city. 
(ii)  A committee on ordinances and administration, to which may be referred by a simple majority vote of the full city council every matter which in the form of adoption is categorized an "ordinance" or the effect of which is of more than temporary significance, all matters the effect of which would be to alter the administrative structure of the city government and which shall have general oversight of the department of the city clerk. 
(iii)  A committee on planning and development, to which may be referred by a simple majority vote of the full city council all matters which affect land use, planning, zoning and other development of the city. 
(b)  Membership — Each committee of the city council shall consist of three members of the city council appointed by the city council president to serve for the term for which the city council is elected. Each member of the city council shall serve on at least one standing committee of the city council. 
(c)  Advisory Members — The standing committees of the city council may provide, by vote, for the appointment of voters of the city to serve as advisory members of the committee. Such advisory members, if appointed, shall have no power to vote. 
(d)  General Powers — The city council may delegate the powers available to it under section 2-6 to any of its standing committees. Each standing committee may, in accordance with such rules as may be adopted by the city council, hold a public hearing on any matter which is referred to it and shall, within a time fixed by council rule, report on each matter which has been referred to it, in writing, a recommendation and the reasons therefor. 
(Ref. of 11-3-1985; Ord. of 11-15-2011) 
Code reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees, § 2-400 et seq.  
Section 2-10. - Appointments to City Offices. 
(a)  Confirmation — The mayor shall submit to the city council the names of all persons he desires to appoint to any city office, as a department head or as a member of a multiple-member body, except a position which is covered by the state civil service law or except as otherwise provided by this charter. The city council shall refer all such names as are submitted to the standing committee on ordinances and administration which shall investigate all such candidates for confirmation and make a report with recommendations to the full city council not less than seven nor more than twenty-one days following such referral. If the city council has taken no other action, said appointments shall become effective on the thirtieth day following the date the name has been received by the city council. The provisions of section 2-11(c) shall not apply to this section. 
(b)  No un-elected appointee shall be appointed to more than one multiple member body, unless said board or commission is inter-related. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ref. of 11-5-1985) 
Code reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq.  
Section 2-11. - Procedures. 
(a)  In General — No measure shall be adopted on the date it is introduced, except in the case of special emergency involving the peace, health or the safety of the people or their property. Except as otherwise provided by the charter, every adopted measure shall be effective at the expiration of thirty-one days after adoption by the city council or at any later date specified therein. Measures not subject to referendum may become effective upon adoption. No ordinance shall be amended or repealed except by another ordinance adopted by the city council, or by the procedure for citizen initiative and referendum provided in article 9. 
(b)  Emergency Measures — An emergency measure shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency measure. A preamble which describes and declares that an emergency exists and which defines its nature in clear and specific terms shall first be separately voted upon and shall require the affirmative votes of two-thirds of the members of the full city council. Following such adoption of an emergency preamble the city council may, by a two-thirds vote, pass the measure with or without amendment at the meeting at which it was introduced. Emergency measures shall stand repealed on the sixty-first day following their adoption, unless a vote of the city council in conformity with the procedures for measures generally is passed extending it for a period not to exceed an additional sixty days, or an earlier date is specified in the measure. 
(c)  Charter Objection — On the first occasion that the question of adoption of any measure is put to the city council, except an emergency measure as defined in section 2-11(b), if a single member objects to the taking of the vote, the vote shall be postponed until the next meeting, regular or special. If when the matter is next brought before the city council for a vote four or more members object to the taking of a vote, the matter shall be further postponed for not less than an additional five days. This procedure shall not be used more than once for any measure notwithstanding any amendment to the original measure. 
(d)  Council Reconsideration — The clerk of the city council shall hold every measure adopted by the city council to the end of the next business day, with no exceptions, and if during said time notice of an intent to file a motion to reconsider the matter is filed with the clerk of the council by any member entitled to make such a motion, the measure shall be returned to the city council for further action. If no such statement of intent is filed with the clerk of the council he shall, at the end of that next business day forthwith present the matter to the mayor. 
(e)  Publication and Public Hearings Required — Every proposed ordinance or loan order, except any submitted in conformity with section 2-11(b), shall be published once in full in at least one local newspaper and in any additional manner as may be provided by ordinance or by law. Such publication shall also state the time, not less than seven days following such publication, and the place at which the city council, or a standing committee of the city council, will hold a public hearing on said proposed ordinance or loan order. 
(f)  Publication of Adopted Measures — After final adoption and approval by the mayor if required, all ordinances and loan orders and such other measures as the city council shall by ordinance direct, shall be published in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and/or by publication on the municipal website. 
(g)  Publication, Exceptions — If any measure required to be published in full by section 2-11(e) or (f) exceeds in length eight octavo pages of ordinary print, then in lieu of such publication, the same may be published in a booklet or pamphlet and made available for distribution to any person requesting the same at the office of the city clerk and provided that notice of such publication and a summary of the contents thereof shall be published as otherwise provided in the said sections. 
(h)  Information to be Given New Members — The president of the city council shall make available to each new member the minutes of the meetings for the four prior months and copies of any applicable laws, rules or regulations which govern the body. In addition, the president shall, within thirty days following any election of a new member, meet with the new member and provide such information and orientation to the duties of a city councilor as may be deemed necessary or desirable. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ref. of 11-3-1987; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Procedures for passage of ordinances, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 20 et seq.  
Section 2-12. - Delegation of Powers. 
The city council may delegate to one or more city agencies the powers vested in it by the laws of the commonwealth to grant and issue licenses and permits, and may regulate the granting and issuing of such licenses and permits by any such city agency, and may, in its discretion, rescind any such delegation without prejudice to any prior action which has been taken.  
Section 2-13. - Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Councilor at Large — If a vacancy in the office of councilor at-large shall occur the vacancy shall be filled by the candidate for the office of councilor at-large at the preceding city election who received the highest number of votes without being elected and provided such person is willing to serve. If a person who received such highest number of votes is not willing to serve the other candidates in descending order of number of votes received shall be offered the vacancy until one accepts the office. If no such candidate is available the city council shall, within thirty (30) days following the date on which the vacancy is declared to exist, elect a suitable person from among the voters of the city to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. The city clerk shall certify the said candidate to the office of councilor at-large to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(b)  Ward Councilor — If a vacancy in the office of ward councilor shall occur the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as provided for councilors at-large, provided that the candidate who is willing to serve shall have received at least thirty percent (30%) of the total number of votes cast for the office of ward councilor in the ward for which the vacancy exists. If no such candidate is available the city council shall, within the thirty (30) days following the date on which the vacancy is declared to exist, elect a suitable person from among the voters residing in the ward to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. The city clerk shall certify the said candidate to the office of ward councilor to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(c)  In General — Whenever a vacancy exists on the council which is not filled when the next election occurs, the person at the city election who is elected to the seat in which the vacancy exists shall forthwith be sworn and shall serve for the balance of the then unexpired term, in addition to the term for which he was elected. If the vacancy is in the office of councilor at-large, it shall be filled by the person receiving the highest number of votes for the office who is not then a member of the city council. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985)  
Section 2-14. - General Powers. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or the charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the city council which shall provide for their exercise and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law.  
ARTICLE 3. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 
 
Section 3-1. - Mayor; Qualifications; Term of Office; Compensation; Prohibitions. 
(a)  Mayor, Qualifications — There shall be a mayor, elected by and from the voters, who shall be the chief executive officer of the city. Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of mayor. The mayor shall devote his full time to the office, that is, he shall not hold any other elective public office, nor shall he actively engage in any other business, occupation or profession during his service as mayor. 
(b)  Term of Office — The term of office of the mayor shall be two years beginning on the first secular day of January following his election and until his successor is qualified. 
(c)  Compensation — The city council shall by ordinance establish an annual salary for the mayor. No ordinance establishing or increasing such salary shall be effective unless it shall have been adopted in the first eighteen months of the term for which councilors are elected and it provides that such salary is to be effective at the commencement of the next term of office of the mayor. 
(d)  Prohibition — No mayor shall hold any compensated appointive city office or city employment during his term and until two years following the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983) 
Code reference— Mayor generally, § 2-50 et seq. 
State Law reference— Compensation of mayor, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 6A; mayor prohibited from holding other compensated office, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 7.  
Section 3-2. - Executive Powers; Enforcement of Ordinances. 
The executive powers of the city shall be vested solely in the mayor, and may be exercised by him either personally or through the several city agencies under his general supervision and control. The mayor shall cause the laws, ordinances and orders for the government of the city to be enforced, and shall cause a record of all his official acts to be kept.  
Section 3-3. - Appointments by the Mayor. 
The mayor shall appoint all city officers, department heads and members of multiple-member bodies for whom no other method of appointment or selection is provided by the charter, excepting only officers serving under the school committee, officers appointed by state officials and persons serving under the city council. All such appointments made by the mayor shall be subject to review by the city council as provided in section 2-10. The appointments of the police chief and fire chief shall be governed by the Code of Ordinances sections 17-16 to 17-18 as amended September 2010 and by [Code of] Ordinances section 8-16 to 8-18 as amended January 2011. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Appointments of mayor subject to council approval, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 1.  
Section 3-4. - Certificate of Appointment. 
In making his appointments the mayor shall sign and file with the city clerk a certificate substantially in the following form: 
Certificate of Appointment 
I appoint (name of appointee) to the position of (name of office) and I certify that (s)he is a person especially fitted by education, training or experience to perform the duties of the office and to assume the responsibilities which will devolve upon him/her, and that I make this appointment solely in the interest of the City of Gloucester. 
(signed) ___________ 
    Mayor 
  
Section 3-5. - Removal of Officials. 
The mayor may remove any person appointed under section 3-3 by filing a written statement with the city clerk setting forth in detail the specific reason or reasons therefor, a copy of which shall be delivered in hand, or mailed to the last known address of the person whose removal is sought, who may make a written reply, which if (s)he desires, may be filed with the city clerk and be a public record; but no such reply shall affect the action taken by the mayor unless the mayor so determines.  
Section 3-6. - Temporary Appointments. 
Whenever a vacancy in an office appointed by the mayor occurs, whether by reason of death, disability, resignation, removal or otherwise, the mayor may appoint the head of another city office or agency, or a city officer or city employee, or some other person to perform the duties of the office for a period not to exceed three months. Such temporary appointment shall not be subject to review by the city council as provided in section 2-10. Whenever a vacancy continues beyond three months, the mayor may make a second three months appointment, but no temporary appointment shall be continued for more than six months unless authorized by the city council.  
Section 3-7. - Chief Administrative Officer. 
To aid him in performing the duties of his office the mayor shall, within sixty days following his inauguration, appoint, subject to the provisions of section 2-10, a chief administrative officer who is professionally qualified as a municipal administrator by virtue of education, training and previous experience. The chief administrative officer need not be a resident of the City of Gloucester. 
The chief administrative officer shall assist the mayor in the preparation of an annual operating budget for all city agencies, and shall, in cooperation with the city auditor, administer the operating budget throughout the year. He shall assist the mayor and the heads of all city agencies in the development of a capital outlay program and the preparation of a capital improvement budget. The mayor may delegate to the chief administrative officer any power or duty which he has under the charter other than the power to veto measures adopted by the city council or the power to appoint or to remove city officers, members of multiple-member bodies and department heads. Under the supervision of the mayor the chief administrative officer shall be specifically responsible for the following: 
(a)  Coordination and supervision of all city agencies; 
(b)  Submission of reports at such times as may be required; 
(c)  Installation and maintenance of financial management and record keeping systems; 
(d)  Conduct of a continuing study of the work of all city agencies and the preparation of management policies based on such studies; 
(e)  Preparation of policy programs and ordinance recommendations affecting the management of the city; 
(f)  Such other powers, duties and responsibilities as may be delegated to him by the mayor. 
The delegation of any power or duty by the mayor to the chief administrative officer may be terminated by the mayor, at will, but all acts of the chief administrative officer pursuant to such delegation prior to any such revocation by the mayor shall be and remain the acts of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Code reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq.  
Section 3-8. - Communications; Special Meetings. 
(a)  Communications to the City Council — Within six weeks following the start of each fiscal year the mayor shall submit to the city council, and make available for public distribution, a complete report on the financial and administrative activities of the city for the preceding fiscal year, as provided in section 7-13. He shall from time to time throughout the year, by written communications, keep the city council fully informed of the financial condition and administrative problems of the city and shall recommend to them such measures for their consideration as, in his judgment, the needs of the city require. 
(b)  Special Meetings of the City Council — The mayor may at any time call a special meeting of the city council, for any purpose, by causing a notice of such meeting to be delivered in hand, to the place of business or residence, or receipt confirming electronic mail of each member of the city council. Such notice shall, except in an emergency of which the mayor shall be the sole judge, be delivered at least forty-eight hours in advance of the time set and shall specify the purpose or purposes for which the meeting is to be held. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 3-9. - Approval of Mayor, Exceptions (Veto). 
Every measure relative to the affairs of the city adopted by the city council, except: 
(a)  measures relating to the internal affairs of the city council, 
(b)  memorial resolutions, 
(c)  emergency measures as defined in section 2-11(b), 
(d)  the budget, and 
(e)  zoning issues, 
shall be presented to the mayor for his approval. If the mayor does approve it, he shall signify his approval by signing it; if he does not approve it, he shall signify his disapproval by returning it with his objections, in writing to the city council. The city council shall enter the objections of the mayor upon its records and shall, forthwith reconsider such measure. If, on such reconsideration, two-thirds of the full council agree to pass the measure, it shall be considered approved. If any measure is not returned by the mayor within ten days following the day it is presented to him, it shall be considered approved. A filing with the clerk of the council shall be considered a return by the mayor to the city council. All votes taken on such returns by the mayor shall be by call of the roll. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 4.  
Section 3-10. - Temporary Absence of the Mayor. 
(a)  Acting Mayor — Whenever, by reason of sickness, absence from the city or other cause, the mayor shall be unable to perform the duties of his office for a period of three successive working days or more, the president of the city council shall be the acting mayor. In the event of the absence or disability of the president of the city council, the vice-president shall serve. In the event that the president or vice-president is unable to serve, a member of the city council in descending order of seniority on the council shall serve. 
(b)  Powers of Acting Mayor — The acting mayor shall have all of the powers of the mayor except that he shall not make any permanent appointment or removal to or from any office unless the disability of the mayor shall have continued for more than sixty days, nor shall he approve or disapprove of any measure passed by the city council unless the time within which the mayor must act would expire before the return of the mayor. During any period in which the city council president, or vice president, is serving as acting mayor he shall not vote as a member of the city council. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 39, § 5, c. 43, § 26.  
Section 3-11. - Vacancy in Office of Mayor. 
(a)  Special Election — If a vacancy in the office of mayor occurs in the first year of the term for which the mayor is elected, whether by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, incapacity or otherwise the city council shall forthwith order a special election to be held within ninety days following the date the vacancy is created, to fill such vacancy for the balance of the then unexpired term. 
(b)  Council Election — If a vacancy in the office of mayor occurs in the second year of the term for which the mayor is elected, whether by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, incapacity or otherwise, the clerk of the council shall forthwith call a special meeting of the city council, and the city council shall, by majority vote, taken by roll call, elect one of its members for the balance of the unexpired term. If the city council fails to elect one of its members as mayor within fourteen days of the date of the meeting called by the clerk of the council the president of the council shall become mayor. Upon the election and qualification of any member of the city council as mayor, under this section, a vacancy shall exist in his seat on the council which shall be filled in the manner provided in section 2-13. 
(c)  Powers, Term of Office — The mayor elected under section 3-11(a) or (b) shall have all the powers of the mayor. He shall serve for the balance of the term unexpired at the time of his election to the office. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 26.  
ARTICLE 4. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code reference— School committee generally, § 18-20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to school committees, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 31 et seq. 
 
Section 4-1. - Composition; Eligibility; Election and Term. 
(a)  Composition — There shall be a school committee consisting of seven members which shall exercise control and management of the public schools of the city. Six of these members, who shall be known as school committee members, shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters at-large. The mayor shall serve as the seventh member of the school committee, with full power to vote. 
(b)  Eligibility — Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of school committee member. 
(c)  Election and Term — The term of office of school committee members shall be for two years, beginning on the first secular day of January following their election and until their successors are qualified. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 31.  
Section 4-2. - Officers of the School Committee. 
After a majority of the school committee members elect have been sworn the school committee shall be called together by the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor by the member present senior in years of service, who shall preside. The school committee shall then elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary, from among its members. The vice-chairman shall preside at all meetings of the school committee in the absence of the chairman and may perform such other duties as may be prescribed by vote of the school committee. The secretary shall keep the records of the committee. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Code reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq.  
Section 4-3. - General Powers and Duties. 
The school committee shall have all of the powers and duties which school committees are given under the general laws. and may have such additional powers and duties as the city council may, from time to time, assign, by ordinance. 
The school committee shall make all reasonable rules and regulations for the management of the public schools of the city and for conducting the business of the school committee as may be deemed necessary or desirable. 
To the extent permitted by State Law (approved 12/9/2002) the powers of the school committee shall include, but need not be limited to the following: 
(a)  To appoint a superintendent of schools, for a term not to exceed three years, who shall be charged with the day to day administration of the school system, subject to policy directives issued by the school committee; 
(b)  To appoint the school business administrator; 
State Law reference— M.G.L. c. 71, § 41. 
(c)  To appoint the director of special education of pupil personnel; 
State Law reference— M.G.L.A. c. 71B, § 3A. 
(d)  Establish and appoint an assistant or associate superintendent upon the recommendation of the superintendent; 
State Law reference— M.G.L.A. c. 71, § 59. 
(e)  To appoint school physicians and registered nurses; 
State Law reference— M.G.L.A. c. 71, § 53. 
(f)  To appoint one or more supervisors of attendance; 
State Law reference— M.G.L.A. c. 76, § 19. 
(g)  Subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of Section 4-3 shall require a majority vote of the full School Committee. 
The school committee shall furnish all school buildings with proper fixtures, furnishings and equipment and shall provide ordinary maintenance of all school buildings and grounds, provided however, that the city council may, by ordinance, provide for the establishment of a centralized purchasing system, which may provide for the inclusion of purchases made under authority of the school committee, and it may also provide, by ordinance, for the creation of a centralized maintenance department which may include maintenance of school buildings and grounds. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— School committee to appoint superintendent of schools, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 32; powers and duties of school committee, M.G.L.A. c. 17 et seq.  
Section 4-4. - Prohibitions. 
No school committee member, other than the mayor, shall hold any other city office or city employment under the jurisdiction of the school committee for which a salary or other emolument is payable from the city treasury while serving as a member of the school committee, or, until two years after the term for which he was elected has expired. This provision shall not prevent a person who has taken a leave of absence from such a position from returning to the same position after his term of office on the school committee has expired.  
Section 4-5. - Filling of Vacancies. 
If a vacancy in the office of school committee member shall occur, the vacancy shall be filled by the candidate for the office of school committee member at the preceding city election who received the highest number of votes without being elected and provided such person is willing to serve. If a person who received such highest number of votes is not willing to serve, the other candidates in descending order of number of votes received shall be offered the vacancy until one accepts the office. If no such candidate is available, the school committee shall, within thirty (30) days following the date on which the vacancy is declared to exist, elect a suitable person from among the voters of the city to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. The city clerk shall certify the said candidate to the office of school committee member to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. 
Whenever a vacancy exists on the school committee which is not filled when the next election occurs, it shall be filled by the person receiving the highest number of votes for the office of school committee member. After said committee [member] is certified as elected by the city clerk he shall forthwith be sworn in and shall serve for the balance of the then unexpired term, in addition to the term for which he was elected. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Filling vacancies on school committee, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 36.  
Section 4-6. - Exercise of Powers; Quorum; Rules of Procedure. 
(a)  Exercise of Powers — Except as otherwise provided by law or by the charter, the powers of the school committee may be exercised in the manner determined by it. 
(b)  Quorum — A majority of the school committee shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full committee shall be necessary to adopt any financial measure. Except as otherwise provided by law or by the charter any other motion or measure may be adopted by a majority vote of those present. 
(c)  Rules of Procedure — The school committee may from time to time adopt rules governing its proceedings. 
(i)  Regular meetings of the school committee shall be held at a time and place fixed by such rules. 
(ii)  Special meetings of the school committee shall be held on the call of the chair person of the school committee, or in his absence by the vice-chair person, acting as such, or by any two or more members. Notice of such meetings shall be by receipt confirming electronic mail, or delivery in hand to the place of residence or business of each member at least forty-eight hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays, in advance of the time set, except in case of emergency, of which the chairman of the school committee shall be the sole judge, when a lesser period shall suffice. 
(iii)  Except as may be otherwise authorized by law, all sessions of the school committee, and any subcommittee thereof, shall be open to the public and to the press. 
(iv)  A full, accurate, up-to-date record of the proceedings of the school committee shall be kept and shall be open to inspection by the public. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 4-7. - School Committee Standing Committees. 
(a)  Designation of Committees — There shall be at least three standing committees of the school committee: 
(i)  A committee on building and finance, to which may be referred by a simple majority vote of the school committee on matters which would involve school buildings, grounds and expenditures by the school department and related policies; 
(ii)  A committee on personnel, to which may be referred by a simple majority vote of the school committee matters which concern collective bargaining, contract negotiations, and benefits and related policies; 
(iii)  A committee on programs, to which may be referred by a simple majority vote of the school committee all matters which affect educational goals, and policies. 
(b)  Membership — Each committee of the school committee shall consist of three members of the school committee appointed by the school committee chair to serve for the term for which the school committee is elected. Each member of the school committee shall serve on at least one standing committee of the school committee. 
(c)  Advisory Members — The standing committees of the school committee may provide, by vote, for the appointment of voters of the city to serve as advisory members of the committee. Such advisory members, if appointed, shall have no power to vote. 
(d)  General Powers — The school committee may delegate the powers available to it under section 4-11 to any of its standing committees. Each standing committee may, in accordance with such rules as may be adopted by the school committee, hold a public hearing on any matter which is referred to it and shall, within a time fixed by school committee rule, report on each matter which has been referred to it, in writing, a recommendation and the reasons therefore. The school committee may create additional standing committees if needed. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 11, 2011, renumbered the former §§ 4-7—4-10 as §§ 4-8—4-11 and enacted a new § 4-7 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Section 4-8. - Budget Hearing. 
At least thirty days before the meeting at which the school committee is to vote on the budget request which it will submit to the mayor for inclusion in the budget he is required to submit to the city council, the school committee shall cause to be published in a local newspaper a general summary of its proposed budget. The summary shall indicate specifically areas of increase from the present budget, if any, and the reasons for such increases and a notice stating (1) the times and places where complete copies of the budget will be available for examination by the public and (2) the date, time and place, not less than seven nor more than fifteen days following such publication when a public hearing will be held by the school committee on the proposed budget. 
The action of the school committee in adopting the budget, following the public hearing, shall be summarized and the results of a roll call vote taken on each amendment offered to the proposed budget shall be duly recorded. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Code reference— Finance generally, § 2-560 et seq. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4-7.  
Section 4-9. - Mayor to be Coordinator. 
The mayor shall be responsible for the coordination of the activities of the school department with the activities of all other municipal agencies. He shall transmit all requests of the school committee which require action by the city council to the city council, and he shall, at the request of the city council, provide them with such information concerning such requests as may be deemed either necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4-7.  
Section 4-10. - Emergency Measures. 
An emergency measure shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency measure. A preamble which describes and declares that an emergency exists and which defines its nature in clear and specific terms shall first be separately voted upon and shall require the affirmative votes of two-thirds ( 2/3 rd's) of the members of the school committee. Following such adoption of an emergency preamble the school committee may, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 rd's) vote, pass the measure with or without amendment at the meeting at which it is introduced. Emergency measures shall stand repealed on the sixty-first day following their adoption, unless an earlier date is specified in the measure or unless a second emergency measure adopted in conformity with this section is passed extending it, or a measure adopted in conformity with the procedures used for measures generally [is] passed extending it. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4-7.  
Section 4-11. - School Committee Access to Information. 
(a)  In General — The school committee may make investigations into the affairs of the school system and into the conduct and performance of any agency under their jurisdiction, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of evidence. 
(b)  City Officers, Member of Multiple-Member Bodies and City Employees — The school committee may require any city officer, member of a multiple-member body or city employee to appear before it to give such information as the school committee may require in relation to the municipal services, functions, powers or duties which are within the scope of responsibility of the said city officer, member of a multiple-member body or city employee. 
(c)  Mayor — In matters under its jurisdiction the school committee may at any time require the mayor to provide it with specific information on any matter within its jurisdiction. The school committee may require the mayor to appear before it, in person, to respond to written questions presented to him. The mayor may bring with him on such occasions any assistant, department head, city officer or city employee he deems necessary to assist him in responding to the questions posed by the school committee. The mayor shall not be required to answer any questions not relevant to those presented to him in advance and in writing. 
(d)  Notice Requirements — The school committee shall give at least five days written notice to any person it shall require to appear before it under the provisions of this section. Notice under this section shall be by delivery in hand. 
(e)  Vote Required — All actions in section 4-11 shall require a majority vote of the full school committee. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 4-7.  
ARTICLE 5. - PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Code reference— Planning generally, ch. 16. 
Editor's note— Prior to its amendment approved at referendum November 5, 1985, article 5, §§ 5-1—5-3, pertained to the comprehensive plan, as derived from the original Charter approved on November 4, 1975. 
 
Section 5-1. - The Planning Process. 
(a)  Overview — Planning for the city shall be considered an on going process where economic development, environmental protection, and preservation of the city's heritage and neighborhood identity are balanced through citizen involvement and professional guidance. 
(b)  Community Development Plan — The planning board shall prepare a community development plan as authorized by MGL chapter 41, section 81-D. Said plan shall set forth community development land use and development in accordance with applicable statutes and state laws. The mayor and city council shall be provided with copies of the community development plan for their review and consideration. 
(c)  Land Use and Development Regulations — In accordance with applicable provisions of the general laws, the city council may, by ordinance, adopt land use and development regulations, including, but not limited to, an official map and zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Capital Improvement Program — A capital improvement program shall be prepared for the mayor's review and approval by the community development department with the advice of the planning board and the capital improvements advisory board. The capital improvement program shall set forth the schedule for land acquisition, utility expansion or replacement, and major building projects for the next five years. The program shall include an explanation and cost projection for each item as well as expected funding sources for each item scheduled for the current year. In the course of preparing the capital improvement program, the community development department shall contact all city agencies and departments to solicit project proposals. The mayor shall annually submit the updated capital improvement program to the city council for its review and recommendation. 
(e)  Actions by Mayor, City Council and Multi-Member Bodies — The mayor, city council and all multi-member bodies shall seek to ensure that their actions and decisions are consistent with the community development plan, the official map, and the capital improvements program. If any such office, agency or board deems it essential to take an inconsistent action or decision, it shall transmit to the planning board a statement in writing, explaining the necessity, prior to the taking of the action or decision. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 5-2. - Planning Board. 
(a)  Authority and Purpose — The planning board, authorized and formed pursuant to MGL chapter 41, sections 81A—81J, shall be the city's primary agency responsible for the establishment of planning and community development policy. In addition to its statutory responsibilities, the planning board shall formulate policies which guide land use and the development of municipal facilities, and educate the public and other multi-member bodies with respect to those policies. 
(b)  Relationship to Mayor, City Council and Community Development Department — The planning board, on its own initiative, or as requested by the mayor or city council, shall study issues or projects related to the development of the city and present its findings and recommendations to the mayor or city council. The planning board and community development department shall work cooperatively on all such studies. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985)  
Section 5-3. - Community Development Department. 
(a)  Purpose — There shall be established a community development department responsible for coordinating the physical growth and economic development of the city as well as the development of municipal facilities. 
(b)  Structure — The community development department shall consist of several divisions, one of which shall be the planning division, to be headed by a professional city planner. 
(c)  Responsibilities — The community development department shall: 
(i)  Advise the mayor on all matters affecting the development of the city; 
(ii)  Formulate and recommend to the mayor and planning board specific measures for the development of the city; 
(iii)  Review and make recommendations to the city council regarding measures considered by it which affect the development of the city; 
(iv)  Assist the planning board in the exercise of its responsibilities and in connection therewith to provide all necessary staff assistance; 
(v)  Assist other multi-member bodies which are involved with the physical development of the city or development of municipal facilities; 
(vi)  Maintain an inventory of all city-owned real property, rights-of-way, town landings, water bodies, water courses, and water ways, a record of the use to which each is being put and a record of the city agency responsible for the management of it; and said inventory shall be updated annually and made available electronically and by paper; 
(vii)  Assist with the preparation of the mayor's capital improvement program; and 
(viii)  Exercise such other powers, duties and responsibilities as may be provided for by both the Gloucester Code of Ordinances and the Gloucester Zoning Ordinances. 
(d)  Community Development Director — The community development department shall be managed by a director of community development who shall be appointed by the mayor, after review and recommendation by the planning board, and confirmed by the city council. 
The community development director shall hold an advanced degree in planning or public administration and have a minimum of six years increasingly responsible experience in municipal planning, community development or management. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 5-4. - Designer Selection Committee. 
(a)  Composition, Mode of Selection, Term of Office — There shall be a designer selection committee which shall consist of three persons appointed by the mayor for each new project. In making his appointments to the committee the mayor shall seek to assure representation from as many of the following areas as is possible: architecture, landscape architecture, construction industry, art and finance. 
(b)  Powers and Duties — Whenever an architect, or designer, is to be engaged by the city for any reason the designer selection committee shall be consulted and shall make the selection. All designers and architects in charge of a project shall be registered. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985)  
Section 5-5. - City Building Committee. 
(a)  Composition, Mode of Selection, Term of Office — Whenever an architect, or designer, is engaged by the city a city building committee shall be established for that project which shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor for terms of three years each so arranged that the term of office of as nearly an equal number as is possible shall expire each year, provided however, that upon the completion of any project for which a committee is appointed under this section the terms of all members shall be terminated and the committee dissolved. In making his appointments to the committee the mayor shall assure representation from the following fields: the construction industry, the building trades, the municipal agency which will be responsible for the facility upon its completion, a person familiar with the use of such facilities in general, and three representatives of the public at-large. 
(b)  Powers and Duties — The committee shall be the representative of the city in all dealings with the architect, or others. The dealings of the Committee are subject to the pertinent authority of the mayor and chief procurement officer as provided elsewhere in the Charter and statutes. The authority of the Committee shall include but not be limited to the following: preparation of all bidding documents; supervision of public bidding process; award of contract to successful bidder; compliance with the program and time requirements of the city; evaluation of the quality, appropriateness and functional attributes of the architect's solution or proposal; periodic meetings with the architect and builder to assure compliance as the project moves forward; review of all change orders during the construction phase; and all other powers and duties as are necessary and appropriate. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
ARTICLE 6. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Code reference— Finance generally, § 2-560 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal finance, M.G.L.A. c. 44. 
 
Section 6-1. - Submission of Budget, Budget Summary. 
Within the period prescribed by state statute, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year which shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year, an accompanying budget message, and supporting documents. 
The mayor's summary shall explain the budget for all city agencies both in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current fiscal year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues, together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the city's debt position, and include such other pertinent material as the mayor deems desirable or the city council may reasonably require. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Submission of budget to city council, M.G.L.A. c. 44, § 32.  
Section 6-2. - Action on the Budget. 
(a)  Public Hearing — The city council shall, within seven days following its receipt of the proposed budget, publish in one or more local newspapers the general summary of the proposed budget as submitted by the mayor and a notice stating: (1) the times and places where copies of the proposed budget are available for inspection by the public, and (2) the date, time, and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, when a public hearing on said proposed budget will be held by the city council or a standing committee of the city council. 
(b)  Adoption — The city council shall adopt the budget, with or without amendments, within forty-five days following the day the budget is received by it. In amending the budget, the city council may delete or decrease any programs or amounts except expenditures required by law or for debt service. If the city council fails to take action with respect to any item in the budget within forty-five days after receipt of the budget, such amount shall, without any action by the city council, become a part of the appropriations for the year and be available for the purposes specified. 
(c)  Publication — Within forty-five days of adoption a detailed line-item budget shall be published electronically. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Procedures for approval, rejection or alteration of budget, M.G.L.A. c. 44, § 32.  
Section 6-3. - Independent Audit. 
At least once in every two years an outside audit of the books and accounts of the city shall be made. In the event that the commonwealth shall fail in any such period to provide for such an audit to be conducted, within sixty days following the date a written request for them to do so is made by the city council, the city council shall provide for such an audit to be made by a certified public accountant, or firm of such accountants, who have no personal interests, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. 
State Law reference— Municipal auditing, M.G.L.A. c. 44, § 35 et seq.  
ARTICLE 7. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Code reference— Administration generally, ch. 2. 
 
Section 7-1. - Reorganization Plans by City Council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or the charter, the city council may by ordinance, reorganize, consolidate, or abolish any existing city agency in whole or in part, establish new city agencies, and prescribe the functions of any city agency. All city agencies under the direction and supervision of the mayor shall be headed and administered by officers appointed by him.  
Section 7-2. - Reorganization Plans by Mayor. 
(a)  Submission — The mayor may, from time to time, prepare and submit to the city council reorganization plans which may, subject to applicable law and the charter, reorganize, consolidate, or abolish any city agency, in whole or in part, or establish new city agencies, as he deems necessary or expedient. Such reorganization plans shall be accompanied by an explanatory message when submitted. 
(b)  Adoption — Every such reorganization plan shall, upon receipt by the clerk of the council, be referred to an appropriate standing committee of the city council. The city council shall, not more than forty-five days later, hold a public hearing on the matter and the committee to which it was referred shall, within thirty days following such hearing, issue a report stating either that it approves or that it disapproves of the plan. A reorganization plan shall become effective one hundred twenty days after the date it is received by the city council unless the city council has prior to that date, voted to disapprove the reorganization plan. A reorganization plan presented by the mayor to the city council under this section, may not be amended by it, but shall either be approved or rejected as submitted and shall not be subject to the objection as provided in section 2-11(c). 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 7-3. - Publication of Reorganization Plan. 
An up-to-date record of any reorganization plan under this article shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk and copies of all such plans shall be included as an appendix in any publication of the ordinances of the city.  
Section 7-4. - Multiple-Member Bodies, Composition, Term of Office. 
Except as otherwise directed by law, all multiple-member bodies shall consist of three or more members appointed for terms of three years each, so arranged that the term of one third of the members, or as nearly that number as may be, shall expire each year. 
Code reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees generally, § 2-400 et seq.  
Section 7-5. - Expiration of Terms. 
Every appointment to city office shall begin on the fifteenth day of February for the term specified in the charter, or by ordinance, and shall continue until a successor is chosen and qualified, but in no case longer than six months when the office shall be declared vacant. 
(Ref. of 11-3-1987)  
Section 7-6. - Notice of the Expiration of Terms. 
(a)  Multiple-Member Bodies — Whenever a vacancy occurs on a multiple-member body, whether because of a death, a resignation, removal from the city or the pending expiration of a term for which a person has been appointed public notice of the vacancy or pending expiration of the term shall be given in the following manner: 
(i)  By publication in a local newspaper or city's website, by title, length of term, brief description of duties and a general indication of the qualities or attributes desired of candidates. Such notice shall also state the time within which persons who desire to be considered for appointment to such offices shall file a statement of interest, with whom, and shall indicate the form on which such application should be made. 
(ii)  A copy of all such notices shall be posted in one or more public places within the city. 
(iii)  At least twice a year a list containing all of the information in (i) above shall be sent to each organization in the city which has filed its name and mail address with the city clerk, and a request in writing, to receive such information. 
(b)  City Office — Whenever a vacancy occurs in a city office, but not including the expiration of a fixed term of office when re-appointment of the incumbent is to be made, notice of the vacancy shall be given in the manner provided in (a)(i) and (ii) above and by publication in appropriate professional newsletters, journals and other publications. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 7-7. - Information to be Given New Appointees. 
In order to acquaint new members of multiple-member bodies with the work which will come before them, the chairman of each such body shall make available to each new member, the minutes of the meetings for the two prior years and copies of any applicable laws, rules or regulations governing the body. In addition, the chairman shall, within thirty days following any new appointment, meet with the new member and provide such orientation to the duties and responsibilities as may be deemed necessary or desirable.  
Section 7-8. - Applications to be Public; Exceptions. 
All applications for appointment to any city office which constitutes a department head shall be open to inspection by the public. All such applications shall be kept in a record book, in the office of the city clerk, for a period of one year from the date of filing, provided however, if any applicant requests that his application be kept confidential it shall be so kept and a copy shall not be made available for public inspection. The mayor, and any other official who by reason of his public office or employment becomes aware of such confidential applications, shall respect the request of the applicant and shall not in any way breach the confidentiality requested.  
Section 7-9. - Meetings with City Council. 
The city council may, at least once during its term of office, hold a joint meeting with multiple-member bodies of the city for the purpose of sharing information and concerns. Where appropriate, the city council may meet with two or more multiple-member bodies which deal with the same general subject matter, at one meeting. The city council may delegate this responsibility to one or more of its standing committees. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 7-10. - Relations with Standing Council Committees. 
Minutes of all meetings of all multiple-member bodies shall be filed with the clerk of the city council. The clerk of the city council shall keep the city council informed of the receipt of all such minutes by noting on the agendas for all meetings of the city council, the minutes of multiple-member bodies received in the period since the previous agenda was prepared. 
The city council may assign general oversight of multiple-member bodies to an appropriate standing committee of the city council in order to effect close coordination and liaison between such multiple-member bodies and the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 7-11. - Political Activity. 
Any city officer, member of a multiple-member body or city employee may, in his capacity as a private citizen, become involved in a local campaign for the election of a candidate to any city office or a campaign in favor of or in opposition to any other local issue which is to go before the voters of the city or the members of the city council, provided however, that personal participation by such persons shall not be made while actively engaged in his municipal duties and further, that no use whatsoever is made of the facilities, or the title or other description by which the city office, or multiple-member body or city employment which they hold, is known.  
Section 7-12. - Management Audits. 
(a)  In General — A complete management audit of each city agency shall be made at least once every eight years in order to accomplish the following purposes: 
(i)  To identify any areas which hinder or prevent the city agency from performing its assigned responsibilities, goals or objectives and to offer suggestions for the removal of such obstacles and to suggest ways in which the responsibilities, goals or objectives might better be met; 
(ii)  To evaluate the adequacy of management practices being utilized in the agency with respect to fiscal controls and use of available personnel and equipment; 
(iii)  To suggest specific ways and means by which the functions and services of the agency might be improved. 
(b)  Elements to be Considered — Each such management audit shall include, but need not be limited to, a consideration of the following: 
(i)  Organization, staffing and manpower; 
(ii)  Adequacy of financial controls; 
(iii)  Facilities and equipment; 
(iv)  Goal setting, long and short range; 
(v)  Procurement practices; 
(vi)  Overtime policies; 
(vii)  Cost companions with other municipalities and comparable private enterprise activities. 
(c)  Organization of Reports — Each management audit shall consist of the following parts: 
(i)  Introduction — A brief explanation of methods used; 
(ii)  Scope — A statement of the extent of the examination made; 
(iii)  Major Contacts — A listing of the names of all persons interviewed in the conduct of the audit and an outline of the procedures used; 
(iv)  Findings — Details of the practices found during the audit, which in the opinion of the audit team, require modification or other change in order to strengthen and improve the agency and its performance; 
(v)  Recommendations — Specific suggestions for action either by the agency through changes in its own internal policies or requiring action by the city council, based upon specific findings made. 
(d)  Administration — The city council shall be responsible for the conduct of all management audits under this section. It shall award all contracts for such audits and shall, through its standing committee on ordinances and city administration, oversee the conduct of all such audits and the implementation of recommendations made therein. The city council may delegate the details of such overview to the city auditor or other designee who shall keep them fully informed of the implementation of the changes suggested in such audit reports by the city agencies concerned.  
Section 7-13. - Annual Report of the City. 
(a)  In General — An annual report which contains a general summary of the activity of all city agencies shall be published. The annual report shall contain reports by the mayor, the city treasurer, city council, the city auditor, the school committee, and such other officers and multiple-member bodies as may be required by ordinance to provide such reports. The annual report may be published in a local newspaper or on city's website, for the convenience of the inhabitants, and additional copies shall be made available in the office of the city clerk for distribution upon request. 
(b)  Application Forms to be Included — A form shall be provided in each annual report upon which voters of the city may make application for appointment as a member of a multiple-member body of the city, which may become vacant during the ensuing year. All such applications shall be retained for a period of three years from their receipt. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Annual reports, M.G.L.A. c. 40, § 49.  
Section 7-14. - Loss of Office, Excessive Absence. 
If any person who is appointed to serve as a member of a multiple-member body shall fail to attend six or more consecutive meetings of the body or more than half of the meetings held in any one calendar year, the mayor shall, after at least seven days written notice of the mayor's intent to do so delivered to the member's place of residence, declare his place to be vacant. In assisting the mayor in his decision, the chairman of the multiple-member body shall provide the mayor with the attendance record of the prior 12 months and any other information that is needed or desired. 
(Ref. of 11-3-1987)  
Section 7-15. - Personnel Practices. 
(a)  Merit Principle — All appointments and promotions of city officers, members of multiple-member bodies and city employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination or other evidence of competence and suitability. 
(b)  Civil Service Probationary Period — Not less than thirty days before the expiration of any probationary period in which a city employee is serving the immediate supervisor of such employee shall file a written report with a recommendation concerning such probationary employee attaining permanent status with the appointing authority and the mayor. Such report shall be signed by the appointing authority and the mayor and be retained in the personnel file of such employee, and a copy shall be made available to the said employee. 
(c)  Personnel Report — The mayor shall annually together, with the submission of the fiscal year budget, file with the city council standing committee on ordinances and administration, a report listing all persons in the employ of the city and their status as such employee whether regular civil service, provisional civil service or not subject to civil service as the case may be and the date on which their employment by the city commenced in such position. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
Code reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq. 
State Law reference— Civil service, M.G.L.A. c. 31.  
Section 7-16. - Director of Public Works. 
The director of public works shall be responsible for the supervision of all public works activities of the city, provided however, that the following powers and duties relating to public works shall be exercised in the manner hereinafter indicated: 
(a)  Any rate, fee or other charge shall be referred by the director of public works to the mayor for his review. The mayor shall file a notice with the city council of any change in rates, fees or other charges which is proposed and no such rate, fee or other charge shall be effective until it has been approved by the city council or more than ninety days following the filing of notice with the city council has elapsed without action by the city council; 
(b)  All rules and regulations regarding the use of public beaches, parks, playgrounds and other municipal facilities shall be referred by the director of public works to the mayor for his review. The mayor shall file a notice of such proposed rules and regulations with the city council and no such rule or regulation shall become effective until it has been approved by the city council or more than ninety days following the filing of notice with the city council has elapsed without action by the city council. 
Code reference— Department of public works generally, § 2-280 et seq.  
Sections 7-17, 7-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former §§ 7-17 and 7-18, designer selection committee and city building committee, have been replaced by §§ 5-4 and 5-5, respectively, of this charter, added by referendum of November 5, 1985.  
Section 7-19. - Reports of the City Treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall, at least semi-annually, file with the city council a report which contains a detailed listing of all banks, trust companies and other depositories where city funds were held on deposit, whether time deposits or demand deposits, the length of time such funds were so held, the interest if any, earned on such deposits and the average daily balance for the period reported on held in each such depository. Said report shall also contain a listing of all other investments made by the city treasurer within the period covered by the report. 
Code reference— City treasurer generally, § 2-70 et seq.  
Section 7-20. - City Water Systems Ownership. 
The City of Gloucester's water supply and distribution shall be owned by the city and shall not be sold, leased or otherwise transferred unless and until the city council, under section 9-5 ("Submission of Proposed Measure to Voters"), submits the question of sale, lease or transfer of ownership to a referendum vote of the voters for adoption or rejection; provided, however that the sale, lease or transfer of the water supply and distributions systems shall require at least two-thirds of the votes on such question to have approved such sale, lease or transfer. (Amended by Chapter 92 of the Acts of 2011) 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
ARTICLE 8. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Code reference— Elections generally, ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Election of officers, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 1 et seq.; method of electing officers, M.G.L.A. c. 43B, § 18; elections generally, M.G.L.A. cs. 50—57. 
 
Section 8-1. - City Elections: General and Preliminary. 
The regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered year. 
On the fifth Tuesday preceding every regular city election there shall be held a preliminary election for the purpose of nominating candidates. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985)  
Section 8-2. - Nonpartisan Elections. 
All elections of city officers shall be nonpartisan, and election ballots for such officers shall be printed without any party mark emblem, or designation whatsoever.  
Section 8-3. - Preliminary Elections. 
(a)  Signature Requirements — The number of signatures of voters required to place the name of a candidate on the official ballot to be used at a preliminary election shall be as follows: for the office of mayor not less than three hundred; for the office of school committee member not less than one hundred-fifty; for the office of councilor at-large not less than one hundred-fifty; and for the office of ward councilor not less than seventy-five signatures of voters of the ward. 
(b)  Ballot Position — The order in which names of candidates appear on the ballot for each office shall be determined by a drawing by lot conducted by the city clerk in the presence of such candidates or their representatives. 
(c)  Determination of Candidates for Election — The two persons receiving at a preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for an office shall be the sole candidates for that office whose names shall be printed on the official ballot to be used at the regular election at which such office is to be filled, and no acceptance of a nomination at a preliminary election shall be necessary to its validity. If two or more persons are to be elected to the same office at such regular election, the several persons in number equal to twice the number so to be elected receiving at such preliminary election the highest number of votes for nomination for that office shall be the sole candidates for that office whose names shall be printed on the official ballot. 
If the preliminary election results in a tie vote among candidates for nomination receiving the lowest number of votes which, but for said tie vote, would entitle a person receiving the same to have his name printed upon the official ballot for the election, all candidates participating in said tie vote shall have their names printed upon the official ballot, although in consequence there be printed thereon candidates to a number exceeding twice the number to be elected. 
(d)  Nomination of Candidates, Conditions Making Preliminary Election Unnecessary — If at the expiration of the time for filing statements of candidates to be voted for at any preliminary election not more than twice as many such statements have been filed with the city clerk for an office as candidates are to be elected to such office, the candidates whose statements have thus been filed shall be deemed to have been nominated to said office, and their names shall be voted on for such office at the succeeding regular election, and the city clerk shall not print said names upon the ballot to be used at said preliminary election and no other nomination to said office shall be made. If in consequence it shall appear that no names are to be printed upon the official ballot to be used at any preliminary election in any ward or wards of the city, no preliminary election shall be held in any such ward or wards.  
Section 8-4. - Regular Election. 
Ballot Position — The order in which names of candidates appear on the ballot for each office in a regular city election shall be determined by a drawing by lot conducted by the city clerk in the presence of such candidates or their representatives.  
Section 8-5. - Special Election for Mayor. 
Whenever a special election is to be held for the office of mayor under the provisions of section 3-11(a), no preliminary election shall be held. All candidates who file nomination papers which are certified by the board of registrars of voters to contain the number of signatures of voters required by section 8-3(a) shall be entitled to have their names appear upon the ballot for the said election. The candidate who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.  
Section 8-6. - Wards. 
The territory of the city shall be divided into five wards so established as to consist of as nearly an equal number of inhabitants as it is possible to achieve based on compact and contiguous territory, bounded insofar as possible by the center line of known streets or ways or by other well-defined limits. Each ward shall be divided into voting precincts in accordance with state statutes. The city council shall from time to time review such wards to insure their uniformity in number of inhabitants. 
Code reference— Wards and precincts generally, § 7-15 et seq.  
Section 8-7. - Application of State Laws. 
Except as expressly provided in the charter and authorized by state law, all city elections shall be governed by the laws of the commonwealth relating to the right to vote, the registration of voters, the nomination of candidates, the conduct of preliminary, regular, and special elections, the submission of charter amendments and other propositions, the counting of votes, and the declaration of results. 
State Law reference— Applicability of state election laws, M.G.L.A. c. 43B, § 17.  
ARTICLE 9. - FREE PETITION; INITIATIVE; REFERENDUM; RECALL[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 11, 2011, changed the title of Art. 9 from "Free Petition; Initiative; Referendum" to "Free Petition; Initiative; Referendum; Recall." 
Code reference— Elections generally, ch. 7. 
 
Section 9-1. - Free Petition. 
(a)  Individual Petitions, Action Discretionary — The city council and the school committee shall receive all petitions signed by one or more voters and addressed to either of them and may, in their discretion, take such action in regard to such petitions as they deem necessary and advisable. 
(b)  Group Petitions, Action Required — The city council or the school committee shall hold a public hearing and act with respect to every petition which is addressed to it and which is signed by at least one hundred fifty voters. The hearing shall be held by the city council or the school committee, or in either case, by a committee or subcommittee thereof, and the action by the city council or school committee shall commence not later than three months after the petition is filed with the clerk of the council or secretary of the school committee. Hearings on two or more petitions filed under this section may be held at the same time and place. The clerk of the council or the secretary of the school committee shall mail notice of the hearing to the ten petitioners whose names first appear on each such petition at least seven days before the hearing. The city council or the school committee shall publish in one or more local newspapers a general summary of the subject matter of such petitions and a notice stating: (1) the times and places where copies of the citizen petitions are available for inspection by the public, and (2) the date, time, and place not less than two weeks after such publication, when a public hearing on said petitions will be held by the city council or school committee. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 9-2. - Citizen Initiative Measures. 
(a)  Commencement of Proceedings — Initiative procedures shall be started by the filing of an initiative petition with the clerk of the council or [the] secretary of the school committee[,] as may be. The petition shall be addressed to the city council or to the school committee, shall contain a request for passage of a particular measure set forth in the petition, and shall be signed by not less than ten per cent of the total number of voters. Signatures to initiative petitions need not be all on one paper. All such papers pertaining to any one measure shall be fastened together and shall be filed in the office of the registrars of voters as one instrument, with the endorsement thereon of the name and address of the person designated as filing the same. With each signature to the petition shall be stated the place of residence of the signer, giving the street and number, if any. 
Within five days after the filing of said petition[,] the registrars of voters shall ascertain by what number of voters the petition is signed, and what percentage that number is of the total number of voters, and shall attach thereto their certificate showing the result of such examination. 
The registrars of voters shall hold the petition and their certificate available for public inspection during ordinary office hours for two full days, and unless written objections to the certificate of the registrars of voters are filed by a voter within said period, the registrars of voters certificate shall be deemed conclusive. If objections are so filed, they shall be disposed of forthwith in the manner provided by general laws, chapter 53. 
If no objections are so filed, the registrars of voters shall forthwith transmit the said certificate with the said petition to the city council or to the school committee, according as the petition is addressed, and at the same time shall send a copy of said certificate to the person designated on the petition as filing the same. 
(b)  Referral to City Solicitor — If the registrars of voters determine that a sufficient number of the signers are voters, the clerk of the council or the secretary of the school committee shall transmit a copy of the petition to the city solicitor. Within fifteen days after his receipt of the petition the city solicitor shall advise the clerk of the council or the secretary of the school committee in writing whether the measure may be proposed by initiative procedures and whether it may lawfully be passed by the city council or the school committee. If the opinion of the city solicitor is that the measure may not lawfully be passed, he shall state his reason or reasons therefor in his reply. The clerk of the council or the secretary of the school committee shall furnish a copy of the solicitor's opinion to the person designated on the petition as filing the same and to the first ten petitioners. 
(c)  Action on Petition — Within thirty days after an initiative petition is presented to the city council or the school committee, and after publication and a public hearing, in the same manner as provided in section 2-11(e) for ordinances and loan orders, the city council or the school committee shall act with respect to the initiative measure by passing it without change, or by rejecting it, or by passing some other measure stated to be in lieu thereof. The passage of a measure in lieu of an initiative measure shall be deemed a rejection of the initiative measure. If the city council or the school committee fails to act with respect to the initiative measure as required by this section within thirty days after presentation, the measure shall be deemed to have been rejected on the thirtieth day after presentation. If an initiative measure is rejected, the clerk of the council or secretary of the school committee shall promptly give written notice of that fact to the first ten petitioners. Initiative measures shall not be subject to charter objections as provided in section 2-11(c). 
(d)  Supplemental Petitions — Within forty-five days after notice of the rejection of an initiative measure has been given by the clerk of the council or secretary of the school committee, a supplemental initiative petition addressed to the city council or the school committee may be filed in the office of the registrars of voters. The supplemental initiative petition shall be signed by a number of additional voters which is at least equal to five per cent of the total number of voters. If the number of signatures to a supplemental initiative petition is deemed sufficient by the registrars of voters, the city council shall provide for submission of the initiative measure to the voters at the next regular city election. The provisions of section 9-2(a) shall apply insofar as applicable to such petition. 
(e)  Immediate Submission to Voters — If the supplemental initiative petition is signed by a number of additional voters which is at least equal to ten per cent of the total number of voters as aforesaid, the city council shall call a special election to be held on a Tuesday fixed by it not less than thirty nor more than forty-five days after the date of the certificate hereinbefore mentioned, and shall submit the proposed measure without alteration to a vote of the voters at that election; provided, that if any city election is otherwise to occur within one hundred and twenty-five days after the date of said certificate, the city council may, at its discretion, omit calling the special election and submit the proposed measure to the voters at such approaching election. 
(f)  Publication — The full text of the measure shall be published in at least one local newspaper at least seven days before the election at which the question is to appear on the ballot. 
(g)  Form of Ballot — The ballots used when voting upon a proposed measure under this section shall contain a question in substantially the following form: 
Shall the following measure which was proposed by an initiative petition take effect? 
(Text of measure or a fair, concise summary prepared by the city solicitor and approved by the registrars of voters)   Yes   No 
(h)  Time of Taking Effect — If a majority of the votes cast on the question is in the affirmative the measure shall be deemed to be effective forthwith, unless a later date is specified in the measure. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01)) 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to initiative petitions, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 37 et seq.  
Section 9-3. - Citizen Referendum Procedures. 
(a)  Referendum Petition, Effect on Final Approval — If, within twenty-one days after the final approval of any measure by the city council or by the school committee, a petition signed by voters equal in number to at least ten percent of the total number of voters, and addressed to the city council or to the school committee as the case may be, protesting against such measure or any part thereof taking effect, is filed in the office of the registrars of voters the same shall thereupon and thereby be suspended from taking effect. The city council or the school committee, as the case may be, shall forthwith reconsider such measure or part thereof; and if such measure or part thereof is not entirely rescinded, the city council shall submit the same, by the method herein provided, to a vote of the voters either at the next regular city election, or at a special election which may, in its discretion, be called for the purpose, and such measure or part thereof shall forthwith become null and void unless a majority of the voters voting on the same at such election vote in favor thereof. 
(b)  Certain Initiative Procedures to Apply — The petition described in this section shall be termed a referendum petition and insofar as applicable sections 9-2(a), (b), and (f), shall apply to the procedure in respect thereto, except that the words "measure or part thereof protested against" shall for this purpose be understood to replace "measure" in said section whenever it may occur, and "referendum" shall be understood to replace the word "initiative" in said section. 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to referendum petitions, M.G.L.A. c. 43, § 42 et seq.  
Section 9-4. - Initiative and Referendum; Ineligible Measures. 
None of the following measures shall be subject to initiative or referendum procedures: (1) proceedings relating to the organization or operation of the city council or school committee, (2) an emergency measure adopted in conformity with the charter, (3) the city budget or the school committee budget as a whole, (4) revenue loan orders, (5) any appropriations for the payment of the city's debts or obligations, (6) appropriations of funds necessary to implement a written agreement executed under collective bargaining, (7) any proceedings, or part thereof, relating to the election, employment, appointment, suspension, transfer, demotion, removal or discharge of any city officer or employee, (8) any proceedings repealing or rescinding a measure, or a part thereof, which is protested by referendum procedure and (9) any proceeding providing for the submission or referral of a matter to the voters at an election.  
Section 9-5. - Submission of Proposed Measure to Voters. 
The city council may, of its own motion, and shall, upon request of the school committee if a measure originates with that committee and pertains to the affairs under its administration, submit to a vote of the voters for adoption or rejection at a general or special city election any proposed measure, or a proposition for the repeal or amendment of any measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as are hereby provided for submission on petition.  
Section 9-6. - Measures with Conflicting Provisions. 
If two or more proposed measures passed at the same election contain conflicting provisions, only the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall take effect.  
Section 9-7. - Advisory Questions to Voters. 
At each regular city election there may appear on the ballot up to three nonbinding advisory questions to determine voter sentiment. Two of these questions shall be proposed by the city council and shall deal with the affairs of the city in general. The third question may be posed by the school committee and shall, if so used, deal with a question relating to affairs under its jurisdiction. In the event that the city council or the school committee do not use the questions allowed them under this section, the city council or school committee may propose up to three questions. 
Within three months following the organization of the city government following each election the city council or the school committee shall take up the subject matter of the advisory questions which were proposed by it and act upon their merits. 
Nothing in this section shall preclude the public from initiating an advisory question under General Laws chapter 53 section 18A and article 9 of the city charter. 
(Ref. of 11-3-1987)  
Section 9-8. - Recall—City of Gloucester. 
The holder of any elective office may be removed at any time by the voters qualified to vote at city elections, and the procedure to effect his removal shall be as follows: a petition signed by a number of the voters of the city qualified to vote at city elections equal to at least twenty per cent of the aggregate number of registered voters in the city, and demanding an election of a successor of the person sought to be removed, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. The petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds for which the removal is sought. It need not be on one paper, but may consist of several distinct papers, each containing the said demand, and substantially upon the same grounds; and all papers containing such demand and statement, which in any one day shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, shall be deemed parts of the same petition. Each signer shall add to his signature his place of residence, on the preceding first day of January, giving the street and the street number if any. One signer of every such paper shall make oath upon his information and belief, before a notary public or a justice of the peace, that the statements therein made are true, and that each signature to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Within ten days after the date of filing the petition, the city clerk, with the assistance of the registrars of voters, shall examine the petition to ascertain whether or not it is signed by the required number of qualified voters, as above described, and shall attach to the petition a certificate, showing the result of his examination. 
If the petition is certified by the city clerk to be sufficient, he shall present the same to the city council without delay, and the city council shall call an election so demanded, and fix a date for holding the same, which shall not be less than thirty nor more than forty-five days after the date of the presentation of the petition by the city clerk to the city council. The city clerk shall make or cause to be made all arrangements for holding such election, and the same shall be held and conducted, returns thereof made and the results thereof declared in all respects as in the case of other city elections. The successor of any elected official so removed shall hold the office during the unexpired term of his predecessor. Any person sought to be removed may be a candidate at the election, and unless he requests otherwise in writing, the city clerk shall place his name on the official ballots without nomination. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. If some person other than the incumbent received the highest number of votes, the incumbent shall thereupon be deemed to be removed from office. In case a person, other than the incumbent, receiving the highest number of votes shall fail to make oath before the city clerk or a justice of the peace, within five days after his election, faithfully to perform the duties of the office, the office shall be deemed vacant. If the incumbent receives the highest number of votes, he shall continue in office until the end of the term which he was serving at the time of the said election, unless sooner removed therefrom by new and like proceedings. The name of no candidate, other than that of the person sought to be removed, shall be printed on the official ballots to be used at the election, unless the candidate be nominated as hereinbefore provided, at a preliminary election for nomination. 
No recall petition shall be filed against an elected official of said city within three months after he takes office, nor in the case of an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six months after that election. 
No person who has been recalled from an office in said City of Gloucester, who has resigned from office while recall proceedings were pending against him, shall be appointed to any city office within five years after such removal by recall or resignation. This shall not preclude any person from running for elected office within said city. 
(Ref. of 11-5-1985; Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
ARTICLE 10. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 10-1. - Charter Changes. 
(a)  In General — This Charter may be replaced, revised or amended in accordance with the procedures made available by article LXXXIX (eighty-nine) of the amendments to the state constitution and any legislation enacted to implement the said amendment. 
(b)  Periodic Review — The city council standing committee on ordinances and administration shall in each year ending in zero review the charter and submit a report with recommendations to the full city council concerning any proposed amendments or revisions to the charter.  
Section 10-2. - Severability. 
The provisions of the charter are severable. If any provision of the charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  
Section 10-3. - Specific Provisions Shall Prevail. 
To the extent that any specific provision of the charter shall conflict with any provision expressed in general terms, the specific provision shall prevail.  
Section 10-4. - Rules and Regulations. 
A copy of all rules and regulations adopted by any city agency shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and made available for review by any person who requests such information and no such rule or regulation shall become effective until it is so filed.  
Section 10-5. - Reenactment and Publication of Ordinances. 
The city council shall at five-year intervals cause to be prepared a proposed revision or recodification of all city ordinances which shall be submitted to the city council for reenactment. The city council shall adopt the proposed revision or recodification with or without amendment prior to the expiration of the calendar year in which it is submitted to them. Such revisions or recodifications shall be prepared under the supervision of the city solicitor, or city clerk, or if the city council so directs, by special counsel retained for that purpose. Copies of the revised or recodified ordinances shall be made available for distribution, provided however, that a charge not to exceed the actual cost per copy of reproduction may be charged. 
In each year between such reenactments[,] an annual supplement shall be published which shall contain all ordinances and amendments to ordinances adopted in the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 10-6. - Procedures. 
(a)  Meetings — All multiple-member bodies of the city, whether elected or appointed or otherwise constituted, shall meet regularly at such times and places within the city as they may prescribe. Special meetings of any multiple-member body shall be held on the call of the respective chairman or by one-third of the members thereof by written notice delivered in hand or to the residence or place of business of each member at least twenty-four hours in advance of the time set. A copy of the said notice shall also be posted on the city bulletin board(s). Special meetings of any multiple-member body shall also be called within one week after the date of the filing with the city clerk of a petition signed by at least one hundred fifty voters and which states the purpose or purposes for which the meeting is to be called. Except as otherwise authorized by general laws, all meetings of all multiple-member bodies shall be open to the public and to the press. 
(b)  Rules and Minutes — Each multiple-member body shall determine its own rules and order of business unless otherwise provided by the charter or by law and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings. These rules and minutes shall be a public record, and certified copies of each shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Voting — If requested by any member, any vote of any multiple-member body shall be taken by a roll call vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes, provided, however, that if the vote is unanimous, only that fact need be recorded. 
Each multiple-member body shall establish and maintain, by its own rules, a list of specific types of actions which will require an accompanying statement of purpose. The statement of purpose shall contain the reasons why the majority of the multiple- member body voted for or against. Such statements shall be entered upon the records of the multiple-member body, in full, for the purpose of providing guidance to future bodies regarding matters that might again be brought before the body, matters that might be the subject of court action, or any other matter requiring the intent of the members of the multiple-member body when voting. 
(d)  Quorum — A majority of the members of a multiple-member body shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. 
(e)  Filings with Multiple-Member Bodies — Unless otherwise provided by statute, the charter, or by ordinance, all applications or petitions which are to be acted upon by a multiple-member body shall be made in the first instance with and to the full multiple-member body. A record shall be made in the minutes of the receipt of all such applications or petitions. The multiple-member body may, upon such receipt, by vote, refer such matters to a sub-committee, or to a paid employee for negotiation, solicitation or further information, or otherwise, to report back to the full multiple-member body before any final action is taken on the matter. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 10-7. - Number and Gender. 
Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things; words importing the plural number may include the singular; and words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.  
Section 10-8. - References to General Laws. 
All references to the general laws contained in the charter refer to the general laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and are intended to include any amendments or revisions to such chapters and sections or to the corresponding chapters and sections or any rearrangement of the general laws enacted subsequent to the adoption of the charter.  
Section 10-9. - Definitions. 
Unless another meaning is clearly apparent from the manner in which the word is used, the following words as used in the charter shall have the following meaning: 
(a)  Charter — The word "charter" shall mean this charter and any amendments to it made through any of the methods provided under Article LXXXIX (eighty-nine) of the amendments to the State Constitution. 
(b)  City — The word "city" shall mean the City of Gloucester. 
(c)  City Agency — The words "city agency" shall mean any board, commission, committee, department or office of the city government. 
(d)  Emergency — The word "emergency" shall mean a sudden, unexpected, unforeseen happening, occurrence, or condition which necessitates immediate action. 
(e)  Full Council — The words "full council" shall mean the entire authorized complement of the city council notwithstanding any vacancies which might exist. 
(f)  Full School Committee — The words "full school committee" shall mean the entire authorized complement of the school committee notwithstanding any vacancies which might exist. 
(g)  Initiative Measure — The words "initiative measure" shall mean a measure proposed by initiative procedures under the charter. 
(h)  Local Newspaper — The words "local newspaper" shall mean a newspaper of general circulation within the City of Gloucester. 
(i)  Majority Vote — The words "majority vote" shall mean a majority of those present and voting, provided that a quorum of the body is present. 
(j)  Measure — The word "measure" shall mean an ordinance adopted or which could be adopted by the city council, or an order, resolution, vote or other proceeding adopted or which could be adopted by the city council or the school committee. 
(k)  Municipal Facilities — [The words "municipal facilities"] shall mean use of land or structures by the City of Gloucester for purposes of public maintenance and operations, public utilities, public works, and other similar public functions, and for public beaches, parks, playgrounds, parking areas, and other similar public uses. 
(l)  Multiple-Member Body — The words "multiple-member body" shall mean any appointed body consisting of two or more members. 
(m)  Planning Board — The words "planning board" shall mean any other board or office performing the duties of a planning board for the city. 
(n)  Ref. Measure — The words "referendum measure" shall mean a measure protested by referendum procedures under the charter. 
(o)  Voters — The word "voters" shall mean registered voters of the City of Gloucester. 
(Ord. of 10-11-2011(01))  
Section 10-10. - Certificate of Election and Appointment; Oath of Office. 
Every person who is elected, including those elected by the city council, or appointed by the mayor to an office shall receive a certificate of such election or appointment from the city clerk. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, before performing any act under his election or appointment, he shall take and subscribe to an oath to qualify him to enter upon his duties. A record of the taking of such oath shall be made by the city clerk. An oath required by this section may be administered by the mayor or any officer authorized by law to administer oaths. 
State Law reference— Oath of office for city officers, M.G.L.A. c. 41, § 107.  
ARTICLE 11. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 11-1. - Continuation of Existing Ordinances. 
All ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the city which are in force at the time the charter is adopted, not inconsistent with the provisions of the charter, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed; provided, however, that the mayor shall be deemed to be the city manager wherever such officer is referred to in any law, ordinance, rule, regulation or resolution.  
Section 11-2. - Continuation of Government. 
All city agencies shall continue to perform their duties until reappointed, re-elected, or until successors to their respective positions are duly appointed or elected or their duties have been transferred to another city agency.  
Section 11-3. - Continuation of Administrative Personnel. 
Any person holding an office or position in the administrative service of the city, or any person serving in the employment of the city shall retain such office, position or employment and shall continue to perform his duties until provisions shall have been made for the performance of the said duties by another person or agency; provided, however, that no person in the permanent full-time service or employment of the city shall forfeit his pay grade or time in service. All such persons shall be retained in a capacity as similar to their former capacity as is practicable.  
Section 11-4. - Transfer of Records and Property. 
All records, property, and equipment whatsoever, of any city agency or part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned in whole or in part to another city agency shall be transferred forthwith to the city agency to which such powers and duties are transferred and assigned.  
Section 11-5. - Effect on Obligations, Taxes, Etc. 
All official bonds, recognizances, obligations, contracts and other instruments entered into or executed by or to the city before the adoption of the charter, and all taxes, special assessments, fines, penalties, forfeitures incurred or imposed, due or owing to the city, shall be enforced and collected, and all writs, prosecutions, actions and causes of action, except as herein otherwise provided, shall continue without abatement and remain unaffected by the charter; and no legal act done by or in favor of the city shall be rendered invalid by the adoption of the charter.  
Section 11-6. - Disposition of Special Laws. 
(a)  Certain Special Laws Partially Repealed — The following special laws, insofar as they confer a power on the City of Gloucester which the city would not otherwise be permitted to exercise under the constitution or general laws are retained; otherwise, they are hereby repealed, it being the explicit intent of this paragraph that portions of any special laws retained which limit or restrict a power conferred or the manner in which it is to be exercised be repealed and that powers so conferred are to be exercised in accordance with the charter: 
Chapter 365, Acts of 1853; Chapter 143, Acts of 1869; 
Chapter 451, Acts of 1895; Chapter 137, Acts of 1917; 
Chapter 14, Acts of 1925; Chapter 224, Acts of 1925; 
Chapter 260, Acts of 1956; Chapter 343, Acts of 1956; 
Chapter 522, Acts of 1958; Chapter 339, Acts of 1959; 
Chapter 631, Acts of 1963; Chapter 693, Acts of 1967. 
(b)  Certain Special Laws Repealed — The following special laws are hereby repealed: 
Chapter 130, Acts of 1859; Chapter 222, Acts of 1864; 
Chapter 226, Acts of 1890; Chapter 389, Acts of 1890; 
Chapter 441, Acts of 1896; Chapter 323, Acts of 1900; 
Chapter 254, Acts of 1917; Chapter 100, Acts of 1965; 
Chapter 559, Acts of 1965; Chapter 751, Acts of 1967. 
(c)  Certain Special Laws Repealed - Action Taken Thereunder Preserved — The following special laws are hereby repealed; provided, however, such action shall not be construed to revoke, or to invalidate or otherwise alter things done in compliance with or under the authority of such special laws heretofore: 
Chapter 371, Acts of 1869; Chapter 246, Acts of 1873; 
Chapter 167, Acts of 1881; Chapter 191, Acts of 1886; 
Chapter 128, Acts of 1888; Chapter 64, Acts of 1889; 
Chapter 127, Acts of 1891; Chapter 326, Acts of 1891; 
Chapter 106, Acts of 1895; Chapter 459, Acts of 1897; 
Chapter 352, Acts of 1902; Chapter 176, Acts of 1908; 
Chapter 611, Acts of 1908; Chapter 351, Acts of 1914; 
Chapter 396, Acts of 1914; Chapter 142, Acts of 1917; 
Chapter 188, Acts of 1917; Chapter 63, Acts of 1920; 
Chapter 409, Acts of 1923; Chapter 32, Acts of 1924; 
Chapter 60, Acts of 1924; Chapter 464, Acts of 1924; 
Chapter 48, Acts of 1926; Chapter 98, Acts of 1927; 
Chapter 124, Acts of 1930; Chapter 345, Acts of 1930; 
Chapter 221, Acts of 1931; Chapter 121, Acts of 1935; 
Chapter 160, Acts of 1938; Chapter 109, Acts of 1941; 
Chapter 135, Acts of 1943; Chapter 34, Acts of 1943; 
Chapter 338, Acts of 1948; Chapter 161, Acts of 1949; 
Chapter 175, Acts of 1949; Chapter 390, Acts of 1949; 
Chapter 619, Acts of 1950; Chapter 188, Acts of 1951; 
Chapter 295, Acts of 1951; Chapter 234, Acts of 1952; 
Chapter 161, Acts of 1953; Chapter 322, Acts of 1954; 
Chapter 97, Acts of 1955; Chapter 177, Acts of 1955; 
Chapter 206, Acts of 1955; Chapter 442, Acts of 1955; 
Chapter 443, Acts of 1955; Chapter 363, Acts of 1956; 
Chapter 180, Acts of 1957; Chapter 414, Acts of 1957; 
Chapter 81, Acts of 1959; Chapter 203, Acts of 1961; 
Chapter 329, Acts of 1963; Chapter 544, Acts of 1968; 
Chapter 347, Acts of 1969; Chapter 383, Acts of 1970; 
Chapter 390, Acts of 1970; Chapter 500, Acts of 1970; 
Chapter 275, Acts of 1972; Chapter 142, Acts of 1974. 
(d)  Certain Special Laws Recognized and Retained: The following special laws are hereby specifically recognized and retained: 
Chapter 8, Acts of 1840; 
Chapter 124, Acts of 1866; Chapter 245, Acts of 1867; 
Chapter 133, Acts of 1869; Chapter 59, Acts of 1871; 
Chapter 366, Acts of 1873; Chapter 285, Acts of 1874; 
Chapter 82, Acts of 1875; Chapter 116, Acts of 1876; 
Chapter 103, Acts of 1882; Chapter 109, Acts of 1883; 
Chapter 176, Acts of 1892; Chapter 379, Acts of 1902; 
Chapter 230, Acts of 1920; Chapter 68, Acts of 1960; 
Chapter 698, Acts of 1965; Chapter 872, Acts of 1966; 
Chapter 257, Acts of 1966; Chapter 343, Acts of 1967; 
Chapter 441, Acts of 1970; Chapter 741, Acts of 1970; 
Chapter 1024, Acts of 1973. 
(e)  The following special laws are recognized, but no action is taken with regard to any of them: 
Chapter 190, Acts of 1867; Chapter 279, Acts of 1901; 
Chapter 254, Acts of 1902; Chapter 271, Acts of 1917; 
Chapter 161, Acts of 1924; Chapter 1, Acts of 1927; 
Chapter 50, Acts of 1927; 
Chapter 310, Acts of 1939; Chapter 105, Acts of 1948; 
Chapter 786, Acts of 1951; Chapter 625, Acts of 1953; 
Chapter 252, Acts of 1954; Chapter 261, Acts of 1958; 
Chapter 382, Acts of 1962; Chapter 754, Acts of 1969; 
Chapter 87, Acts of 1970; Chapter 198, Acts of 1970; 
Chapter 545, Acts of 1972; Chapter 921, Acts of 1973; 
Chapter 1065, Acts of 1973. 
(Ref. of 11-8-1983)  
Section 11-7. - Time of Taking Effect. 
This charter shall become fully effective on July 1, 1976 except to the extent that other provision is made in the following schedule: 
(a)  As soon as practicable after the election at which the charter is adopted a special districting committee shall be organized by the city clerk, who shall serve as chairman, ex-officio, to consist of one member of the city council, one member of the school committee, one member of the board of assessors, one member of the board of registrars of voters, one member of the planning board, one member of the charter commission, one member of the Gloucester League of Women Voters, one member of the Gloucester Chamber of Commerce each of the aforesaid to be designated by the body of which they are a member and a representative, for the purpose of drawing the five wards from which city councilors are to be elected. 
The ward lines shall be drawn so as to contain as nearly an equal number of inhabitants as is possible in compact and contiguous territory, bounded insofar as possible by the center line of known streets or ways or by other well defined limits. 
Not later than January 31st in the year following the year in which the charter is adopted the special districting committee shall prepare and publish a preliminary report concerning a proposed division of the city into five wards as required by section 2-1. Not later than February 15th in said year, the special districting committee shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed wards. The final report of the special districting committee shall be filed not later than March 15th in the year following the year in which the charter is adopted. 
The five wards established under this section shall be effective for the purpose of a special municipal election to be held on June 8, 1976 for the purpose of electing a mayor and a city council in accordance with the provisions of the charter. A preliminary election, for the purpose of nominating certificates, shall be held on the fourth Tuesday preceding the special election (May 11, 1976). These elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this charter. The terms of office of members of the school committee shall not be affected, but the terms of all city councilors elected at the election at which the charter was adopted shall be terminated upon the inauguration and the assumption of their respective powers and duties by the mayor and the new city council on July 1, 1976. The office of city manager shall be abolished on the date the charter becomes fully effective. 
The special districting committee in establishing the five wards for the election of city councilors shall, if the precinct lines to be used for the election of representatives to the general court have already been fixed, use such precinct lines in the formation of the five wards. 
(b)  Until such time as some other salary is established, in accordance with the provisions of the charter, the following salaries shall serve for the respective offices: for the office of the mayor, $19,500.00 per annum; for the office of member of the city council, $1,500.00 per annum; for the office of administrative assistant to the mayor, $18,500.00 per annum. 
(c)  The provisions of 2-5(vi) shall not be effective until January 1, 1977. 
(d)  The term of office of the city clerk and the city auditor, in the manner provided in section 2-7, shall begin in 1978. In order to achieve this cycle the election of the clerk and the auditor in 1977, when the current terms expire, shall be for one year. 
(e)  The provisions of section 3-8(a) shall not be effective until July 1, 1977. 
(f)  Any multiple-member body which is not in conformity with the provisions of section 7-4 shall be brought into conformity with the said election by the appointment of successor members to such bodies for terms of three years, or such lesser number of years as will cause as nearly an equal number of terms as is possible to expire each year. 
(g)  The provisions of section 7-6(a)(iii) shall not become effective until January 1, 1977; the other portions of the said section shall, however, become effective on July 1, 1976. 
(h)  The designer selection committee which is required by section 7-17 shall be appointed prior to October 1, 1976; provided, however, that following the adoption of the charter no architect shall be engaged by the city until such a committee has been appointed to make the selection. 
(i)  All rules and regulations of the several city agencies which are not on file in the office of the city clerk, as required by section 10-4, shall be deemed to have been properly filed if they are placed on file within ninety days following the date of the election at which the charter is approved by the voters. 
(j)  As soon as practicable following their inauguration in July 1976, the city council shall provide for the review and recodification of city ordinances in the manner provided in section 10-5 and shall provide for such revision to be effective on January 1, 1977. 
(k)  City agencies shall have until January 1, 1977, to adopt the rules required by section 10-6(c).  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances contained in this chapter and in the chapters following shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Gloucester, Massachusetts," and may be so cited. Any such ordinances may also be cited as the "Gloucester City Code." 
(Code 1970, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such definitions or rules would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context of the Code or ordinance in question: 
Charter. The term "Charter" or "the Charter" means the Gloucester Home Rule Charter, as published in part I of this volume. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Gloucester. 
City council. The term "city council" or "council" means the duly elected city council of the City of Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Commonwealth. The term "commonwealth" means the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" means the County of Essex, Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right to him as such official it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extent and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Liability for offenses. When anything is prohibited in this Code or in any other ordinance, not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing, but also the employer and any person concerned therein, shall be liable to the prescribed penalty. 
May. The term "may" is always permissive and never mandatory. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, departments, etc. Whenever any officer, board, department or other agency is referred to by title, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Gloucester, Massachusetts," unless indicated to the contrary. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Poppers/snappers. Any of a type of explosive contained inside of paper or other material which purpose is to explode upon contact with a hard surface when thrown or tossed. 
Power to license. When in this Code or in any other ordinance of the city anything is prohibited from being done without the permission or license of a certain officer or board, any such officer or board shall have the power to permit or license the thing to be done. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Shall. The term "shall" is always mandatory and never permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means a strip within the public way in front or on the side of a house or lot of land lying between the property line and the street. 
Signature. If the written signature of a person is required, it shall always be his own handwriting or if he is unable to write, his mark. 
Silly string. The term "silly string" means and includes the product of the same name and any similar product sold or used for amusement that ejects a soft, rubbery substance. 
Statute references. The abbreviation 'M.G.L.' refers to the Massachusetts General Laws, as now or hereafter amended. 
Street or way. The term "street" or "way" includes streets, avenues, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city, including any bridge which is a part thereof, all of which shall have been decreed, dedicated or accepted by due process of law. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, means any person holding a written or oral lease therefor or any person who occupies the whole or part of any such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Writing. The terms "writing" and "written" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means calendar year. 
(Code 1970, § 1-3; Ord. of 11-29-1988, § I(I); Ord. No. 29-1992, § I, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed to be taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the users of the Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of any ordinance shall not affect any act done, any right accruing or accrued or established or any suit or proceeding had or commenced in any civil case before the time when such repeal shall take effect, nor any offense committed, nor any penalty or forfeiture incurred, nor any suit or prosecution pending at the time of such repeal for any offense committed, or for the recovery of any penalty or forfeiture incurred under any of the provisions so repealed. All persons who, at the time when the repeal shall take effect, shall hold any office under any of the ordinances so repealed, shall continue to hold the same according to the tenure thereof, except those offices which may have been abolished, and those as to which a different provision shall have been made. When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. 
(Code 1970, §§ 1—2(b), 2-26) 
Charter reference— Continuation of existing ordinances, section 11-1.  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance accepting or adopting the provisions of any statute of the commonwealth; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any administrative order of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(4)  Any right or franchise conferred by any ordinance or resolution of the city council to any person or corporation; 
(5)  Any zoning ordinance or any ordinance making changes in the zoning map; 
(6)  Any collective bargaining agreement between the city and its employees; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing prices for grave sites in any city-owned cemetery; 
(8)  Any ordinance pertaining to city personnel regulations, salaries, benefits or retirement of officers or employees of the city or pertaining to any department, board or other agency administering any such ordinances; 
(9)  Any ordinance pertaining to trailer coaches and trailer coach parks; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance adopting, amending, modifying or administering a fire prevention code; 
(12)  Any ordinance describing the boundaries of the wards and precincts of the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades of any street in the city; 
(14)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; 
(16)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(17)  Any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city; 
(18)  Any ordinance adopted after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code; and 
(19)  All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1970, §§ 1—2, 2-26)  
Sec. 1-8. - Enacting clause of ordinances. 
All bylaws of the city shall be called ordinances and the enacting clause thereof shall be, "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Gloucester as follows:." 
(Code 1970, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-9. - Recordation of ordinances. 
All ordinances shall be engrossed by the city clerk, in the order in which they are passed, in a book of records. 
(Code 1970, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-10. - When ordinances take effect. 
Every ordinance which does not expressly prescribe the time when it shall go into operation shall take effect 31 days after its passage and in no case shall an ordinance take effect less than 31 days after its passage. 
(Code 1970, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, any such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1970, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments and additions to Code. 
Whenever the city council adopts any ordinance in amendment of, or in addition to, this Code, it shall be by amending or repealing the specific section of the particular chapter dealing with the subject matter of the proposed ordinance. Any such chapter and section shall be referred to by number, in order that the structure of this Code may be maintained.  
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and title for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty for violation of Code and ordinances. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of any section of this Code or of any ordinance of the city, where no specific penalty is stated or none is prescribed by state law, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $300.00 for each offense. 
(b)  All fines and penalties for violations of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or any order of the city council shall, when recovered, inure to the use of the city and be paid into the city treasury, unless otherwise directed by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1970, §§ 1-8, 1-9) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prescribe penalty for ordinance violations, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21.  
Sec. 1-15. - Penalty for violation of certain specified sections of Code. 
Violation of the Code sections set forth in this section may be enforced noncriminally by way of the ticketing procedures set forth in M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. For the purpose of this section the specific penalty which is to apply for a violation of each such section shall be as listed below and the municipal officers or employees whose titles are listed under such section shall be deemed to be enforcing officers for each such section: 
Chapter 4, section 4-3. 
Confinement of animal in a motor vehicle causing exposure to extreme heat or cold; protection of animal by animal control or law enforcement officer or fire fighter; penalties 
Penalty: 
First offense: Fine of not more than $150.00; 
Second offense: A fine of not more than $300.00; and 
Third or subsequent offense: A fine of not more than $500.00 
Chapter 4, section 4-15, running at large prohibited. 
Penalty: 
Each offense: $50.00. 
Chapter 4, section 4-16d, dog park violations. 
Penalty: 
Each offense: $50.00. 
The enforcement officer for violation is the animal control officer. 
Chapter 4, section 4-16e, dogs prohibited from all city-owned flower beds . 
Penalty: 
Each offense: $50.00 
Chapter 4, section 4-16f Chaining or tethering dog to stationary object; confinement; restrictions; penalty. 
Penalty: 
First offense: Written warning or a fine of not more than $50.00; 
Second offense: A fine of not more than $200.00; and 
Third or subsequent offense: A fine of not more than $500.00, and be subjected to impoundment of the dog in a local shelter at the owner's, keeper's or guardian's expense pending compliance with this section, or loss of ownership of the dog. 
Chapter 4, section 4-21, dog fouling . 
Penalty: 
$100.00 per day for each offense and dog(s) may have off leash beach privileges revoked by animal control. 
Authorized enforcement personnel: City of Gloucester Police Department, Animal Control Officers. 
Chapter 5, article II, section 5-19, inspections of buildings erected on pilings. 
Each day a violation continues will be treated as a separate offense. A violation of this ordinance shall be $300.00 per day and/or condemnation of the building. 
Chapter 5, article II, division 4, sections 5-35—5-39.3, vacant buildings. 
Penalty: Each day a violation continues will be treated as a separate offense. A violation of this division shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day. 
Enforcing person: Inspector of buildings or his/her designee. 
Chapter 6, section 6-4, visitors conduct, but excluding section 6-4(e)(11). 
Penalties: Penalties shall be set at a minimum of $50.00 for the first violation, with further violations to be up to $300.00. 
Enforcing persons: Board of health, department of public works, police department. 
Chapter 6, section 6-4(e)(11), animals/public cemeteries. 
Penalties: Penalties in accordance with chapter 4, animals. 
Enforcing persons: animal control officer, police department. 
Chapter 9, article I, sections 9-1 and 9-9, garbage and litter. 
Penalty: $20.00 for each of the first three offenses; $100.00 thereafter. 
Enforcing persons: police officers, parking control officers, health agents, health inspector, building inspector and building inspector's assistant and school department's director of operations and school facilities supervisor. 
Chapter 9, trash, recycling and litter, section 9-8, littering prohibited: 
Upon finding violation of section 9-8, the district court shall fine the violator according to the severity of the violation of up to $300.00 for each offense. 
Enforcing persons: police officers, board of health members or their agents and recycling coordinator. 
Chapter 9, section 9-20, Polystyrene-based disposable food serving items prohibited. 
Violations of Sec. 9-20 of the Code of Ordinances shall be subject to civil ticketing by agents of the Health Department". If a violation has occurred a warning notice shall be issued for the first offense. The penalty for each violation that occurs after the initial violation shall be: $50.00 for the first offense and $100.00 for each offense thereafter. 
Chapter 10, section 10-53, use of public ramp at DunFudgin. 
Penalty: 
$25.00 per violation. 
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
Chapter 10, all articles and sections, except for § 10-53. 
Penalty: 
$100.00 per violation. 
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
Enforcing persons: harbormaster, assistant harbormasters, police officers. 
Chapter 12, marshlands, article II, wetlands, section 12-23, penalty for violation. 
Penalty: 
First offense (days one—fourteen after issuance of the violation): $50.00 per day of violation. 
Second offense (days 15—30 after issuance of the violation): $100.00 per day of violation. 
Third and consecutive offenses (more than 30 days after issuance of the violation): $250.00 per day of violation. 
Chapter 13, section 13-5, prohibited sound, and section 13-6, maximum permissible sound levels—enumerated. 
Penalty: For violations of section 13-5 and section 13-6, a minimum if $100.00 per violation, not to exceed $300.00 per violation. 
Enforcing persons: police officers, building inspector, DPW personnel, health agents and health inspectors. 
Chapter 14, section 14-14, smoking tobacco, marijuana or marijuana products on school grounds, and board of health regulations prohibiting involuntary exposure of minors to second hand smoke. 
Penalty: 
$25.00 for the first offense; 
$50.00 for the second offense; and 
$100.00 for the third and subsequent offenses. 
Chapter 14, article II, sections 14-26 through 14-33, alarm systems. 
Penalty: 
Section 14-27(a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) or 14-29: $25.00; 
Section 14-30(b): $25.00 for the fourth false alarm; and 
$50.00 for each false alarm thereafter. 
These penalties are for a single-alarm system. 
The penalties apply to multiple-alarm systems after the number of alarms is greater than three times the number of systems. After 30 days of the date of the assessment, penalties unpaid will be assessed a $10.00 per day delinquency surcharge. 
Enforcing persons: fire or police personnel, designated by the fire chief or police chief. 
Chapter 14, section 14-16, public consumption of marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol prohibited. 
Penalty: 
First offense: $100.00; 
Second offense: $200.00; 
Third offense: $300.00. 
Enforcing persons: police officers. 
Chapter 14, section 14-17, synthetic drugs (synthetic marijuana, stimulants and hallucinogens). 
Penalty: 
First Offense: $150.00; 
Subsequent Offenses(s): $300.00; 
Enforcing persons: Police officers. 
Chapter 21, article 1, section 21-4(c) (house numbers). 
Penalty: 
Written warning notice on first offense; 
$20.00 for second offense; and 
$50.00 for each offense thereafter. 
Enforcing persons: the enforcement officer for violation of section 21-4(b) is the building inspector or his agent. 
This method of enforcement is optional and shall not supplant enforcement by criminal complaint or indictment brought in the district court. 
Chapter 21, section 21-11, playing ball, etc. 
Penalties: 
First offense: written warning notice. 
Second offense: $25.00. 
Third offense and each offense thereafter: $50.00. 
Enforcing persons: Police department personnel. 
Chapter 22, article V, section 22-150, loading and unloading on city streets. 
Penalty: 
First offense: $100.00 for truck and $100.00 for firm. 
Second offense: $200.00 for truck and $200.00 for firm. 
Third and consecutive offenses: $500.00 for truck and $500.00 for firm. 
Enforcing persons: Police officers or parking control officers. 
Chapter 23, article III, section 23-60, water use restrictions. 
Penalty: 
$50.00 for first violation. 
$100.00 for subsequent violations. 
Enforcing persons: department of public works, water division personnel; fire or police personnel; health agents and health inspectors. 
Chapter 23, article IV, division I, section 23-77, pole specifications. ;b1; Penalty: 
$100.00 per instance to the owner of record of the pole in question. 
Enforcing persons: director, department of public works or designee. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, § I; Ord. of 2-16-1988, § I; Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I; Ord. of 4-4-1989; Ord. No. 20-1990, § I, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 12-1994, § I, 8-9-1994; Ord. No. 26-1997, § I, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 27-1997, § I, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 30-1997, § I, 2-18-1997; Ord. No. 44-1997, § I, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 63-1997, § I, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 78-1998, § I, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 94-1998, § I, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 113-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. of 10-22-2002(02), § I; Ord. of 6-10-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 9-2-2008(02); ; Ord. of 9-2-2008(05); Ord. of 4-7-2009(04); Ord. of 6-8-2010(04); Ord. of 11-29-2011(01); Ord. of 7-24-2012(03); Ord. No. 2014-092, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 2014-260, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2014-338, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-146, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 2016-235, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-102, 5-23-2017; Ord. No. 2017-176, 9-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-057, 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 2018-058, 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Form of government mandated, section 1-3; powers of the city, section 1-4; provisions relating to administrative organization, section 7-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 7; planning, ch. 16; administration and enforcement of traffic and motor vehicle regulations, § 22-20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal—Design. 
The official seal of the city shall be in the following design: A representation of a schooner under sail, with Eastern Point Lighthouse in the distance, and in a circle surrounding the same, the words "City of Gloucester, incorporated 1873," the whole to be arranged as shown below. 
(Code 1970, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Duty to establish city seal, M.G.L. c. 40, § 47; unauthorized use of seal, M.G.L. c. 268, § 35.  
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Custodian; use. 
The city clerk shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix, or permit the mayor or any other city officer to affix, the same to any deed, lease, indenture or instrument executed by the city which requires a seal. 
(Code 1970, § 2-3) 
State Law reference— Duty to designate custodian of city seal, M.G.L. c. 40, § 47.  
Sec. 2-3. - Disposition of real property owned by the city. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Definition. For the purpose of this section the term "disposition of real property" shall mean the sale, conveyance, or transfer of any interest in real property owned by the city, including but not limited to sale of a fee interest in said real property, the grant of an easement, license or any other less than fee simple interest, the leasing of city real property, or the exchange of real property. 
(2)  Council authorization. No building, land or other real property or rights or interests therein shall be disposed of without prior order from the city council authorizing said disposition by the mayor. The council may impose any condition, restriction, or other limitation on the building of property as it deems appropriate, consistent with the general laws. 
(3)  Method of dispositions. All disposition of real property shall be pursuant to the bidding and proposal requirements of M.G.L. c. 30B unless the property is specifically excluded from M.G.L. c. 30B. 
(4)  Price. A minimum bid price shall be established by the city council, with the assistance of the assessors, using comparable sales analysis based on the highest and best use of the land. Minimum bid and sale prices shall not be subject to change except by the city council. All prices shall include a $200.00 charge for administrative costs. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(b)  Procedure for sale. 
(1)  Requests for disposition of property. Requests for council authorization for the disposition of city-owned real property may be initiated by the mayor or a member of the public. 
a.  By the mayor. The mayor shall from time to time, but at least annually, advise the council whether or not any city-owned real property has been determined to be surplus or otherwise appropriate for disposition. Prior to making such recommendations, said property shall be reviewed by the department of community development, department of public works, treasurer, general counsel, or any executive department agency, board or commission having jurisdiction over said property or who are otherwise deemed appropriate to comment, who shall make recommendations as to whether or not the property shall be disposed of and any conditions that should be placed upon said disposition. 
b.  Preliminary review. The mayor, on advice of the department of community development, prior to any review required by subsection (b)(1)a of this section, shall determine whether the property is subject to M.G.L. c. 40, §§ 15 or 15A, or amendment article 97 of the Massachusetts Constitution, or is a playground, parkland, or town landing and advise the council. 
c.  By the public. Any member of the public may make a written request through the city clerk to dispose of any real property owned by the city. Said request shall be submitted on forms provided by the city clerk and shall contain the person's name, address, telephone number, the assessor's map and lot number of the parcel, the street address of the parcel, the size of the parcel, current zoning applicable to the property and the proposed use of the parcel if disposition is authorized. However the member of the public making a request shall not be allowed to acquire the property except by following all applicable competitive procedures of M.G.L. c. 30B. 
(2)  Quarterly review of recommendations and requests. In the months of March, June, September and December on the third Tuesday the council shall review all requests and recommendations for the disposition of city-owned real property received pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section. No later than two weeks before those dates the mayor shall submit a status report to the council on property previously approved for disposition. 
(3)  Sale of parcels to abutters. Except as otherwise provided in this section, when a city-owned parcel not contiguous to any other city-owned parcel is determined to be suitable for disposition but unbuildable by virtue of insufficient lot area and other conditions such as wetlands, topography, soil conditions or similar other conditions, the director of community development and the building inspector shall notify the mayor. Pursuant to subsections (b)(1)a and b of this section the mayor shall advise the council. The council may instruct the city clerk to notify the abutters by certified mail that these lots would be available for purchase at a minimum price to be established by the council. This notice shall be done together with and in the same manner as the advertisement for proposals required by M.G.L. c. 30B. If the council has voted to dispose of the parcel as required by M.G.L. c. 30B and subsection (a)(2) of this section, the procedures required by M.G.L. c. 30B shall then be followed. The property shall be sold to the highest bidder whose bid exceeds the minimum price established by the council. If no bid exceeds the minimum price set by the council, the mayor may accept the highest bid offered subject to two-thirds approval of the full city council. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Easements, licenses, and other less than fee simple conveyances. 
(1)  All requests for the grant of an easement, license or other less than fee simple conveyance, except for a lease, shall be subject to all of the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section except as herein modified. 
(2)  The petitioner upon filing a request for an easement, etc., shall, in addition to the information required by subsection (b)(1)c of this section, provide a detailed statement setting forth the need for said easement, etc., and provide a copy of a plan indicating the location and approximate metes and bounds of said proposed easement, etc. 
(3)  If the council votes to authorize the disposition of said easement or other such interest the applicable procedures of M.G.L. c. 30B shall be followed. The buyer shall bear the costs for providing to the city's general counsel a recordable plan with the precise metes and bounds of the grant. 
(4)  All easements, etc., for septic disposal systems shall contain a provision that they shall expire within six months after sewerage is available to the property and that the buyer shall be required to connect to said sewer within those six months. 
(e)  Lease. 
(1)  All votes to authorize leases of real property by the city to third parties, shall be approved by a two-thirds vote of the full city council. 
(2)  The mayor shall recommend to the city council all terms and conditions of the lease, including the rent to be charged. 
(3)  The term of all leases shall be for a period of one year unless otherwise allowed by a provision of the general laws, in which case the term may be up to the maximum period allowed by said general laws. 
(4)  All leases of city-owned real estate are subject to the requirements of M.G.L. c. 30B and therefore no amendment or option to renew a lease may be entered into without first obtaining the approval of the chief procurement officer in addition to then obtaining city council approval. 
(Code 1970, § 2-15; Ord. of 10-28-1980, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 12-16-1986, § I; Ord. of 9-8-1987, § I; Ord. No. 12-1991, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 2015-199, 9-22-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to hold, lease and convey property, M.G.L. c. 40, § 3; sale or other disposal of realty, disposition of proceeds, M.G.L. c. 44, § 63; sales of public land, payment of taxes, M.G.L. c. 44, § 63A.  
Sec. 2-4. - Marking and use of city vehicles. 
All motor vehicles owned by the city, with the exception of unmarked police vehicles, shall be permanently lettered "City of Gloucester" on the outside of both front doors, together with the name of the department in which they belong, in letters not less than 1½ inches in height and in strong contrast to the color of the car. All such motor vehicles shall be used solely for city business, unless otherwise authorized by the mayor, with appropriate tax form 1099 submitted for private use of city vehicles. The mayor shall issue, annually, to the city council a complete list of all city employees who are authorized to utilize city-owned vehicles for travel between the city and place of domicile. 
(Code 1970, § 2-6; Ord. No. 9-1997, § I, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 2-5. - City hall—Rules and regulations for letting, use. 
(a)  The mayor may make such rules and regulations for the letting of the city hall as he may from time to time deem expedient, and make and regulate the terms and conditions by which the same shall be let. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages, marijuana or marijuana products may be served, sold, or consumed in any city building, except the director of public works may grant permission to groups or individuals to serve, sell or consume alcoholic beverages in city hall, the Rose Baker Senior Center and the American Legion building provided the applicant obtains all necessary permits and liquor licenses. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-7, 2-9; Ord. No. 53-1996, §§ I, II, 11-26-1996; Ord. of 9-30-2008(02); Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 2-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-139, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed § 2-6, which pertained to city hall—duties of junior custodian and derived from Code 1970, § 2-8.  
Sec. 2-7. - Student Government Day. 
Annually, a day known as "Student Government Day" in the city shall be designated by the city clerk and by the school department who shall cooperate with each other in the programming and planning thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 2-13; Ord. of 7-24-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 2-8. - Golden Agers' Day. 
There is hereby created and established in the city a day to be known as "Golden Agers' Day" at which time members of the Golden Age Club, by election among their organization, shall assume the positions of mayor and council, in a similar manner as student government day. The city clerk shall expedite same in conjunction with the Golden Age Club. 
(Code 1970, § 2-13.1)  
Secs. 2-9—2-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administrative orders of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-7(3). 
 
Sec. 2-20. - Constitutes governing body. 
The city council shall be the governing body of the city as provided in sections 1-3 and 2-1 of the Charter. 
(Code 1970, § 2-72)  
Sec. 2-21. - Election, composition and term of office. 
The city council shall be elected in the manner and for the terms specified in section 2-1 of the Charter. It shall consist of nine members. 
(Code 1970, § 2-73)  
Sec. 2-22. - Legislative powers. 
The city council shall exercise all legislative powers as provided by sections 1-3, 2-1 and 2-14 of the Charter. 
(Code 1970, § 2-74)  
Sec. 2-23. - Organization. 
The city council, after its election, shall meet and organize as provided in section 2-2 of the Charter. 
(Code 1970, § 2-75)  
Sec. 2-24. - Meetings; public hearings, planning review sessions. 
(a)  Regular meeting of the city council shall be held on Tuesday, in the Fred J. Kyrouz Auditorium, City Hall, on such dates as determined by the council president or by a majority vote of the city council, time and place of council meetings may only be changed by a majority vote of the council, except in the case of an emergency. 
(b)  Special meetings may be held when called in conformance with section 2-5 of the Charter. Notice of special meetings shall state the time of the meeting and the purpose thereof, and shall be signed by the person calling the meeting. 
(Code 1970, § 2-76; Ord. No. 21-1999, § I, 8-17-1999)  
Sec. 2-25. - Yeas and nays and recording of vote required. 
All final votes on questions which come before the city council shall be by yeas and nays and shall be entered on the records, as provided in section 2-5 of the Charter. 
(Code 1970, § 2-77)  
Sec. 2-26. - Tax classification, timing and notice. 
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 56, percentages of local tax levy for property (tax classification) each year in the month of October, the city council shall hold a public hearing to determine the percentage of local tax levy to be borne by each class of real and personal property. In the fifth year where the commissioner certified the board of assessors that all property is being assessed at full and fair cash value every effort shall be made to comply with the intent of this section. Notice of the hearing shall be in accordance with the open meeting law, and additionally, by two hearing notices appearing in a newspaper serving the city, the first notice appearing at least 14 days prior to the hearing. To the extent possible, the notice shall appear on the back page of the first section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 33-1997, § I, 3-18-1997; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 2-27. - Authority to hire outside consultants. 
The city council has the authority to hire outside consultants according M.G.L. c. 44, § 53G. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2007(02); Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 2-28. - Fees. 
All fees contained in the city schedule of fees are hereby established and authorized. Said fees may be modified from time to time by vote of the city council unless the fees are governed and controlled by M.G.L. The schedule shall be posted on the city website and published in a local newspaper whenever fee changes or new fees are approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2013(014))  
Sec. 2-29. - Council salary. 
City councilor salaries shall be $11,500.00 per year beginning January 1, 2014. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013(026))  
Secs. 2-30—2-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Procedures for appointments to city offices, section 2-10. 
Cross reference— Collective bargaining agreements between city and its employees saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); ordinances pertaining to city personnel regulations, salaries, benefits or retirement of officers of the city or pertaining to department, board, or other agency administering such ordinances saved from repeal, § 1-7(8); dog officer, § 4-20; fire chief to act as forest warden, § 8-23; harbormaster, deputy harbormaster and assistant harbor master, § 10-20 et seq.; officers of planning board, § 16-17; provisions relating to chief of police, § 17-20 et seq.; provisions relating to supervisor of attendance of schools, §§ 18-2, 18-3; shellfish constable, deputy shellfish constable, § 20-1; sewer inspectors, § 23-40; inspector of wires, § 23-75 et seq.; provisions relating to tree warden, § 24-16 et seq.; provisions pertaining to sealer of weights and measures, § 26-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-40. - Records and reports of departments and officers. 
All department heads and other officers of the city government shall keep and furnish such records and reports, in book form or otherwise, as shall be prescribed by the city auditor. 
(Code 1970, § 2-144)  
Sec. 2-41. - Filing statements of money received with auditor. 
All officers and department heads which pay over to the city treasurer fees or money received by them, as required by section 2-72 shall, at the same time, file with the city auditor an itemized statement of the sources from which such fees or money were received and the amount thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 2-147)  
Sec. 2-42. - Filing itemized accounts with auditor. 
All offices and department heads required to deposit bills with the city treasurer or send out bills for collection shall file with the city auditor an itemized account of the same with the statement of the accounts to which the same should be credited when paid, and upon payment thereof, report of the items shall be made by the city treasurer to the city auditor and to the department for which it was made. 
(Code 1970, § 2-146)  
Sec. 2-43. - Official bonds. 
(a)  Every city officer, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, shall give such bond as the city council may from time to time require, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
(b)  A registry of all surety bonds required by this section shall be kept by the city auditor. 
(c)  All premiums for the surety bonds required in this section shall be paid by the city. 
(d)  Surety companies which shall provide bonds under this section shall be authorized to transact business in the commonwealth. 
(Code 1970, § 2-25) 
State Law reference— Fidelity bonds, payment of premiums, M.G.L. c. 41, § 109A.  
Sec. 2-44. - Special municipal employees. 
(a)  The following positions, agencies, boards, commissions, committees, etc., are designated and classified as special municipal employees: 
(1)  Affordable housing trust. 
(2)  Archives and records advisory commission. 
(3)  Board of appeals, building. 
(4)  Board of appeals, zoning. 
(5)  Board of health. 
(6)  Cable TV advisory commission. 
(7)  Capital improvement advisory board. 
(8)  Citizens advisory committee. 
(9)  City building committees. 
(10)  City electrician. 
(11)  Clean energy commission. 
(12)  Committee for the arts. 
(13)  Community development block grant advisory board. 
(14)  Community pier association. 
(15)  Community preservation committee. 
(16)  Conservation commission control. 
(17)  Council for aging. 
(18)  Designer selection committee. 
(19)  Director of civil defense. 
(20)  Downtown development commission. 
(21)  Economic development industrial corporation. 
(22)  Fisheries commission. 
(23)  Forestry fire warden. 
(24)  Gloucester cultural council. 
(25)  Historical commission. 
(26)  Historic district commission. 
(27)  Housing authority. 
(28)  Industrial development commission. 
(29)  Industrial development finance authority. 
(30)  Licensing board. 
(31)  Licensing commission. 
(32)  Mariner's medal committee. 
(33)  Open space committee. 
(34)  Plan implementation review committee. 
(35)  Planning board. 
(36)  Poet laureate. 
(37)  Registrar of voters. 
(38)  Sanders temperance fund agent. 
(39)  School committee. 
(40)  Shellfish advisory commission. 
(41)  Superintendent insect and pest. 
(42)  Tourist commission. 
(43)  Traffic commission. 
(44)  Tree warden. 
(45)  Trust funds, board of commission. 
(46)  Vocational advisory committee. 
(47)  Waterways board. 
(48)  Youth committee. 
(b)  Persons employed by the city as professional consultants, specifically including the following: 
(1)  Appraising; 
(2)  Law; 
(3)  Medicine; 
(4)  Engineering and architecture; 
(5)  Auditing and management; 
(6)  Science, public relations and writing; 
(7)  Investment counseling, aesthetics; 
shall be classified as special municipal employees. 
(c)  "Special municipal employee" means a person performing services for or holding an office, position, employment or membership in a municipal agency, whether by election, appointment, contract of hire or engagement, whether serving with or without compensation on a full, regular, part-time, intermittent, or consultant basis. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1979, § I(2-62); Ord. No. 15-1994, § 1, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 8-3-2010(01)) 
Editor's note— Provisions amending § 2-62 of the 1970 Revision of the Ordinances, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 2-44.  
Secs. 2-45—2-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MAYOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to mayor, section 3-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-50. - Closing offices; ordering display of flags. 
The mayor may order the public buildings or any of the public offices of the city to be closed, not exceeding one day at a time, whenever he deems it expedient, and may at any time order flags to be displayed thereon and on any city flag staff. 
(Code 1970, § 2-94)  
Sec. 2-51. - Supervision of municipal insurance. 
(a)  All municipal insurance, including fire, liability, fiduciary, bonds and protective insurance of all kinds, shall be in the charge of the mayor or his designee. 
(b)  In case a loss is suffered under any policy of insurance held by the city, such loss shall immediately be reported by the department head or board in control of such property to the mayor, who shall take the necessary steps to recover for such loss. 
(Code 1970, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-52. - Signing or approval of contracts, deeds, etc. 
(a)  All agreements, contracts, deeds, indentures, instruments or leases that may be given or required to be executed by the city shall be signed or approved by the mayor and sealed with the seal of the city. 
(b)  The council shall be notified in writing whenever a request for proposal for a lease of real property with a term which exceeds more than one year or the total cost is expected to exceed $250,000.00 issued. 
(c)  The notification shall conform to the requirements of the M.G.L. c. 30A, §§ 18—25. The council may request additional detail in an executive session meeting as provided for in the state law. 
(d)  Should the mayor fail to comply with all of the above provisions, then the city shall lease no real property or structure in excess of one year unless the funding for that lease is expressly approved by a majority of the membership of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 2-92; Ord. No. 2014-252, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 2-53. - Discharge, release or assignment of mortgages. 
Whenever any person, having lawful authority to redeem any estate mortgaged to the city, shall make application to the mayor for such purpose, the mayor shall have the power, on payment of the money due on such mortgage to the city treasurer, to discharge, release or assign the same, without liability or recourse to the city, and to execute, in behalf of the city, any and all legal instruments that may be necessary for this purpose, with authority to seal the same with the seal of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-93)  
Sec. 2-54. - Compensation. 
The mayor will receive annual compensation of $100,000.00, effective January 1, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 6-1996, § J, 3-19-1996; Ord. of 3-27-2012(01))  
Secs. 2-55—2-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— City clerks generally, M.G.L. c. 41, § 12 et seq.; appointment and term of city clerk, M.G.L. c. 43, § 18. 
 
Sec. 2-60. - General duties; permitting removal of records. 
(a)  The city clerk shall perform all the duties required by the general laws of the commonwealth, the Charter, this Code and the other ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The city clerk shall have the care and control of the city records, and of all documents, maps, plans and papers of the city, respecting the care and custody of which no other provision is made. He shall keep all records and documents belonging to his office in his custody, and shall in no case, except upon summons in due form of law or when the temporary removal of records and documents in his custody is necessary or convenient for the transaction of the business of the courts, or the performance of the duties of his office, cause or permit any record or document to be removed therefrom. 
(c)  The city clerk shall post a notice on the city bulletin board informing the public that copies of public records are available from his office on request. 
(Code 1970, § 2-106) 
Charter reference— Duties of city clerk generally, section 2-7(b); city clerk to serve as clerk of the council, section 2-8.  
Sec. 2-61. - Copying and indexing records. 
The city clerk may cause any of the public records and papers in his office to be copied, arranged and indexed conveniently for examination and reference, whenever in his opinion the same may be necessary. 
(Code 1970, § 2-107)  
Sec. 2-62. - Compensation ordinances to be transmitted to auditor. 
The city clerk shall transmit to the city auditor a copy of every ordinance fixing or changing the compensation of any officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-108)  
Sec. 2-63. - Assistant—Office established; appointment; oath; removal. 
The office of assistant city clerk is hereby established. The assistant city clerk shall be appointed by the city clerk, but such appointment shall be subject to the approval of the city council. The assistant city clerk shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of the duties of the office, and may be removed at any time by the city clerk with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 2-109) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to create office of assistant clerk and provide for his manner of appointment, M.G.L. c. 41, § 18.  
Sec. 2-64. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the assistant city clerk to assist the city clerk in the performance of the duties of his office and, in the absence of the city clerk, to do and perform all duties pertaining to the office of city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk shall post notice on the city website of all meetings or all multiple-member city boards and commissions at least 48 hours in advance on the official city website and shall indicate date, time, and place of the meeting and a brief summary agenda. Publication on the city website shall be in addition to other statutory requirements for advertisement and posting of hearings and public meetings. 
(Code 1970, § 2-110; Ord. of 11-14-2006(02))  
Sec. 2-65. - Authorization of fund to maintain, repair, etc. city records; collection; limit. 
Authorization of the city auditor to establish of a revolving fund for the city clerk's office for maintenance, repair, preservation and safekeeping of the permanent records of the city, in accordance with M.G.L. c. 44, § 53E½ with the stipulation that the source of funds will be a surcharge of $2.50, to be placed upon all vital records sold in the city clerk's office and that said fund not exceed $10,000.00 for FY09. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008)  
Secs. 2-66—2-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER-COLLECTOR/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-100, adopted May 23, 2017, amended Div. 4, and in so doing changed the title of said division from "City Treasurer-Collector" to "City Treasurer-Collector/Chief Financial Officer," as set out here. Previously, Ord. No. 11-1990, adopted April 17, 1990, amended this Code by repealing division 4, §§ 2-70—2-77, and division 5, §§ 2-85—2-90 of this article, pertaining to the city treasurer and the city collector as derived from the 1970 Code. Ord. No. 11-1990 combined these two offices into one to be known as the city treasurer-collector and provided for a new division 4 of this article of that title as herein set out. 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to city treasurers, M.G.L. c. 41, § 35 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-70. - Appointment and term. 
The mayor shall appoint a city treasurer-collector who shall be confirmed by the city council in even years only. He shall hold office for a term of two years and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. He may also be referred to as the chief financial officer. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990; Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 2-71. - Bond. 
The city treasurer-collector shall give such bond as is required by M.G.L. c. 41, § 35 and c. 60, § 13. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-72. - Department heads and other officers to remit money. 
The head of each department and all officers receiving money for the city shall remit to the city treasurer-collector at least once a week, all moneys that may be in the possession of such department or officers belonging to the city, except in such cases where the time of payment to the city treasurer-collector is prescribed by statute. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-73. - Deposits in banks. 
The city treasurer-collector shall keep his cash balances of all moneys on deposit at interest, and in such banks as the mayor shall approve. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-74. - Records to be kept in fireproof safe. 
The city treasurer-collector shall cause all books, papers, vouchers and documents of permanent record under his care, belonging to the city, when not in use, to be deposited and kept in a fireproof safe or vault, provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-75. - Duty to furnish information to city council and mayor. 
The city treasurer-collector shall furnish such information respecting the accounts, finances or payments of or to the city, as the city council or mayor may at any time require, including the semiannual report to the city council prescribed by section 7-19 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-76. - Reports from and audit of accounts of city treasurer-collector. 
The receipts and payments of the city treasurer-collector shall be reported monthly to the city auditor in such form as the city auditor may desire, and the accounts of such office shall be regularly audited by him. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-77. - Delivery of books and other property to successor. 
The city treasurer-collector shall deliver to his successor, or to any person appointed by the mayor to receive the same, all papers, books, documents and property belonging to the office. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-78. - Deposits in banks. 
The city treasurer-collector shall keep his cash balances of all moneys on deposit at interest, and in such banks as the mayor shall approve. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-79. - General duties. 
The city treasurer-collector, shall do and perform all the duties required of him as the city treasurer-collector of the city as embodied in M.G.L. cs. 31, 41, 44, 48, 51, 58, 60, 100 and 132, together with any ordinances of the city relating to the same. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-80. - Receiving office for all taxes. 
The office of the city treasurer-collector shall be the receiving office for all moneys due and payable to the city from all commonwealth, county and city taxes or all other assessments duly assessed and committed to him for collection by the board of assessors. As the city treasurer-collector, he shall be the only authorized officer to receive and receipt for any such moneys payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990)  
Sec. 2-81. - Collection of debts and claims due city. 
(a)  The treasurer-collector shall enforce the collection of all debts, dues and claims due to the city and shall be authorized and empowered and it shall be his duty to enforce collection by action at law or otherwise of the same, and for this purpose, all officers, boards and commissions shall monthly transmit and commit to the treasurer-collector for such action all sums then owing or due to their respective departments, boards or commissions. 
(b)  All officers, boards and commissions shall provide monthly a copy of invoices, statements or contracts to the city treasurer-collector, to enable him to determine accurately the sum or sums due to the city. 
(c)  All payments due to the city from third parties for private details worked by city police officers shall be due and payable within 30 days of the invoice date. All payments which remain unpaid after such 30 days shall accrue interest at the rate allowed under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 59, § 57. 
(Ord. No. 11-1990, 4-17-1990; Ord. of 6-19-2001(01), § I)  
Sec. 2-82. - Unpaid taxes and local licenses and permits. 
(a)  The city comptroller shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any persons, corporation or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any other local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or other municipal charges who have not paid said local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or other municipal charges including amounts assessed under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, civil ticketing statute for over a 12-month period. This article shall not apply to any party who has filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or has a pending petition before the appellate tax board. 
(b)  The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any building permit or local license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the comptroller; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and comptroller, as required by applicable provisions of law and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than 14 days after said notice. The hearing will be held by the licensing or permit granting authority. The comptroller has the right to intervene in the hearing. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The comptroller shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the comptroller that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other city charges, payable to the city as the date of issuance of said certificate. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: 
a.  Open burning (M.G.L. c. 48, § 13); 
b.  Reserved; 
c.  Sales of articles for charitable purposes (M.G.L. c. 101, § 33); 
d.  Children work permits (M.G.L. c. 149, § 70); 
e.  Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses (M.G.L. c. 140, § 21E); 
f.  Dog licenses (M.G.L. c. 140, § 137); 
g.  Fishing, hunting, trapping license (M.G.L. c. 131, § 12); 
h.  Marriage licenses (M.G.L. c. 207, § 28); 
i.  Reserved; 
j.  Theatrical events and public exhibition permits (M.G.L. c. 140, § 181). 
(2)  Appeals will be through the superior court in an action for certiorari pursuant to M.G.L. c. 249, § 4. 
(3)  In accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 57(d), this section shall also not apply to local licenses and permits as follows: 
a.  Chapter 3, amusements. 
b.  Chapter 5, article III only, electrical regulations. 
c.  Chapter 8, fire prevention. 
d.  Chapter 9, garbage, refuse and waste. 
e.  Chapter 10, waterways administration. 
f.  Chapter 11, hawkers and peddlers. 
g.  Chapter 12, marshlands. 
h.  Chapter 15, parks and recreation. 
i.  Chapter 19, secondhand goods. 
j.  Chapter 20, shellfish, seaworm, and eels. 
k.  Chapter 21, streets, sidewalks and other public places. 
l.  Chapter 23, utilities. 
m.  Chapter 24, vegetation. 
n.  Chapter 25, vehicles for hire. 
o.  Chapter 26, weights and measures. 
(c)  Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law. 
(d)  The city council may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owners, its officers or stockholders, if any or members of his immediate family, as defined in M.G.L. c. 268A, § 1 in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. 
(Ord. No. 51-1996, § 1, 10-29-1996; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 2-83. - Community Preservation Act—Surcharge; exemptions. 
The city adopted M.G.L. c. 44B, § 1 et seq., the Community Preservation Act, which imposes a surcharge on real property. The act authorizes the property owner to file an application for an exemption on the basis of certain criteria. In adopting M.G.L. c. 44B, the city accepted the following exemptions: 
(1)  For property owned and occupied as a domicile by a person who would qualify for low income housing or low or moderate income senior housing in the city; and 
(2)  For $100,000.00 of the value of each taxable parcel of residential real property. 
The Act does not establish a deadline for filing the application. The city hereby establishes a deadline which matches the time restrictions for filing an exemption pursuant to M.G.L. c. 59. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2009(02); Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-139, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, deleted §§ 2-83—2-87, which pertained to provisions related to the community preservation committee. Said provisions have been superseded by and are now set forth in § 2-532 et seq. of the Code. In so deleting said sections, §§ 2-88 and 2-89 have been renumbered as §§ 2-83 and 2-84, as set out herein. Former sections 2-83—2-87 derived from Ord. of 7-23-2008, §§ 514—518.  
Sec. 2-84. - Same—Application. 
An application for an exemption from the Community Preservation Act surcharge shall be filed with the board of assessors by December 15 or three months after the actual bills are mailed for the fiscal year, whichever is later. An application shall be considered filed when: 
(1)  Received by the assessors on or before the filing deadline; or 
(2)  Mailed by United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, to the proper address of the assessors, on or before the filing deadline, as shown by a postmark made by the United States Postal Service. 
All other procedures and deadlines for the consideration of the exemption shall be in accordance with the personal property exemption procedure as set forth in M.G.L. c. 59. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2009(03); Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-139, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, deleted §§ 2-83—2-87, which pertained to provisions related to the community preservation committee. Said provisions have been superseded by and are now set forth in § 2-532 et seq. of the Code. In so deleting said sections, §§ 2-88 and 2-89 have been renumbered as §§ 2-83 and 2-84, as set out herein. Former sections 2-83—2-87 derived from Ord. of 7-23-2008, §§ 514—518.  
Secs. 2-85—2-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 
 
Sec. 2-95. - Appointment and term. 
Subject to the provisions of section 3-7 of the Charter, the mayor shall appoint a chief administrative officer to hold office for a term of two years and to be confirmed by the city council in even years only. 
(Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
DIVISION 5A. - INFORMATION SERVICES DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-96. - Appointment and term. 
The mayor shall appoint a director of information services to hold office for a term of two years and to be confirmed by the city council in odd years only. The information services officer, under the supervision and direction of the mayor, shall act as the chief information services officer for all departments within city government and shall have direct responsibility and control over all information technology and services systems within city government. 
(Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
DIVISION 5B. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-97. - Term. 
The community development director shall be appointed pursuant to section 5-3 of the Charter and hold office for a term of two years and shall be confirmed by the city council in even years only. 
(Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Secs. 2-98, 2-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - CITY AUDITOR[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Auditors generally, M.G.L. c. 41, § 48 et seq.; c. 43, § 18. 
 
Sec. 2-100. - Appointment and term. 
The city council shall appoint a city auditor to hold office for two years and until his successor is qualified. 
(Code 1970, § 2-137)  
Sec. 2-101. - General duties. 
In addition to the duties prescribed by this article, the city auditor shall perform such other service as may be required of him by statute, by section 2-7 of the Charter, by this Code or the other ordinances of the city or by any vote of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 2-138)  
Sec. 2-102. - Method of keeping accounts. 
The city auditor shall keep his accounts in the form now in use until otherwise ordered by the city council, and by such divisions and such details as may be necessary to a clear exhibit of the expenses incurred by each of the several departments of the government in their various operations, stating among other things, the appropriation for each department, and for each distinct object of expenditure. 
(Code 1970, § 2-139)  
Sec. 2-103. - Report of status of appropriations. 
The city auditor shall, within ten days from the approval of the monthly bills by the mayor, submit to him a printed statement of all existing appropriations, general and special, and the respective amounts expended and unexpended in each of the same. 
(Code 1970, § 2-140)  
Sec. 2-104. - Duty when appropriations are exhausted. 
Whenever the appropriations for any department or for any objects have been exhausted, the city auditor shall immediately communicate the fact to the mayor and the city council, and all expenditures therefor shall cease until a further application is duly made. 
(Code 1970, § 2-141)  
Sec. 2-105. - Monthly reports to council. 
The city auditor shall make a monthly statement of receipts and expenditures to the city council in such form and detail as it shall prescribe. 
(Code 1970, § 2-142)  
Sec. 2-106. - Annual report to council. 
On or before April 1 in each year, the city auditor shall report, in writing, to the city council the receipts and expenditures for the preceding fiscal year, giving the details thereof under their separate heads and the purposes for which such expenditures were made. 
(Code 1970, § 2-143)  
Sec. 2-107. - Procedure for payment of bills and accounts against city. 
(a)  The city auditor shall receive all bills and accounts from persons having demands against the city, examine them in detail, and have them filed and entered in books in such manner and form as the city council may direct. All doubtful bills and accounts so received shall be presented by the city auditor to the mayor before being entered in the books. Before money is paid out of the city treasury, a requisition therefor in writing, with detailed accounts attached, specifying the amount to be paid, and the party to whom the payment is due, shall be made by the board or head of the department incurring the expenditure, upon the city auditor. The city auditor shall receive all such requisitions, accounts and claims rendered against the city, and carefully examine the same, and shall see that they are correctly cast and approved. In case of any error or informality, he shall make note of the fact, and return the bill or demand with the objections to the officer, board or person presenting the same. When the regular weekly or monthly bills due from the city for services rendered or supplies furnished shall have been recorded by the city auditor, the draft or order upon the city treasurer for the payment of the aggregate amount of the bills aforesaid shall be signed by the mayor, and countersigned by the city auditor. 
(b)  The city auditor shall give his certificates for all bills approved as aforesaid to the city treasurer, which certificate shall specify the account or appropriation to which the bill is chargeable, the name of the person authorized to receive the amount due, together with the amount duty approved and payable to the person. Any such certificate shall be signed by the city auditor, and upon presentation shall be paid by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1970, § 2-148) 
State Law reference— Approval of bills by auditor, M.G.L. c. 41, § 52.  
Sec. 2-108. - Countersigning and registering bonds; recordation of bonds and notes. 
Whenever any bonds shall be issued by the city, the city auditor shall countersign and register the same, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. He shall record all notes and bonds issued by the city treasurer and countersigned by the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 2-149)  
Sec. 2-109. - Assistant. 
(a)  The office of assistant city auditor is hereby established. The assistant city auditor shall be appointed by the city auditor subject to the confirmation of the city council, and shall hold office until his successor is chosen and qualified. 
(b)  The assistant city auditor shall be sworn to the faithful discharge of the duties thereof. 
(c)  The assistant city auditor shall perform such duties as the city auditor may from time to time assign. If by reason of illness, absence or other cause, the city auditor is temporarily unable or ceases to perform the duties of his office, the assistant city auditor shall perform the same duties until such disability ceases, and if a vacancy occurs in the office of city auditor, the assistant city auditor shall perform the duties of such office until such vacancy is filled. 
(Code 1970, § 2-150; Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017) 
State Law reference— Assistant auditors, M.G.L. c. 41, § 49A.  
Secs. 2-110—2-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Inspectors of buildings, M.G.L. c. 143, § 3. 
 
Sec. 2-115. - Designated. 
The mayor shall designate a person to act as the inspector of buildings who shall be confirmed by the city council in odd years only. Said designation shall be made for a term of two years. 
(Code 1970, § 4-13; Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 2-116. - General duties. 
The inspector of buildings shall perform the duties vested by statute in or usually exercised by an inspector of buildings, including the enforcement of the following: 
(1)  The city's zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Its building regulations; and 
(3)  The commonwealth building code. 
(Code 1970, § 4-16)  
Sec. 2-117. - Records and reports. 
The inspector of buildings shall keep a record of the business of his office, including all violations of sections 5-15 to 5-39 and all other ordinances relating to buildings. He shall annually submit to the mayor a report of his activities during the preceding year. 
(Code 1970, § 4-17)  
Secs. 2-118—2-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CITY ENGINEER 
 
Sec. 2-125. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-100, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed § 2-125, which pertained to appointment; term; removal and derived from Code 1970, § 2-212.  
Sec. 2-126. - General duties. 
The city engineer shall work for, and perform such services as may be required of him by the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 2-213)  
Sec. 2-127. - Custody of instruments, plans, profiles, etc. 
The city engineer shall have charge and custody of all the surveying instruments, plans, profiles and measurements of all the buildings, streets, sidewalks, drains and sewers, culverts and bridges, public park lands, playgrounds, reservoirs, landings and lands, reservoirs, waterbasins and lands connected with the water, belonging to the city, and keep the same, when not in use, in a fireproof vault provided for him by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-214)  
Sec. 2-128. - Records of surveys. 
The city engineer shall make and keep a record of all surveys of the streets, alleys, market places, public landings, land and commons and all other public works of the city, and execute plans and drafts of the same. 
(Code 1970, § 2-215)  
Sec. 2-129. - Ascertainment of street grades, levels, boundaries, etc. 
The city engineer shall calculate and ascertain the proper grade and level of all streets which now are, or may hereafter be accepted, laid out and established by the city council, with the boundaries and measurements thereof, the names of the owners of estates, if known, upon and through which such streets may be located, and the estates abutting thereon. 
(Code 1970, § 2-216) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21.  
Secs. 2-130—2-134. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - CITY ELECTRICIAN[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical regulations, § 5-40 et seq.; city electrician to have right of access to interior wirings, appliances, etc., § 5-45; city electrician designated as inspector of wires, § 23-75. 
 
Sec. 2-135. - Position established; qualifications; term; duties; powers. 
(a)  There is hereby established the position of city electrician. The city electrician shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  The city electrician shall be a competent and experienced electrician. 
(c)  The city electrician's tenure of office shall be governed by the requirements of the personnel ordinance. 
(d)  The city electrician shall perform such duties as are, or may hereafter be imposed upon him by law or by ordinance of the city council. 
(e)  The jurisdiction of the city electrician shall include all public and private electrical systems installed in the city. 
(Code 1970, § 7-1)  
Sec. 2-136. - Powers and duties relative to fire alarm and police signal systems. 
(a)  The fire chief shall be the superintendent of the fire alarm and police signal systems of the city and shall have jurisdiction over such systems. He shall have the care and management of the wires, apparatus and machinery, and other property connected therewith, belonging to the city, shall keep the same at all times in good working order, and shall have access to all buildings and places necessary for these purposes. All additions to such systems shall be erected under his supervision and to his satisfaction. 
(b)  In performing his duties as superintendent of the fire alarm and police signal systems, and in all respects pertaining to the management and control thereof, the fire chief shall be under the general direction of the mayor and shall consult with the mayor on all matters involving the workings of such systems. 
(c)  The annual fee of $175.00 shall be established for each fire alarm master box connected to the municipal fire alarm system. 
(d)  The administration be authorized to put out to bid and subsequently enter into a five-year lease with a private provider for the service and maintenance of the municipal fire alarm system. 
(e)  The fire chief be designated as the authority to recommend subsequent fees for the maintenance and service of said fire box systems, through the mayor's office and with approval by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 7-2; Ord. no. 2-1993, § I, 1-19-1993) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; alarm systems, § 14-26 et seq.; police, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Fire alarms and sprinkler systems, M.G.L. c. 148, § 26 et seq.; police signal system, M.G.L. c. 268, § 32.  
Sec. 2-137. - Records. 
The city electrician shall keep records of all inspections made and permits issued by him, and these records shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by any interested party. 
(Code 1970, § 7-8)  
Sec. 2-138. - Annual report. 
The fire chief shall make an annual report to the mayor concerning his activities of the preceding year, the condition of all wires under his supervision within the city and all necessary information regarding his office. 
(Code 1970, § 7-9; Ord. No. 2-1993, § I, 1-19-1993)  
Secs. 2-139—2-144. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - CITY PHYSICIAN[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment of physician by board of health, M.G.L. c. 111, § 27. 
 
Sec. 2-145. - Position established; duties. 
There is hereby established in the city the position of city physician, who shall serve without compensation and who shall be responsible for administering pre-employment physical examinations. 
(Ord. of 5-8-1979, § I(171))  
Secs. 2-146—2-154. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - WORKERS' COMPENSATION AGENT 
 
Sec. 2-155. - Position established. 
The position of workers' compensation agent is hereby established to act as such in all matters which concern the city. 
(Code 1970, § 2-226; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
State Law reference— Duty to designate local workmen's compensation agent, M.G.L. c. 152, § 75.  
Sec. 2-156. - Appointment; term. 
The workers' compensation agent shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, and he shall continue to act as such agent until his appointment is revoked and a new agent appointed. The mayor may appoint, to the position of workers' compensation agent, any city official or employee already filling another position of employment in the city government, provided that the additional duties do not conflict with civil service rules and regulations and are agreed to be performed by the person so appointed. 
(Code 1970, § 2-227; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 2-157. - Duties prescribed. 
The workers' compensation agent shall be responsible for the proper carrying out of the duties to be performed by such an agent under M.G.L. c. 152, § 75 in particular, as well as the duties which devolve upon such an agent by any other provision of law, and such duties as may be given him to perform by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 2-228; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 2-158. - Supervision. 
The workers' compensation agent's duties shall be performed under the direction and supervision of the department of the commonwealth administering the workers' compensation laws. 
(Code 1970, § 2-229; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Secs. 2-159—2-259. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference— Procedures governing conduct of multi-member bodies, section 10-6. 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-15 et seq.; police department, § 17-15 et seq.; inspection of wires department, § 23-75. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-260. - Interruption in term of service. 
Any new appointed employee shall serve the remainder of the current term as designated for his new position plus one additional term. 
(Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Secs. 2-261—2-269. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LAW DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-270. - Organization. 
There is hereby established a law department to provide the city with legal services on a fulltime basis. Office facilities and secretarial staff shall be provided by the city for the use of general counsel and assistants. The facilities shall include a central law library which will be available for the official use of all city departments. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1980, § I(2-121))  
Sec. 2-271. - General counsel; appointment, duties; term. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint general counsel who shall hold office for a term of two years and until a successor has been appointed and qualified. The general counsel shall be confirmed by the city council in odd years only. The general counsel shall be prohibited from receiving any compensation from the practice of law other than from the city. The appointment of the general counsel shall be subject to confirmation by the city council as provided in section 2-10 of the Charter. 
(b)  The general counsel shall be a member of the federal and commonwealth bars and shall not hold any other office created by the city council during the period for which the appointment under this section is effective. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, the duties of the general counsel shall include: 
(1)  Commencing and prosecuting all actions by the city before any tribunal in the commonwealth, whether in law or equity; 
(2)  Appearing in, defending and advocating the rights and interests of the city wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinance or act of the city government, or any breach of any ordinance, may be brought into question; 
(3)  Appearing before the legislature of the commonwealth, or any committee thereof, whether of either or both branches of the same, and there, in behalf of the city, to represent, answer for, defend and advocate the welfare and interests of the city wherever the same may be directly or incidentally affected, whether to prosecute or defend the same; 
(4)  Appearing as counsel in the prosecution of criminal cases before the District Court of Eastern Essex when requested by the city council or the chief of police to do so; 
(5)  Drafting and reviewing approval for all bonds, deeds, obligations, contracts, leases, agreements, conveyances and other legal instruments of whatever nature; 
(6)  Furnishing the city council and any other officer of the city who may require it in the official discharge of his duties, when requested, with a legal opinion on any subject relating to or affecting the duties of their respective offices; 
such additional powers and professional duties as the city council may from time to time prescribe. 
(d)  The general counsel shall be responsible for the management of all municipal legal affairs, as described in subsection (c) of this section, and in furtherance of those duties may refer particular matters to special counsel as provided in section 2-272. In all cases in which a matter has been referred to special counsel the general counsel shall remain responsible for the supervision and management of the matter. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1980, § I(2-122); Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 2-272. - Special counsel; appointment, duties, payment; term. 
(a)  The city may retain under written contract, as a part of its law department, individual attorneys or law firms as special counsel, to provide specialized or short-term legal services as may be required by the best interests of the city. Any individual or firm so retained shall be duly qualified to provide the requisite legal services, including representation in all commonwealth and federal courts and administrative agencies and before any legislative or executive body. 
(b)  The special counsel shall be paid on an hourly basis for services rendered and may be reimbursed for necessary disbursements related to their services on behalf of the city when approved in advance by the general counsel. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1980, § I(2-123))  
Sec. 2-273. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-100, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed § 2-273, which pertained to assistant to the general counsel; appointment; duties; term and derived from Ord. of 6-17-1980, § I(2-124).  
Sec. 2-274. - Travel expenses. 
In all cases when the general court or assistant to the general counsel may be required to attend municipal affairs outside of the city, travel and related expenses shall be allowed. 
(Ord. of 6-17-1980, § I(2-125))  
Secs. 2-275—2-279. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference— Provision for moving of building by director of public works, § 5-25. 
 
Sec. 2-280. - Established. 
There is hereby established in the city a department of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 2-201)  
Sec. 2-281. - Director of public works—Position confirmed; appointment; term. 
The department of public works shall be managed by the director of public works under the supervision of the mayor, which position is hereby ratified as established by section 7-16 of the Charter. The director shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of two years subject to the approval of the city council in odd years only. 
(Code 1970, § 2-202; Ord. No. 7-1991, § I, 3-12-1991; Ord. No. 23-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017) 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of the director of public works, § 7-16.  
Sec. 2-282. - Same—Creation of divisions or other units in department. 
The director of public works may subdivide the department of public works into divisions or other units which, in his opinion, will produce the greatest efficiency in the department, and he may allot to each of such divisions or units the activities or parts of activities set forth in this division and as may be added to this division from time to time. 
(Code 1970, § 2-203)  
Sec. 2-283. - General powers and duties. 
The department of public works, under the direction of its director of public works and the supervision of the mayor, shall: 
(1)  Have the direction and control of the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and management of ways, streets, sidewalks, bridges, fences and retaining walls; 
(2)  Cause to be made and have the technical custody of all plans, surveys, measurements and levels pertaining to public ways, drains and all other public lands belonging to the city; 
(3)  Direct and control all the engineering activities of or pertaining to the city; 
(4)  Have charge and control of all the public lands belonging to the city, including beaches, cemeteries, and the Dorothy Talbot Rink, with the exception of all other school buildings and grounds; 
(5)  Have the management and control of the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and care of all the public buildings including school buildings and grounds owned by the City of Gloucester; 
(6)  Have the management and control of the cleaning of and snow removal from streets and ways, as well as street lighting; 
(7)  Manage and control the collection of refuse and arrange for its disposal; 
(8)  Have charge of the procurement, management, repair, maintenance and allocation of all motor vehicles, machinery and miscellaneous property and equipment within such department, excluding that which may be under the jurisdiction of the school department; 
(9)  Have the management and control of the activities of the city forestry, tree and moth control departments, and the maintenance of the parking meter systems and airfields, if any should be established by the city; 
(10)  Have the management and control of the municipal sanitary landfill; 
(11)  Have the charge and control of all the lands, buildings and other property and also the direction and control of all the activities heretofore directed by the board of park commissioners, the playground and recreation commission, the board of sewerage survey and the board of water commissioners; 
(12)  Have, possesses and exercises all of the powers and duties heretofore exercised by the superintendent of insect and pest control and by the city forester, respectively; 
(13)  Perform such other duties as the city council may by ordinance from time to time direct. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-204, 2-205(a), 2-20; Ord. of 6-22-2010) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; cemeteries, ch. 6; trash, recycling, and litter, ch. 9; parks and recreation, ch. 15; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21; vegetation, ch. 24.  
Sec. 2-284. - City motor pool. 
(a)  A city motor pool is hereby established which shall consist of all city-owned or leased regulatory and other vehicles assigned to the department of public works and its divisions. The director of public works shall be responsible for the supervision, management, control and regulation of the city motor pool. 
(b)  City motor pool vehicles shall be used only for official municipal purposes. Official municipal purposes do not include, among other things, transportation between domiciles and places of employment or other personal use, except as authorized on an emergency basis by the director of public works. No municipal employee shall take a city motor pool vehicle to his domicile on a regular or routine basis, at noontime, overnight or on any other nonemergency occasion without the written authorization of the director of public works. 
(c)  City motor pool vehicles, when not being used in conjunction with official purposes, shall be parked at secure locations as designated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. of 6-7-1983, § I)  
Sec. 2-285. - Centralized maintenance department. 
The department of public works, under the direction of the director, shall include a centralized maintenance department for the purpose of maintaining all buildings and land owned by the city including school buildings and grounds. The centralized maintenance department is hereby established as authorized by Section 4-3 of the City Charter and the adoption of M.G.L. c. 71, § 37M, by the city council and the school committee. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2010)  
Secs. 2-286—2-289. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS' SERVICES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Veterans' benefits generally, M.G.L. c. 115, § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-290. - Established; purpose. 
The department of veterans' services is hereby established to carry out what is required to be done by the city for servicemen under M.G.L. c. 115, and for the purpose of furnishing such information, advice and assistance to veterans as may be necessary to enable them to procure the benefits to which they are, or may be, entitled, and for the purpose of keeping records of veterans' services and photostating and recording their discharges. 
(Code 1970, § 26-12) 
State Law reference— Requirement to establish local department of veterans' services, M.G.L. c. 115, § 10.  
Sec. 2-291. - Appointment, qualifications and general powers and duties of director. 
The department of veterans' services shall be administered by a director who shall have all the powers and duties of the veterans' benefits agent and of the director of veterans' services, and who shall be a veteran and shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of two years and approved by the city council in odd years only. 
(Code 1970, § 26-13; Ord. of 7-24-2012(02); Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 2-292. - Clerks. 
The director of the department of veterans' services shall be assisted by such clerks, either regular or temporary, as the city council shall, from time to time determine. 
(Code 1970, § 26-14)  
Sec. 2-293. - Duties. 
The director and employees of the Department of Veterans' Services shall advise and assist persons who have enlisted or have been inducted or entered into the armed forces of the United States and who shall be veterans of the armed forces, and the dependents of all such persons, concerning their rights and privileges under federal, commonwealth and local laws. They shall also advise and assist such veterans in obtaining employment, training and retraining for any employment, in obtaining opportunities for further education, and in obtaining medical treatment and assistance. The department shall further keep informed as to the programs or facilities of any organization, whether public or private, of service to or of interest to veterans and their dependents and in general shall carry on its activities for the purpose of extending aid, other than soldiers' relief and commonwealth and military aid disbursed under M.G.L. c. 115, to members of the armed forces and their families, or veterans and their families. 
(Code 1970, § 26-15)  
Secs. 2-294—2-399. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS AND COMMITTEES[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Charter reference— Council committee on budget and finance, § 2-9; council committee on ordinances and administration, § 2-9; council committee on planning and development, § 2-9; school committee, § 4-1 et seq.; designer selection committee, § 5-4; city building committee, § 5-5; procedures governing the conduct of multi-member bodies, § 10-6. 
Cross reference— Board of registrars of voters, § 7-1; recreation committee, § 15-15 et seq.; planning board, § 16-15 et seq.; conservation commission, § 16-30 et seq.; provisions relating to historic district commission, § 16-62 et seq.; school committee, § 18-20 et seq.; shellfish advisory commission, § 20-2; traffic commission, § 22-30 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-400. - Meeting attendance; member qualifications at adjudicatory hearings. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, upon municipal acceptance of this section for one or more types of adjudicatory hearings, a member of any municipal board, committee or commission when holding an adjudicatory hearing shall not be disqualified from voting in the matter solely due to that member's absence from no more than a single session of the hearing at which testimony or other evidence is received. Before any such vote, the member shall certify in writing that he has examined all evidence receive at the missed session, which evidence shall include an audio or video recording of the missed session or a transcript thereof. The written certification shall be part of the record of the hearing. Nothing in this section shall change, replace, negate or otherwise supersede applicable quorum requirements. 
(b)  By ordinance or bylaw, a city or town may adopt minimum additional requirements for attendance at scheduled board, committee, and commission hearings under this section. 
(Ord. of 8-22-2006)  
Sec. 2-401. - Posting to city website. 
The meeting notices and agendas for the public meetings of all city boards, commissions and committees including the school committee and city council shall comply with the Open Meeting Law, M.G.L. c. 30A, § 18-25 and 940 C.M.R. 29.00, and shall be posted to the City of Gloucester website or Gloucester School Department website at least 48 hours exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, prior to a meeting. All postings must include a complete agenda, and if the notice is to be posted by the city clerk, must be provided to the office of the city clerk during regular business hours and more than 48 hours in advance. 
(Ord. No. 2015-058, 3-24-2015)  
Secs. 2-402—2-409. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ASSESSORS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference— City assessors generally, M.G.L. c. 41, § 24 et seq.; assessment of local taxes, M.G.L. c. 59. 
 
Sec. 2-410. - Composition; appointment and terms of members; organization. 
(a)  The board of assessors shall consist of three members to be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council for a three-year term. The board shall meet and organize in the manner provided in the statutes of the commonwealth. 
(b)  One of the three members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council to serve in the position of principal assessor. The principal assessor shall serve as department head for the assessors' department and perform all required administrative duties, including staff supervision. 
(Code 1970, § 2-181; Ord. No. 28-1995, § I, 5-22-1995) 
State Law reference— Organization of board of assessors, M.G.L. c. 41, § 24.  
Sec. 2-411. - Quorum; majority may act. 
The majority of the board of assessors shall constitute a quorum for organizing and for doing the board's business. The powers and duties possessed by the board of assessors may be legally performed by a majority of the members thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 2-182)  
Sec. 2-412. - General duties. 
It shall be the duty of the board of assessors, from and after January 1 in each year, to visit the different states and parcels of real estate in the several wards of the city, to keep a list of the polls, to estimate the value of personal property subject to be assessed to the residents of the city, to appraise the value of the real estate subject to assessment within the city, and to obtain the information necessary for making the statistics required by law. 
(Code 1970, § 2-183)  
Sec. 2-413. - Office hours. 
Each member of the board of assessors shall be in attendance at city hall during the hours they are scheduled to work except at such time as they may be elsewhere necessarily employed in the discharge of their assessing duties. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit an assessor from being employed by the city on a parttime basis. 
(Code 1970, § 2-184; Ord. of 10-21-1986, § I)  
Sec. 2-414. - Call of meetings. 
The chairperson of the board of assessors shall have authority to call meetings of the full board for the transaction of business, whenever in his judgment it may be necessary so to do. 
(Code 1970, § 2-185)  
Sec. 2-415. - Compliance with law in assessment and apportionment of taxes. 
All taxes shall be assessed and apportioned by the board of assessors in the manner prescribed by the laws of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1970, § 2-186) 
State Law reference— Assessment of local taxes, M.G.L. c. 59.  
Sec. 2-416. - Duties of chairperson. 
The chairperson shall preside, when present, at all meetings held by the board of assessors and shall perform such other duties required of a chairperson of a board of assessors by law or by the commissioner of the department of revenue of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1970, § 2-187) 
State Law reference— Selection of board chairperson, M.G.L. c. 41, § 24.  
Sec. 2-417. - Duties of secretary. 
The secretary of the board of assessors shall keep a full and complete record of the doings of the board, and shall have in his custody the official records to be kept by assessors and he likewise shall perform the duties required of a secretary of a board of assessors by law or as may be required by the commissioner of the department of revenue of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1970, § 2-188) 
State Law reference— Selection of secretary, M.G.L. c. 41, § 24.  
Sec. 2-418. - Books and records. 
The board of assessors shall cause to be carefully protected and preserved all books, records and papers belonging to the assessor's department and a detailed and accurate record in permanent form shall be kept relating to all the official acts of the board of assessors. 
(Code 1970, § 2-189)  
Secs. 2-419—2-424. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF HEALTH[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference— City and town boards of health generally, M.G.L. c. 111, §§ 26—32. 
 
Sec. 2-425. - Composition; appointment, term and removal of members. 
The board of health shall consist of five members all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city council, staggered terms of three years each. 
(Code 1970, § 2-297; Ord. No. 4-1991, § I, 2-26-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 111, § 26.  
Sec. 2-426. - Members not compensated. 
Members of the board of health shall receive no compensation for their services. 
(Code 1970, § 2-298) 
State Law reference— Members of board of health to receive such compensation as council determines, M.G.L. c. 111, § 26.  
Sec. 2-427. - Selection of chairperson. 
The board of health shall organize annually, by the selection of one of its members as chairperson. 
(Code 1970, § 2-299) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 111, § 27.  
Sec. 2-428. - Rules and regulations. 
The board of health may make rules and regulations for its own government and for the government of its officers, agents and assistants. 
(Code 1970, § 2-303) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 111, § 27.  
Sec. 2-429. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-045, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed § 2-429, which pertained to appointment of physician to take and examine cultures and school physicians and derived from Code 1970, § 2-300.  
Sec. 2-430. - Employment of clerk and other assistants. 
The board of health may appoint a clerk according to the provisions of the civil service laws and regulations governing such an office, which clerk shall not be a member of the board. The board may also employ the necessary officers, agents and assistants to execute the health laws and the board's regulations. 
(Code 1970, § 2-301) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 111, § 27.  
Sec. 2-431. - Compensation of clerk and assistants. 
The board of health may fix the salaries or compensation of its clerk and other agents and assistants. 
(Code 1970, § 2-302) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 111, § 27.  
Secs. 2-432—2-439. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COUNCIL ON AGING 
 
Sec. 2-440. - Established; composition; appointment and terms of members. 
There is hereby established a council on aging governed by a board of directors of up to 11 members. The director of public works, the chairperson of the board of health or their respective representatives, shall serve as ex officio members of the board of directors. The board of directors are further governed by the council on aging bylaws created in November of 2004. 
(Code 1970, § 2-343; Ord. of 2-22-1977, § 1; Ord. of 5-27-1986, § I; Ord. of 2-1-2005(01), § I(2-440)) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish council for the aging, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8B.  
Sec. 2-441. - Members not compensated. 
The members of the council on aging shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1970, § 2-344; Ord. of 2-1-2005(01), § I(2-441))  
Sec. 2-442. - Designation of officers. 
The officers of the council on aging shall consist of a chairperson, co-chairperson or vice-chairperson, secretary and treasurer. 
(Code 1970, § 2-345; Ord. No. 25-1996, § J, 4-18-1995; Ord. of 2-1-2005(01), § I(2-442))  
Sec. 2-443. - Supervision. 
The council on aging shall be under the administrative supervision of the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 2-346; Ord. of 2-1-2005(01), § I(2-443))  
Sec. 2-444. - Mission. 
It shall be the mission of the council on aging to serve as a focal point where seniors and their families can access the local, state and federal network of elder services, while providing an integrated array of health, educational recreational, and social programs for older men and women. 
(Code 1970, § 2-347; Ord. of 2-1-2005(01), § I(2-444))  
Secs. 2-445—2-449. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - MARINERS MEDAL COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-450. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established a committee to be known as the mariners medal committee. 
(Code 1970, § 2-385)  
Sec. 2-451. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The mariners medal committee shall consist of five members, one to be the mayor and the other four to be residents of the city appointed by the mayor to serve staggered terms of four years. The mayor in office shall continue his membership on the committee for the term for which he is elected. 
(Code 1970, § 2-386)  
Sec. 2-452. - Qualifications of members; city officers not eligible. 
(a)  At least three of the appointed members of the mariners medal committee shall have had experience on the high seas as master of some commercial vessel. 
(b)  None of the four appointed members of the mariners medal committee shall hold any elective or appointive office within the government of the city when appointed, and should they later hold such an office, their membership on the committee shall be declared vacated. 
(Code 1970, § 2-387)  
Sec. 2-453. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the mariners medal committee shall be elected by majority vote of the membership. 
(Code 1970, § 2-388; Ord. of 3-4-1986, § I)  
Sec. 2-454. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the mariner's medal committee to establish and seek to maintain high standards for the awarding of a mariner's medal to any person or persons performing an act of heroism and extraordinary seamanship on the high seas. Such an act must have taken place within a six month period from date of notification. The committee, after investigation and consideration of all the facts, shall recommend to the city council the awarding of the mariner's medal to such person or persons as the committee deems deserving to receive the award. 
(Code 1970, § 2-389; Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I)  
DIVISION 6. - YOUTH SERVICES COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-455. - Established; composition; appointment and terms of members. 
There is hereby established a youth services commission consisting of seven members, who shall be appointed by the mayor from the residents of the city and confirmed by the city council. Appointees shall serve staggered terms of three years, beginning at the date of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 16-1993, § I, 12-14-1993) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish youth services commission, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8E.  
Sec. 2-456. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-457. - Election of chairperson. 
The chairperson of the youth services commission shall be elected from the membership annually. 
(Ord. No. 16-1993, § I, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 2-458. - Supervision. 
The youth services commission shall be under the administrative supervision of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 16-1993, § I, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 2-459. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the youth services commission to advocate for youth related activities and programs. The youth services commission will work in conjunction with the city as well as new and existing groups to provide and seek funding to meet the opportunities, challenges and problems of the youth of the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-1993, § I, 12-14-1993)  
Secs. 2-460—2-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6A. - TOURISM COMMISSION[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as Ord. No. 21-1991, adopted June 18, 1991, did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as division 6A, §§ 2-471—2-476, was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-471. - Purpose. 
(a)  In recognition of the continuing need for tourism in the city as a means to encourage economic revitalization and the promotion of history, culture and recreation, a tourism commission has been established and shall be funded by the city. 
(b)  It shall be the purpose of the tourism commission to encourage and promote tourism throughout the year and throughout the city. The commission shall undertake but not be limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Recommend and implement an overall coordinated tourism plan that is related to the city's community and economic development activities, historical resources, recreational opportunities, visitor welcoming and natural and scenic attractions. 
(2)  Recommend the organization, creation and maintenance of tourist attractions and welcoming services. 
(3)  Recommend and implement a marketing program for the city. 
(4)  Coordinate a public and private marketing program for the city. 
(5)  With the assistance of the community development department staff implement and manage a grant program to help accomplish the purposes referenced in this section. 
(Ord. No. 21-1991, 6-18-1991; Ord. of 8-14-2012(01))  
Sec. 2-472. - Tenure; composition. 
The tourism commission shall consist of not less than seven members and may be up to 11 members if deemed necessary by the tourism commission. All members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for the following terms: 
(1)  At least two members for one year; 
(2)  At least three members for two years; 
(3)  At least two members for three years; and 
consideration shall be given so that members are chosen from persons with a vested interest in tourism who are distributed among the several tourism sectors of restaurants, accommodations, tourist attractions, retailers, arts and culture; and there shall be at least one at large member. One member shall be a city councillor who shall be ex-officio. 
(Ord. No. 21-1991, 6-18-1991; Ord. No. 18-1996, § J, 6-25-1996; Ord. of 8-14-2012(01))  
Sec. 2-473. - Requirements. 
(a)  Residency requirements. All members shall be residents of the city, however, up to two members, who need not be residents, but who otherwise meet the requirements of this section and section 2-472, may be appointed as ex-officio members for a term of up to two years. 
(Ord. No. 21-1991, 6-18-1991; Ord. of 8-14-2012(01))  
Sec. 2-474. - Vacancies. 
In case of resignation, death or disqualification of any member of the commission, or for the purpose of filling a vacancy for any other reason, the appointment for the unexpired promptly shall be made by the mayor and forwarded to the city council for their approval. 
(Ord. No. 21-1991, 6-18-1991; Ord. of 8-14-2012(01))  
Sec. 2-475. - Assistance of city officials, boards and employees. 
The commission shall receive regular support and assistance from the community development department including but not limited to planning, implementation, communications and assistance on securing and managing tourism grants. Further, when the commission determines that it requires assistance, the commission may request, through the mayor, and upon request shall receive the services of and assistance from other city officials and boards on matters based on the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 21-1991, 6-18-1991; Ord. of 8-14-2012(01))  
Sec. 2-476. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-045, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed § 2-476, which pertained to periodic reports and plans and derived from Ord. No. 21-1991, adopted June 18, 1991 and Ord. of 8-14-2012(01).  
DIVISION 6B. - THE LINZEE COOLIDGE PHILANTHROPY AWARD COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-477. - Purpose. 
The Linzee Coolidge Philanthropy Award is hereby created in honor and recognition of the contributions made by Linzee Coolidge through the Dusky Foundation to organizations which benefit the citizens of Gloucester. The Linzee Coolidge Philanthropy Award is created to foster philanthropy in Gloucester and to encourage others to model their philanthropic giving on Linzee Coolidge's generosity and commitment to the civil community of Gloucester. 
(Ord. No. 2015-014, 1-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-478. - Criteria. 
The Linzee Coolidge Philanthropy Award is the highest honor for philanthropic giving, financial or otherwise, to be bestowed by the City of Gloucester. As such, the Linzee Coolidge medallion may be awarded to individuals who demonstrate substantial generosity and contributions to the City of Gloucester which meet or exceed the contributions in the tradition of Samuel Sawyer and Linzee Coolidge. 
(Ord. No. 2015-014, 1-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-479. - Medallion. 
The Linzee Coolidge Philanthropy Medallion shall be awarded to a citizen in appreciation for outstanding generosity, caring and notable philanthropy which has contributed to the betterment of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2015-014, 1-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-480. - Committee. 
(a)  There shall be a Linzee Coolidge Philanthropy Award Committee which shall consist of four persons appointed by the mayor. The mayor shall serve on the committee and shall be the fifth member thereof. The terms of the members shall be coterminous with the Mayor. 
(b)  None of the four appointed members of the committee shall hold any elective or appointive office with the government of the city when appointed, and should they later hold such an office, their membership on the committee shall be declared vacated. The committee shall serve an executive function within the administration of the mayor's office. 
(Ord. No. 2015-014, 1-13-2015)  
Sec. 2-481. - Chairperson. 
The mayor or his/her designee shall be the chairperson of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-014, 1-13-2015)  
Secs. 2-482—2-490. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as Ord. No. 28-1991, adopted July 7, 1991, did not specify manner of codification, inclusion herein as division 7, §§ 2-491—2-495, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-491. - Purpose. 
In recognition of the continuing need for preservation, revitalization and improvement of city's central business district and its environs, a downtown development commission is hereby recreated and reestablished. 
(Ord. No. 28-1991, 7-7-1991)  
Sec. 2-492. - Created; membership; terms. 
(a)  There is hereby recreated and reestablished in the city a commission to be known as the downtown development commission consisting of nine members, one member shall be a city councilor, who shall serve ex officio, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and shall be confirmed by the city council. Upon the establishment of this commission the mayor shall appoint three members for three years; two members for two years; and two members for one year; and as each term expires the mayor in like manner shall appoint members to serve for three years. 
(b)  In the case of resignation, death or disqualification of any member of the commission, or for the purpose of filling a vacancy for any other reason, the appointment for the unexpired term shall immediately be made by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 28-1991, 7-7-1991; Ord. of 9-4-2007)  
Sec. 2-493. - Mission. 
It shall be the mission of the downtown development commission to encourage economic revitalization within a context of historic preservation, community involvement and activities, a strong identity and tourism. The commission shall undertake, but not be limited to, the following activities: 
(1)  Examine and evaluate conditions on an ongoing basis. 
(2)  Propose and promote physical improvements. 
(3)  Coordinate public and private efforts. 
(4)  Encourage, in cooperation with the Cape Ann Chamber of Commerce, a creative marketing plan, coordinated advertising, promotions and special events. 
(5)  Promote the establishment of new businesses. 
(6)  Encourage the establishment of special committees, composed of municipal officials, bankers, merchants, industrialists, preservationists, chamber of commerce officials, downtown residents, design professionals, developers, real estate brokers, and others concerned with downtown. 
(7)  Promote and encourage the proper mix of goods, services, housing, recreation and entertainment. 
(8)  Coordinate, through the community development department, the activities related to downtown of the following: 
a.  The historical commission; 
b.  The historic district commission; 
c.  The waterways commission; 
d.  The planning board; 
e.  The tourism commission; 
f.  The economic development and industrial corporation; 
g.  The redevelopment authority; and 
h.  The housing authority. 
(Ord. No. 28-1991, 7-7-1991)  
Sec. 2-494. - Assistance of city officials, boards and employees. 
The commission shall receive regular support and assistance from the community development department. Such department may undertake planning, implementation and review responsibilities on behalf of the commission. Further, the commission may request the services and assistance of any of the officials, boards and, through the mayor, employees of the city at all reasonable times when the commission determines that it requires the assistance and advise of such officials, boards and employees in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 28-1991, 7-7-1991)  
Sec. 2-495. - Annual report. 
The downtown development commission shall submit an annual report of its activities to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 28-1991, 7-7-1991)  
DIVISION 8. - HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-496. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city, including its employees, agents and officials, to protect and promote the constitutional, civil and human rights of all people within the city. Further, the city asserts that: 
(1)  All people have certain inalienable rights, including the right to life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness and equal justice under the laws of the United States, the commonwealth and the city; 
(2)  No person in our city shall have these rights constrained, reduced, ignored or violated; 
(3)  All people in our city shall be protected in the exercise of these human and civil rights; and 
(4)  No person in our city shall be unlawfully discriminated against in matters of housing, employment, education, contracts, purchasing or public accommodations, on the basis of: age, ancestry, citizenship, color, disability, economic status, ethnicity, family or marital status, gender, military status, national origin, race, religion, sexual orientation or source of income. 
(Ord. No. 22-1994, § I, 11-1-1994)  
Sec. 2-497. - Established; terms; compensation. 
(a)  There shall be in the city a commission known as the "Gloucester Human Rights Commission" hereinafter called the commission, which shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, to serve without compensation. The commission may have in addition one ex-officio member selected by the majority vote of the commissioners. 
(b)  The commissioners shall be appointed from a list developed by the mayor through an application process which shall include public notice as provided in the Charter, § 7-6. Said list shall be updated as vacancies on the commission occur. All such appointments by the mayor shall be confirmed by the city council pursuant to the Charter, § 2-10(a). 
(c)  The commissioners shall serve a term of three years; provided, however, that of the members first appointed to the commission, two shall be appointed to a term of one year, two shall be appointed to a term of two years, and three shall be appointed to a term of three years. Thereafter, the mayor shall appoint each successor to a term of three years. In the event of the death of resignation of any member, a successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term for which the member has been appointed. 
(d)  The loss of office by a commissioner due to excessive absence shall be governed by Charter, § 7-14. 
(Ord. No. 22-1994, § I, 11-1-1994)  
Sec. 2-498. - Election of chairperson; rules of procedure; quorum. 
(a)  The members of the commission shall elect annually a chairperson from among its members who shall not hold that office for more than three consecutive terms. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the mayor, the commission shall adopt rules of procedure for its administration which are consistent with the laws of the commonwealth and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Four members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Ord. No. 22-1994, § I, 11-1-1994)  
Sec. 2-499. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the commission shall be to: 
(1)  Improve the life of city by enlisting individuals and community-based groups in educational programs and campaigns to increase mutual self-respect, harmonious intergroup relations and the peaceful enjoyment of life in our diverse community; 
(2)  Assist persons in the city who believe that their human or civil rights, as defined by existing local, commonwealth and federal law, have been violated in the city, by providing voluntary mediation for all parties concerned, and informing such people of the local, commonwealth and federal agencies available to address their grievances; and 
(3)  Work with all city departments, including the school department, commissions and boards, to increase compliance with appropriate local, commonwealth and federal laws and to raise the level of awareness and sensitivity to human rights issues in municipal business with the public. 
(Ord. No. 22-1994, § I, 11-1-1994)  
Sec. 2-500. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  To support and assist all city departments, including the school department, commissions and boards, in their efforts to celebrate the diversity of the city, promote tolerance, and comply with appropriate local, commonwealth and federal laws; 
(2)  To publish reports and other documents; 
(3)  To provide a public forum for hearing complaints and answers thereto in matters of alleged discrimination, and to resolve such complaints by mediation. No party to any alleged discrimination shall be compelled to appear before the commission, nor such party be compelled to submit to mediation; 
(4)  To refer complaints to the appropriate local, commonwealth or federal agency to address their grievances; 
(5)  To publish an annual report of the state of human rights in the city drawn from its own resources as well as records of other city departments, including the school department; and 
(6)  To render to the mayor, the city council and the school committee a full written report of its activities and its recommendations, not less than once a year. 
(Ord. No. 22-1994, § I, 11-1-1994)  
Sec. 2-501. - Records. 
All commission records shall be public except those that are necessary to ensure privacy rights under other local, commonwealth or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 22-1994, § I, 11-1-1994)  
DIVISION 9. - CLEAN CITY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-502. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to create and maintain a clean environment and to encourage all persons living and working within the city to keep the city beautiful. 
(Ord. No. 20-1996, § I, 7-9-1996)  
Sec. 2-503. - Established; terms; compensation. 
(a)  There shall be in the city a commission known as the "Gloucester Clean City Commission," hereinafter called the commission, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, to serve without compensation. 
(b)  The commissioners shall be appointed from a list developed by the mayor through an application process, which shall include public notice as provided in Charter, § 7-6. Said list shall be updated as vacancies on the commission occur. All such appointments by the mayor shall be confirmed by the city council. 
(c)  The commissioners shall serve a term of three years; provided, however, that of the members first appointed to the commission, one shall be appointed to a term of one year, two shall be appointed to a term of two years, and two shall be appointed to a term of three years. Thereafter, the mayor shall appoint each successor to a term of three years. In the event of the death or resignation of any member, a successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term for which the member has been appointed. 
(d)  The loss of office by a commissioner due to excessive absence shall be governed by Charter, § 7-14. 
(Ord. No. 20-1996, § I, 7-9-1996; Ord. of 10-9-2001(01), § I)  
Sec. 2-504. - Qualifications of commissioners. 
(a)  Commissioners shall be residents of the city at the time of their appointment and throughout their tenure. 
(b)  Commissioners shall be representative of the citizens of the city and may include residents of each of the five wards in the city as well as members of the business and public school communities. 
(c)  Commissioners shall swear to uphold the laws of the United States, the commonwealth and the city. 
(Ord. No. 20-1996, § I, 7-9-1996)  
Sec. 2-505. - Election of chairperson; rules of procedure; quorum. 
(a)  The members of the commission shall elect annually a chairperson from among its members, who shall not hold that office for more than three consecutive terms. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the mayor, the commission shall adopt rules of procedure for its administration, which are consistent with the laws of the commonwealth and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Three members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business. 
(Ord. No. 20-1996, § I, 7-9-1996)  
Sec. 2-506. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the commission shall be to keep the city beautiful by the following ways: 
(1)  Organize and direct volunteer efforts to keep the city beautiful; 
(2)  Keep the mayor and the appropriate city departments informed of the maintenance and beautification needs of public property; 
(3)  Work with all city departments, including: 
a.  The department of public works; 
b.  The department of parks and recreation; 
c.  The school department; 
d.  The conservation commission; and 
e.  The waterways board. 
(Ord. No. 20-1996, § I, 7-9-1996)  
Sec. 2-507. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall include the following: 
(1)  To support and assist all city departments in their efforts to maintain a safe and clean environment; 
(2)  To submit reports to the mayor and the appropriate city departments concerning the matters set forth in section 2-506; 
(3)  To submit plans for resolving problems, concerning the matters set forth in section 2-506, to the mayor and the appropriate city departments; and 
(4)  To render to the mayor, the city council and the appropriate city departments a full written report of its activities and its recommendations, not less than once a year. 
(Ord. No. 20-1996, § I, 7-9-1996)  
DIVISION 10. - COMMITTEE FOR THE ARTS 
 
Sec. 2-508. - Created. 
(a)  This is hereby created and established a committee to be known as the committee for the arts. 
(b)  No work of art, monument or ornament of art shall be placed on any public ways or on any public lands other than cemeteries and no work of art or object of decoration shall be placed in or upon any public or municipal building or be removed, relocated or altered unless the design thereof or the action to be taken therewith shall have been reviewed by the committee for the arts. For the temporary installation of a work of art, the committee shall make a written recommendation to the mayor within 45 days of its submission. For the permanent installation of a work of art, the committee shall make a written recommendation to the mayor within 90 days of its submission to the committee. Should the mayor choose to accept the committee's recommendation, after consultation with the department of public works director and the building inspector he shall forward it to the city council for a public hearing and a vote. 
(c)  Temporary installations of art work of school age children shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 112-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. of 5-16-2006(04); Ord. of 7-24-2012(03); Ord. No. 2015-167, 8-11-2015)  
Sec. 2-509. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The committee for the arts shall consist of a minimum of five members and a maximum of seven members, one to be the mayor or his designee from time to time acting in his stead and the other four to be residents of the city appointed by the mayor to serve staggered terms of four years. The mayor in office shall continue his membership on the committee for the term for which he is elected. 
(Ord. No. 112-2000, § I, 11-28-2000)  
Sec. 2-510. - Qualifications of members; city officers not eligible except as mayoral designee from time to time. 
(a)  At least three of the appointed members of the committee for the arts shall have had experience in the arts by reason of vocation, avocation, or by membership in a private or public entity devoted to the arts. 
(b)  None of the appointed members of the committee for the arts shall hold any elected office. 
(Ord. No. 112-2000, § I, 11-28-2000)  
Sec. 2-511. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the committee for the arts shall be elected by majority vote of the membership. 
(Ord. No. 112-2000, § I, 11-28-2000)  
Sec. 2-512. - Assistance of city officials, board and employees. 
The committee shall receive regular support and assistance from the community development department. Such department may undertake planning, implementation and review responsibilities on behalf of the committee. Further, the committee may request the services and assistance of any of the officials, boards, and through the mayor, employees of the city at all reasonable times when the committee determines that it requires the assistance and advice of such officials and employees in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 112-2000, § I, 11-28-2000)  
Sec. 2-513. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the committee for the arts: 
(1)  To promote the arts, visual, written, performed and spoken; 
(2)  To foster within the community, a knowledge and appreciation of artistic endeavors, commercial or otherwise; 
(3)  To seek out private or public assistance by way of donations or grants; 
(4)  To do all appropriate acts that encourage the continuation of artistic endeavors within the city; and 
(5)  To establish premises and offices and to spread the fame of local artists and educate the public. 
(Ord. No. 112-2000, § I, 11-28-2000)  
Sec. 2-514. - Poet laureate established. 
(a)  The city shall designate a poet as the official poet laureate of the city. The poet laureate shall be designated by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. A poet laureate selection committee shall review applications and make a recommendation to the mayor for the designation. The committee shall be comprised of the following: 
(1)  One member of the committee for the arts. 
(2)  The mayor or one representative appointed by the mayor. 
(3)  A member of city council or one representative appointed by the city council. 
(4)  Two members chosen by the committee for the arts who have a demonstrated substantial expertise and knowledge of poetry and reside in the city. 
(b)  The committee for the arts shall set forth the criteria for the selection of the poet laureate to the selection committee. 
(c)  The selection committee will then review the applications and make a recommendation to the committee for the arts for the poet laureate candidates. 
(d)  The committee for the arts shall forward the selection committee's recommendation for the position to the mayor for appointment with approval by the city council. 
(e)  The responsibilities of the poet laureate shall be established by the committee for the arts and may include, but not be limited to, providing public poetry readings, encouraging poetry appreciation within the city, and composing and publishing poems. The poet laureate shall be an honorary title and shall not receive any monetary compensation from the city. 
(f)  The committee for the arts shall assist and support the poet laureate whenever possible and both parties should meet on an annual basis. 
(g)  The poet laureate shall be a domiciled resident of the city and shall serve a four-year term. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2009(01))  
Secs. 2-515—2-519. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - CITY HALL RESTORATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-520. - Purpose. 
In recognition of the need to restore and preserve the city hall as the focal point of the city, and a cultural, historical and architectural asset of the city, the city hall restoration commission is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-514))  
Sec. 2-521. - Mission. 
The mission of the city hall restoration commission to provide for/secure the stabilization, restoration and preservation of city hall. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-515))  
Sec. 2-522. - Goals. 
The commission shall undertake, but not be limited to, the following activities: 
(1)  Examine and evaluate with professional help the current condition of the building. 
(2)  Establish and prioritize short and long term goals that may be achieved. 
(3)  Coordinate public and private efforts to secure funds to accomplish these goals. 
(4)  Oversee the restoration project as appropriate to ensure successful completion of the project. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-516))  
Sec. 2-523. - Created; terms; compensation; officers; duties. 
(a)  Created; terms. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "City Hall Restoration Commission," hereinafter called the commission, which shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. The commission shall be selected with due care for providing an optimum mix of background and expertise required to fulfill the purpose. Upon the establishment of the commission, the mayor shall appoint three members to a term of one year; three to a term of two years and three to a term of three years. Thereafter, the mayor shall appoint each successor to a term of three years. In the event of death, resignation or removal of any member, a successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term for which the member has been appointed. 
(b)  Compensation. Members of the commission who are not city employees shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Chairperson. A chairperson shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of one year and may be reappointed. The chairperson shall decide all points of order and procedure, unless directed otherwise by a majority of the commission. The chairperson shall determine the chairpersons of the subcommittees, and shall be a member of all the subcommittees. The chairperson may serve as secretary of the commission. 
(d)  Vice-chairperson. A vice-chairperson shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of one year and may reappointed. The vice-chairperson shall serve as acting chairperson in the absence of the chairperson. 
(e)  Secretary. A secretary of the commission shall be elected by the commission and shall be responsible for maintaining minutes of the regular meetings and a record of attendance of the commission members. The secretary shall also be responsible for filing reports with the city clerk/city council. 
(f)  Attendance at meetings. Should a member fail to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, and should there be no adequate excuse for such absence, the chair with the concurrence of the majority of the entire commission, shall recommend to the mayor that a vacancy be declared and the vacated position be filled. 
(g)  Committees. Subcommittees shall be established as needed by vote of the commission. Such subcommittees shall each comprise at least three members, at least one of who shall be a commission member, and who shall serve as the chairperson of the subcommittee to the commission at the regular meeting. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-517))  
Sec. 2-524. - Assistance of city officials, boards, and employees. 
The commission shall receive support from the executive office, community development, public works and any other city department, when requested, to achieve its stated goals. Further, the commission may request the services or assistance of any of the officials, boards and through the mayor, employees of the city at all reasonable times when the commission determines that it requires the assistance and advice of such officials, boards and employees in the performance of its duties. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-518))  
Sec. 2-525. - Monthly reports. 
The city hall restoration commission shall submit a monthly report to the mayor and the city council of its activities and progress. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-519))  
Sec. 2-526. - Completion of the project. 
Upon completion of the project the commission may be disbanded, upon approval by the city council and the mayor. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I(2-520))  
Secs. 2-527—2-531. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-532. - Established. 
There shall be a community preservation committee (committee), in accordance with chapter 267 of the Acts of 2000, Massachusetts Community Preservation Act, M.G.L. c. 44B, § 1 et seq., which shall consist of nine members. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2009(03), § 2-514)  
Sec. 2-533. - Membership, terms and compensation. 
The community preservation committee shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. Committee members shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for a period of three years expiring on February 15. The committee shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  Four members shall be members of the boards and commission as required by the Community Preservation Act, M.G.L. c. 44B, § 5 and appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation of the city council. If a statutory board or commission no longer functions or exists within the city then the mayor shall appoint a member from the general public who has expertise or performs like duties as the board or commission. Each board or commission shall submit the name of one of its members to sit on the committee within 45 days of a vacancy of the statutory membership. The statute directs that a member from each of the following shall be designated as a member of the committee: 
a.  One member of the conservation commission as designated by the commission. 
b.  One member of the historical commission as designated by the commission. 
c.  One member of the planning board as designated by the board. 
d.  One member of the parks and recreation department. 
e.  One member of the housing authority as designated by the authority. 
(2)  There shall be four members of the general public not currently holding elected or appointed office, as appointed by the mayor. 
a.  The at-large members may include citizens who have expertise or demonstrated interest in open space, recreation, historic preservation, affordable housing and municipal finance and fiscal accounting practices. 
b.  To the extent possible, the members of the committee will be selected so that the five wards are fairly represented. 
The commission and boards which may designate a member for appointment shall do so within 45 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and shall forward the names to the mayor. Should a commission or board fail to designate a member for appointment within 45 days, the mayor shall appoint the member from the general public. Should a member from a designated commission or board be no longer able to serve on the preservation committee, the mayor shall appoint a successor member. 
(3)  All committee members shall serve on the committee without compensation. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2009(03), § 2-515)  
Sec. 2-534. - Terms of office; officers; vacancies. 
(a)  Terms. The term of office for each member of the committee shall be three years. No member shall serve more than two terms. In order to stagger the terms of the members, the terms of the initial appointments shall be as follows: 
(1)  The historic commission member, the conservation commission member, two at-large members appointed by the mayor shall serve for three years; 
(2)  The housing authority member, the planning board member and one at-large member appointed by the mayor shall serve for two years; 
(3)  The parks and recreation member and one at-large member appointed by the mayor shall serve for one year. 
For purposes of this subsection, the initial one- and two-year appointments shall be deemed not to constitute full terms. 
(b)  Officers. 
(1)  The committee shall annually elect one of its members to serve as chairperson and may elect such other officers, adopt procedural rules and regulations and establish any subcommittees as it deems appropriate. 
(2)  A committee member may serve as chairperson for two consecutive years, after which he shall not be eligible to be nominated for the same position. However, a two-thirds vote of the committee can waive this provision. 
(c)  Vacancies. Any vacancy shall be filled by the respective board, commission, authority or mayor for the remainder of the unexpired time. In the event that a committee member is unable for any reason to complete serving a term, whether by failure of reappointment to his underlying board, commission or authority, or otherwise, the board, commission or authority responsible for designating said committee member shall forthwith designate another of its members to complete the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2009(03), § 2-516)  
Sec. 2-535. - Authority, duties and responsibility. 
(a)  The community preservation committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the city regarding community preservation, including the consideration of regional projects. The committee shall consult with the mayor, the city council, the community development director, the housing authority director, the conservation commission, the historical commission, the zoning board, the parks and recreation director, the chairperson of the city housing trust, grants director, public works director and any persons acting in those capacities or performing like duties when conducting such studies. 
(b)  As part of its study, the committee shall hold one or more public information hearings annually on the needs, possibilities and resources of the city regarding the community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of the two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and published electronically on the city's web site. 
(c)  The committee shall meet as necessary to carry out its duties, but in any fiscal year shall hold no fewer than three meetings. 
(d)  On or before November 1 of each year, the committee shall make recommendations to the city council for: 
(1)  The acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; 
(2)  The acquisition, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic resources; 
(3)  The acquisition, creation, preservation and support of community housing; 
(4)  The acquisition, creation, preservation, rehabilitation, and restoration of land for recreational use; and 
(5)  The rehabilitation or restoration of open space and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in this section. 
(e)  With respect to community housing, the committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites. 
(f)  The committee may include in its proposal to the city council, a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available in the community preservation fund or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community preservation; provided however, that funds expended pursuant to this chapter shall not be used for maintenance. 
(g)  The committee may recommend the issuance of general obligation bonds or notes, in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 44B, § 11, in anticipation of revenues to be raised pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44B, § 3, the proceeds of which shall be deposited in the community preservation fund. 
(h)  In each fiscal year, the committee shall recommend that the city council either spend, or set aside for later spending, not less than ten percent of the annual revenues in the community preservation fund for each of the following: 
(1)  Open space, and land for recreational use; 
(2)  Historic resources; 
(3)  Community housing. 
(i)  All recommendations and proposals submitted by the committee to the city council shall include the anticipated costs thereof. 
(j)  The committee shall submit to the mayor, by March 1 of each year, an annual administrative and operating budget for the committee for the next fiscal year, which shall not exceed five percent of that year's estimated annual community preservation fund revenues. The community preservation fund budget shall be submitted by the mayor to the city council with the entirety of the city budget pursuant to the city Charter. 
(k)  No appropriation shall be made from the community preservation fund without the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2009(03), § 2-517; Ord. No. 2014-334, 12-16-2014)  
Sec. 2-536. - Quorum and voting. 
(a)  Five members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of convening a meeting and of conducting the business of the committee. 
(b)  The committee shall approve its actions by a majority vote of the quorum. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2009(03), § 2-518)  
Secs. 2-537—2-541. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - CLEAN ENERGY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-542. - Created. 
The city clean energy commission is created to promote clean energy options in the city, including energy efficiency, conservation and the development of clean and renewable energy. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009, § 2-514)  
Sec. 2-543. - Duties. 
The commission shall pursue the following tasks: 
(1)  Propose and develop strategies to reduce energy costs of city-owned facilities and vehicles through energy conservation, efficiency and renewable energy measures. The strategies may include electricity, vehicle fuel, natural gas and oil conservation and may identify innovative cost-saving measures. 
(2)  Recommend citywide programs including participation in federal or statewide energy initiatives, such as the green communities program, to promote and facilitate smart energy strategies for city citizens on both public and private real property. 
(3)  Work with appropriate city departments to track energy usage and costs associated with key assets and operations of the city. 
(4)  Identify climate adaptation and mitigation issues and strategies to safeguard the longterm economic and cultural vitality of the city. 
(5)  Follow emerging federal and state mandates, as well as initiatives and funding opportunities for energy conservation, renewable energy, or climate adaptation and mitigation strategies. Recommend strategies to comply with applicable mandatory or voluntary standards. 
(6)  Provide guidance, in the form of education or information, to the mayor, city council and key city departments and personnel, to support their decision-making on recommended strategies and clean energy opportunities. 
(7)  Serve as a communications and information resource on clean energy issues and city initiatives for the public through: 
a.  Meetings and sponsored events; 
b.  Maintenance of an active web site; 
c.  Regular communications to interested parties; and 
d.  Public/private partnerships. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009, § 2-515)  
Sec. 2-544. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council, subject to the provisions of the city Charter. Appointees shall serve staggered terms of two years beginning at the date of appointment and ending on February 14 as required by the city Charter. Commission members shall be city residents and may include representation by appropriate city employees as determined by the mayor. Members will be selected based on relevant experience and knowledge in energy management strategies, renewable and alternate energies, energy efficiency and/or community sustainability. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment. 
(b)  The terms of the members shall be staggered, as such, the initial members shall be for the following terms: 
(1)  Three members for one year; 
(2)  Four members for two years. 
(c)  The commission shall: 
(1)  Meet on a monthly basis and retain meeting minutes; 
(2)  Report to the mayor on a quarterly basis; and 
(3)  Beginning six months after its initial formation, the commission shall submit to the council on a semiannual basis a report of its activities and its progress in achieving its mission. 
(Ord. of 5-19-2009, § 2-516)  
Secs. 2-545—2-550. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-551. - Established; composition; appointment; terms. 
There is hereby established an open space and recreation committee which is created to formulate and implement an open space and recreation plan (OSRP) for the city. The open space and recreation committee will assist the city in its future actions with regard to open space parcels within the city. The committee shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor from the residents of the city and confirmed by the city council. The members shall serve for three-year staggered terms beginning on the date of appointment and ending on February 14 as required by the city Charter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009(01), § 2-517)  
Sec. 2-552. - Purpose. 
The committee shall create and implement an OSRP which shall: 
(1)  Ensure the existence, smart use and access to open space in perpetuity. 
(2)  Ensure that contiguous areas and functions and values that depend on them are maintained 
(3)  Propose a process for agreements with abutters with shared use/conservation interests for enhancing open space. 
(4)  Recommend planned city growth and business development in a way that fully contemplates and strives to maintain the functions, values, uses and vision for open space in the city. 
(5)  Establish a criteria and process for ceding open space to development or dedicated use. 
(6)  Promote awareness and use of open spaces through a descriptive inventory of open spaces. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009(01), § 2-518)  
Sec. 2-553. - Process. 
The former open space plans shall be used to create the plan which shall be submitted to the commonwealth. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009(01), § 2-519)  
Sec. 2-554. - Authorities and responsibilities. 
(a)  The open space and recreation committee shall act as an advisory committee to the mayor, city council, municipal boards and the general public on matters concerning open space and recreation and shall have no budgetary powers. 
(b)  A majority of appointed members serving on the committee shall constitute a quorum and no meeting shall be continued without a quorum being present, unless a subcommittee has been established. 
(c)  The committee shall submit a summary of its activity and its progress on semiannually basis in the months of September and April. 
(d)  The open space and recreation committee may promote ad-hoc committees to develop stewardship for public open spaces. Such activities shall be coordinated with the parks department and conservation commission. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2009(01), § 2-520)  
DIVISION 15. - MAGNOLIA WOODS OVERSIGHT AND ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-555. - Purpose. 
In recognition of the continuing need for oversight in the city's ownership, operation and maintenance of Magnolia Woods so its full recreational utilization can be sustainably realized and its integrity as an environmental remediation project and as a natural resource for the entire community can be fully protected, the Magnolia Woods Oversight and Advisory Committee is hereby created and established. 
The committee shall undertake but not be limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Recommend an overall and coordinated program for the use of the recreational facilities at the Magnolia Woods that balances the competing needs for the various recreational and sports programs seeking to use those facilities. 
(2)  Review and make recommendations upon plans for proposed maintenance of or capital improvements to any of the facilities or property contained within the Magnolia Woods and provide advisory oversight to the execution of any such plans. 
(3)  Recommend programs and activities which can generate revenue streams which can be dedicated to the maintenance or improvement of any of the facilities or property contained within the Magnolia Woods. 
(Ord. of 8-23-2011(01))  
Sec. 2-556. - Tenure; composition; requirements. 
(a)  The Magnolia Woods Oversight and Advisory Committee shall consist of nine members, one of whom will be the Gloucester School System Athletic Director (or his/her designee), two of whom shall be the director of public works (or his/her designee) and the ward councilor representing Ward 5, who shall serve so long as they hold the aforementioned positions. The six remaining members shall initially be appointed by the mayor of the city and approved by the city council under Section 2-10 of the City Charter for the terms listed below and shall be residents of Gloucester: 
(1)  Two members for one year; 
(2)  Two members for two years; and 
(3)  Two members for three years. 
(b)  The successors to these initial appointees shall serve for a term of three years. Five appointed members shall be selected from the Magnolia community at large provided that these members shall be registered voters in Ward 5 of the city. One of these five appointed members shall be from a neighborhood abutting the Magnolia Woods. For the remaining four members, preference shall be given to members of organizations that utilize the facilities of Magnolia Woods including, but not limited to, the Fisherman Youth Soccer Association, the Cape Ann Youth Lacrosse Association, the Cape Ann Model Airplane Flying Association, and the Magnolia Bike Club. In addition, a sixth member may be a representative from the city at large, provided that this member will be a registered voter of the city. 
(c)  The committee shall receive regular support and assistance from the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 8-23-2011(01); Ord. No. 2015-082, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-046, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 2-557. - Vacancies. 
In case of resignation, death or disqualification of any member of the committee, or for the purpose of filling a vacancy for any other reason, the appointment of a new member to fill the unexpired term of such previous member immediately shall be made by the mayor and forwarded to the city council for its approval. 
(Ord. of 8-23-2011(01))  
DIVISION 15A. - MAGNOLIA PIER ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-558. - Created. 
Recognizing the Magnolia Pier's need for oversight in the city's ownership, operation, and maintenance so its recreational utilization can be realized, the Magnolia Pier Advisory Committee is hereby created. The committee shall: 
(1)  Review and recommend plans for proposed maintenance of or capital improvements to any of the facilities; 
(2)  Consist of three members appointed by the mayor, plus the director of public works or designee and the Ward 5 Councilor; initial appointments shall be one member for one year, one member for two years and one member for three years; 
(3)  Successor appointments shall be for a term of three years; 
(4)  The three appointed members shall represent the following interests: the neighborhood abutting the Magnolia Pier; a Magnolia resident at large; and a representative of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2016-046, 3-22-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-046, adopted March 22, 2016, repealed former § 2-558, and enacted a new division and new § 2-558, as set out herein. Former § 2-558 pertained to assistance of city officials, boards, and employees of the Magnolia Woods Oversight and Advisory Committee and derived from Ord. of 8-23-2011(01).  
DIVISION 16. - WATER ADVISORY COMMITTEE[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 11, 2012, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 2-560 and 2-561. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, these provisions have been included as a new Div. 16, §§ 2-559 and 2-559.1 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-559. - Created. 
The city water advisory committee is created to advise and recommend to the mayor and the city council policies on the management, protection, improvement and conservation of the city's water supply, watersheds, stormwater and wastewater infrastructure. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012)  
Sec. 2-559.1. - Membership. 
(a)  The committee shall consist of seven members. As required by the City Charter, members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Members shall serve staggered two-year terms beginning at the date of appointment and ending on February 14 as required by the City Charter. Committee members shall be city residents. Members will be selected based on relevant experience and knowledge. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(c)  The committee shall: 
(1)  Meet on a monthly basis and file timely meeting minutes with the city clerk; 
(2)  Report to the mayor on a quarterly basis; and 
(3)  Beginning six months after its initial formation the committee shall submit to the city council on a semi-annual basis a report of its activities and its progress achieving its mission. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2012)  
DIVISION 17. - ANIMAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-222, adopted Nov. 22, 2016, amended Ch. 2 by adding Div. 17, §§ 2-560 and 2-561. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-559.2 and 2-559.3, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-559.2. - Animal advisory committee—Purpose. 
(a)  In recognition of the continuing need for policy and oversight for the health and welfare of all animals and the associated health and welfare of citizens associated with animals within the borders of the city be they domestic or wild, the animal advisory committee is hereby established. 
(b)  At the first of each calendar year the committee shall elect from among its members a chair, vice-chair and secretary. 
(c)  The committee shall undertake but not be limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Research, recommend and advise at the request of various departments and agencies of the city on matters pertaining to domestic and wild animals within the borders of the city; and to 
(2)  Review and recommend changes to city policies and ordinances that affect all animals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-222, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 2-559.3. - Composition; requirements; tenure. 
The animal advisory committee shall consist of up to seven members comprised of a resident representative from each of the city's five wards, and two resident members who shall be at-large members. These members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council under the City Charter to a term of up to three years. Ex-officio non-voting members shall be one city councilor appointed by the council president; the police chief or his designee and the public health director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-222, 11-22-2016)  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[21] 
Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to council committee on budget and finance, § 2-9; provisions relating to municipal financial procedures, § 6-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Ordinances promising or guaranteeing payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(2); appropriation ordinances saved from repeal, § 1-7(14); ordinances levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-7(15). 
State Law reference— Municipal finance generally, M.G.L. c. 44, § 1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-560. - Fiscal year. 
The city's fiscal year shall begin on July 1 in each year and end on the following June 30th in each year, including both days. 
(Code 1970, § 2-1) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year of cities, M.G.L. c. 44, § 56A.  
Sec. 2-561. - Payroll procedure. 
All blanks for payrolls shall be made on single sheets of uniform length and width, and to ensure uniformity in all respects, the blanks shall be in such form as may be approved by the city auditor. All payrolls shall be approved by the heads of departments and transmitted unfolded by them to the city auditor. They shall be examined and approved by the city auditor and the mayor and then transmitted to the city treasure with a summary by divisions under the uniform system, which shall be a warrant for the payment of the same. After payments have been made, the payrolls shall be returned to the city auditor in such form as he may decide upon. 
(Code 1970, § 2-29) 
Cross reference— City payrolls, M.G.L. c. 41, §§ 41, 42; approval of payrolls by city auditor, M.G.L. c. 41, § 52.  
Sec. 2-562. - Wages for mechanics, chauffeurs and laborers employed by contractors doing work for city. 
Building trades mechanics, chauffeurs and laborers employed by contractors doing work for the city shall be paid the current wages established for like work by the commonwealth commissioner of labor and industries. In all contracts, the contractor shall post, in a conspicuous place on the premises where the work is being done, a legible copy of all of the then current wage rates. Willful refusal to abide by these conditions shall be considered sufficient cause to remove the offender from the list of those eligible to work or bid on city contracts. 
(Code 1970, § 2-14; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
State Law reference— State commissioner of labor and industries to establish minimum fair wage rates, M.G.L. c. 151, § 7.  
Secs. 2-563—2-569. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING 
 
Sec. 2-570. - Department established. 
A department for the purchase of materials and supplies for the city is hereby established under the authority and in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 41, § 103 and c. 30B. 
(Code 1970, § 2-241; Ord. No. 12-1991, 4-9-1991)  
Sec. 2-571. - Appointment of purchasing agent and clerks; clerks subject to civil service. 
The purchasing agent shall be the chief procurement officer as defined in M.G.L. c. 30B, § 2. Any assistants and clerks hired shall be subject to M.G.L. c. 31, relating to civil service. 
(Code 1970, § 2-242; Ord. No. 12-1991, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 2-572. - Removal of purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent may be removed at any time by the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 2-243)  
Sec. 2-573. - Purchasing agent to make all purchases; exception. 
The purchasing agent shall purchase all supplies, materials and equipment required for the city and for every department thereof, as required by M.G.L. c. 30B. 
(Code 1970, § 2-244; Ord. No. 12-1991, 4-9-1991)  
Sec. 2-574. - When competition required. 
All purchases and contracts for goods and services made by any office or department, including schools shall comply with the requirements of M.G.L. c. 30B. 
(Code 1970, § 2-245; Ord. No. 12-1991, 4-9-1991) 
State Law reference— Advertisements for bids on contract proposals, M.G.L. c. 40, § 4G.  
Sec. 2-575. - Records. 
A record shall be kept by the purchasing agent of the prices paid for the supplies, equipment and materials purchased and of all bids and from whom received on any supplies, equipment or materials which the purchasing agent purchases for any department of the city, and such record shall be open to the inspection of any citizen. 
(Code 1970, § 2-246) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 41, § 103.  
Sec. 2-576. - Services or materials supplied by one department to another. 
For the purposes of permitting the various departments of the government of the city to perform certain services or supply certain materials common to their respective departments to other departments and for the purpose of arranging a method of interdepartmental requisition, credit and debit, the purchasing department is hereby authorized to act as the intermediary in the procuring of the services or materials when requested, and in the execution of the system of interdepartment requisition, credit and debit, in accord with the following stipulations: 
(1)  The purchasing department shall not requisition service or material from any department without having previously gained the approval of the proper authority in the respective department or having ascertained the cost of the service or material requested; 
(2)  When a department is supplying both service and material to another department, the department acting as the supplier shall not be expected to supply any materials not available or not common to the department acting as the supplier; 
(3)  The charges for any material or service shall not be in excess of cost price or prevailing hourly wage scale; 
(4)  No department shall be expected to perform a service for any other department while or when the necessary personnel or equipment is available in the department making the request; 
(5)  In its weekly work progress report, a department having had service performed or material supplied shall, in each instance, show proper credit to the performing or supplying department. 
(Code 1970, § 2-247)  
Sec. 2-577. - Purchasing agent to keep record. 
The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all contracts entered into by any department of the City for designer services. The purchasing agent shall provide the record to the City Council on a semiannual basis. 
(Ord. of 3-30-2010(01))  
Secs. 2-578—2-584. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-585. - Advisory board—Established; annual planning. 
A long range plan to serve as guidelines for capital improvements in the city shall be prepared each year in writing by the mayor subject to approval by the city council. Development of the plan shall take into account the recommendations made by a capital improvements advisory board, which is hereby established. 
(Code 1970, § 2-18)  
Sec. 2-586. - Same—Function; composition; appointment; terms of office. 
(a)  The capital improvements advisory board shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor from the community at large with due care for providing an optimum mix of background and expertise, whose terms of three years shall be staggered. The mayor shall designate a chairperson of the board, who shall serve for a term of one year and may be reappointed. All the members of the board shall elect a vice-chairperson from the membership, again on a yearly basis. No member of the city council shall serve as a member of the board. 
(b)  The board shall be apprised of the preparation of the ten-year capital improvements program developed by the community development department on a continuing basis, shall review the final ten-year program and shall submit a report on its review to the mayor. 
(c)  Minutes of each meeting of the capital improvements advisory shall be forwarded forthwith to each member of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 2-21; Ord. of 8-6-1985, § I; Ord. No. 6-1991, § I, 2-26-1991)  
Sec. 2-587. - Capital improvement plan. 
(a)  The capital improvement plan shall be concerned with physical facilities, such as land, buildings or other structures, or pieces of equipment, which require a relatively large investment and have a relatively long useful life. 
(b)  The capital improvement plan shall specify a detailed program of capital expenditures over a period of ten fiscal years from the date on which it becomes effective and shall specify the methods of financing the proposed capital improvements. 
(c)  Guidelines for the planning process, specifying minimum cost and useful life of capital improvements to be considered in the capital improvement plan, the maximum proportion of total budget to be devoted to capital improvements, and any restrictions on methods of financing, shall be established on recommendation of the mayor and approval by the city council. 
(d)  The capital improvement plan shall be submitted by the mayor to the city council no later than 90 days before the first day of the fiscal year in which it is to take effect. The plan shall be updated annually during the time it is in effect. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-19, 2-20; Ord. No. 6-1991, § I, 2-26-1991)  
Sec. 2-588. - Scope of division. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as preempting or diminishing the statutory prerogatives of the city council or the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 2-22)  
Secs. 2-589—2-594. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRUST FUNDS 
 
Sec. 2-595. - Custodian. 
The city treasurer shall be the custodian of all trust funds given or bequeathed for the benefit of the city or the inhabitants thereof and securities of such funds. He shall invest and reinvest them and expend therefrom moneys as directed by the board. The treasurer shall furnish a bond satisfactory to the board for the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1970, § 2-259) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 41, § 46.  
Sec. 2-596. - Board of commissioners of trust funds—Created; membership; purpose; officers. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the board of commissioners of trust funds consisting of three persons who are residents of the city at the time of their appointment. The board shall have the management of all trust funds given or bequeathed for the benefit of the city or the inhabitants thereof, unless the donor, in making the gift or bequest, shall otherwise provide. 
(b)  The members of the board of commissioners of trust funds shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. All members of the board shall be appointed for a three-year term. Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(c)  The board of commissioners of trust funds shall choose one of its members to be chairperson and one member to be clerk. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-270—2-273) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 41, § 45.  
Sec. 2-597. - Same—Powers and duties; reports. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of trust funds shall, so far as consistent with the terms of the trusts, manage and control the same, and distribute the income in accordance with the terms of the respective trusts. 
(b)  The board of commissioners of trust funds shall keep a record of its holdings and, at the close of each fiscal year, shall make a report to the mayor showing the total amount of the funds, and its investments, receipts and disbursements on account of the same, setting forth in detail the sources of the receipts and the purposes of the expenditures. 
(Code 1970, §§ 2-273, 2-274) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 41, § 47.  
Sec. 2-598. - Huntress fund—Designation. 
The fund of $33,505.09 given to the city by the late Joseph F. Huntress of Boston, together with the accumulated interest thereon, shall be called the Huntress Fund. 
(Code 1970, § 2-280)  
Sec. 2-599. - Same—Investments and expenditures. 
The board of trustees of the Huntress Fund shall keep the fund, as well as any and all additions made thereto, safely invested. The board is hereby authorized to expend from the same such sums as are necessary for the proper care and management of the fund; provided, however, that no part or portion of the principal shall be expended without first having obtained the consent of the city council thereto. 
(Code 1970, § 2-285)  
Sec. 2-600. - Same—Records and reports of trustees. 
The board of trustees of the Huntress Fund shall keep a record of all of its activities and annually, at the close of each fiscal year, make a report thereof in full to the city council regarding the standing of the fund. 
(Code 1970, § 2-286)  
Sec. 2-601. - Affordable housing trust fund—Purpose. 
(a)  The commonwealth has recently enacted legislation clarifying the ability of municipalities to create affordable housing trust funds by enacting M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C. 
(b)  Due to the high cost of housing, it is becoming harder to maintain economic diversity in the housing stock of the city. 
(c)  This rising cost affects the ability of all ages of the city residents to remain in the city as well as affecting the ability of the city to attract new residents of all age ranges. 
(d)  The city is dedicated to providing diversity in housing, which diversity includes economic diversity. 
(e)  By adopting the affordable housing trust fund ordinance from which sections 2-601 through 2-615 is derived, it will allow flexibility in addressing the needs of the city in a regulatory and problematic fashion. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-601)  
Sec. 2-602. - Same—Policy of the city. 
It is the policy of the city to support the creation, preservation and maintenance of affordable housing. In doing so, it is also the policy of the city to protect, preserve, and enhance the economic and social diversity of the city, to provide affordable rental and homeownership options for people of all ages and income levels, and to accommodate the changing housing needs of families and individuals. The Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund is created to promote this policy. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-602)  
Sec. 2-603. - Same—Establishment of the affordable housing trust fund. 
There is hereby created the Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund in accordance with M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C, as now or hereafter amended or superseded. The Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall hereinafter be known as the trust. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-603)  
Sec. 2-604. - Same—Definitions. 
For the purposes of sections 2-601 through 2-615, as well as for the declaration of trust for the trust or any other documents: 
Board means the board of trustees of the trust. 
Board members and trustees mean members of the board of the trust, which terms maybe used interchangeably. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-604)  
Sec. 2-605. - Same—Membership. 
(a)  Acting under the authority of M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C, there is hereby created a board of trustees for the trust established pursuant to sections 2-601 through 2-615, for the purposes set out in the M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C. The board shall include no fewer than five trustees, including the mayor, ex officio, or his written designee, ex officio. The remaining trustees shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council for a term not to exceed two years. 
(b)  The board members shall have knowledge or expertise in areas including, but not limited to, affordable housing, real estate, real estate finance, or housing construction. The mayor, however, shall not be required to appoint board members from all of these areas of knowledge or expertise, but shall only be required to make his best effort to find persons that meet this requirement. In addition, the city community development director shall serve as an ex officio trustee. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-605)  
Sec. 2-606. - Same—Terms of the board members; election of officers. 
(a)  The terms of the board members set out in sections 2-605 and 2-606 shall be two-year terms; provided, however, that for the appointment of the initial board members, three members shall be appointed for one year, and the remaining trustees for two years. The board members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The mayor, however, shall serve for his entire term of office as mayor. The mayor's written designee shall serve for the term of his written designation, which may be amended or revoked at any time in writing. The community development director shall serve for the entire term of his employment as community development director. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 7.5 of the Charter of the city, every appointment to the trust shall begin on February 15 for the term specified in subsection (a) of this section and shall continue until a successor is chosen and qualified as specified in subsection (a) of this section, but in no case longer than six months when the office shall be declared vacant. 
(c)  The board shall, annually, elect a chairman and vice-chairman of the board at the first regularly scheduled meeting after February 15. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-606)  
Sec. 2-607. - Same—City board. 
The trust is a board of the city for purposes of M.G.L. c. 30B (Uniform Procurement Act) and M.G.L. c. 40, § 15A (Transfers of Land); but agreements and conveyances between the trust and agencies, boards, commissions, authorities, departments and public instrumentalities of the city shall be exempt from M.G.L. c. 30B. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-607)  
Sec. 2-608. - Same—Removal of trustees. 
Pursuant to section 7-14 of the Charter of the city, any trustee may be removed from the board and have his place declared vacant for the reasons set out in and under the procedures set out in said section 7-14. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-608)  
Sec. 2-609. - Same—Meetings of the trust; notice; quorum. 
(a)  The trust shall meet monthly as long as there is business requiring the attention of the trust; provided, however, that the trust shall meet at least on a quarterly basis. The meetings of the trust shall be at such time and at such place as the trustees shall determine. Notice of all meetings of the trust shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the Open Meeting Law, M.G.L. c. 39, §§ 23A, 23B and 23C. 
(b)  A quorum at any meeting shall be a majority of the trustees qualified and present in person. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-609)  
Sec. 2-610. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The trust, acting through the trustees, shall have the powers and duties set out in M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C, as now or hereafter amended or superseded, which include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  General powers. The following are the general powers of the trustees: 
a.  With the approval of the city council, to accept and receive property, whether real or personal, by gift, grant, devise or transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public or private entity, including without limitation, grants of funds or other property tendered to the trust in connection with provisions of any zoning ordinance or any other ordinance. Acceptance or receipt of funds shall require city council approval pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C; 
b.  With the approval of the city council to the extent required by ordinance and M.G.L. c. 30B, to purchase and retain real or personal property, including without restriction, investments that yield a high rate of income or no income; 
c.  With the approval of the city council, to sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real property at public auction or by private contract for such consideration and on such terms as to credit or otherwise, and to make such contracts and enter into such undertakings relative to trust property as the trustees deem advisable notwithstanding the length of any such lease or contract; 
d.  To employ advisors and agents, such as accountants, appraisers and lawyers as the board deems necessary; 
e.  To pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and agents and to apportion such compensation between income and principal as the board deems advisable; 
f.  With the approval of the city council, to comprise, compromise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in favor or against the trust, including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either in total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the board may deem appropriate. 
(2)  Real estate related powers. The following are the real estate related powers of the trustees: 
a.  With the approval of the city council to execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges, leases, covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments sealed or unsealed, necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the board engages for the accomplishment of the purposes of the trust; and 
b.  To own, manage or improve real property and, with the approval of the city council, to sell or transfer any property which the trustees determine not to be worth retaining. 
(3)  Financial powers. The following are the financial powers of the trustees: 
a.  With the approval of the city council, to disburse trust funds for the purpose of making loans or grants in furtherance of the creation or preservation of affordable housing in the city upon such terms as the trustees shall deem most appropriate to carry out such purposes; 
b.  To incur debt; 
c.  To apportion receipts and charges between income and principal as the board deems advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such purpose, and to create reserves for depreciation depletion or otherwise; 
d.  With the approval of the city council: 
(i)  To participate in any reorganization, recapitalization, merger or similar transactions; and 
(ii)  To give proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution, to vote any securities or certificates of interest, and to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage, purchase or sale of property, by or between any corporation and any other corporation or person; 
e.  With the approval of the city council, to deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee, and to delegate to such committee such powers and authority with relation thereto as the board may deem proper and to pay, out of trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation of such committee as the board, with the approval of the city council, may deem necessary and appropriate; 
f.  To carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date values; 
g.  With the approval the city council, to borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such sources as the trust deems advisable, and to mortgage and pledge trust assets as collateral; 
h.  To make distributions or divisions of principal in-kind; 
i.  To hold all or part of the trust property uninvested for such purposes and for such time as the board may deem appropriate; and 
j.  To extend the time for payment of any obligation to the trust. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-610)  
Sec. 2-611. - Same—Funds paid into the trust. 
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C(d), and notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, all moneys paid to the trust in accordance with the city zoning ordinance, exaction fee, or private contributions shall be paid directly into the trust and need not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the trust. General revenues appropriated into the trust become trust property and these funds need not be further appropriated to be expended. All moneys remaining in the trust at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not expended by the board within one year of the date they were appropriated into the trust, remain trust property. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-611)  
Sec. 2-612. - Same—Custodian of the funds. 
The city treasurer will be the custodian of the funds. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-612)  
Sec. 2-613. - Same—Taxes. 
The trust is exempt from M.G.L. chs. 59 and 62, and from any other provisions concerning payment of taxes based upon or measured by property or income imposed by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereto. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-613)  
Sec. 2-614. - Same—Governmental body. 
The trust is a governmental body for purposes of M.G.L. c. 39, §§ 23A, 23B and 23C. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-614)  
Sec. 2-615. - Same—Reports to the mayor and city council; annual audits. 
(a)  The trust shall, on a quarterly basis, provide written reports to the mayor and city council on each and every aspect of the business conducted by the trust. The reports shall be provided on or before the 15th day of the month following the first day of a calendar quarter. 
(b)  Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 44, § 55C(h), the books and records of the trust shall be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices for municipalities. The trust shall forward a copy of the audit to both the city council and the mayor. The auditor shall work for the city treasurer. However, the costs of the audit shall be paid from the trust. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006(01), § 2-615)  
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS 
 
Sec. 2-616. - Purpose. 
This ordinance establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by city departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by M.G.L.c. 44, § 53E½. 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-617. - Expenditure limitations. 
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this division without appropriation subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund, except for those employed as school bus drivers. 
(2)  No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund. 
(3)  The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by the city council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-618. - Interest. 
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this division shall be credited to the General Fund. 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-619. - Procedures and reports. 
Except as provided in M.G.L. c. 44, § 53E½ and this division, the laws, charter provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of city monies and the expenditure and payment of city funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this division. The city auditor shall include a statement and the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report the city auditor provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-620. - Authorized revolving funds. 
The table establishes: 
(1)  Each revolving fund authorized for use by a city department, board committee, agency or officer, 
(2)  The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from each fund, 
(3)  The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the city auditor, 
(4)  The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used, 
(5)  Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund; 
(6)  Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund, and 
(7)  The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-621. - School revolving funds table. 
A 
  
Revolving Fund 	B 
  
Department, Board, Committee, Agency or Officer Authorized to Spend from Fund 	C 
  
Fees, Charges or Other Receipts Credited to Fund 	D 
  
Program or Activity Expenses Payable from Fund 	E 
  
Restrictions or Conditions on Expenses Payable from Fund 	F 
  
Other Requirements/Reports 	G 
  
Fiscal Years 
Summer School Program 	School 	Fees collected From Users 	Salary/Expense to Run summer school Program 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Transportation 	School 	Contracts/Charters collected To Users 	Transportation Services for Students 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
ROTC 	School 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Salary/Expenses 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Preschool 	School 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Salary/Expenses of Teachers and Materials 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Professional Development 	School 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Training Expense For Gloucester School Teachers 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Non Resident Student Tuition 	School 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Salary/Expense for Non resident Students 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
West Parish Before School Program 	School 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Salary/Expense to Run West Parish Before School Program 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-622. - City revolving funds table. 
A 
  
Revolving Fund 	B 
  
Department, Board, Committee, Agency or Officer Authorized to Spend from Fund 	C 
  
Fees, Charges or Other Receipts Credited to Fund 	D 
  
Program or Activity Expenses Payable from Fund 	E 
  
Restrictions or Conditions on Expenses Payable from Fund 	F 
  
Other Requirements/Reports 	G 
  
Fiscal Years 
Building Use 	DPW Director 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Janitorial/Maintenance for School Buildings 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
City Hall User 	DPW Director 	Fees/Charges Collected from Users 	Janitorial/Maintenance for Kyrouz Auditorium 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Court Repairs 	DPW Director 	State Reimbursement 	Repairs to the Court Building 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Septic Loan - BOH 	City CFO 	Fees collected From Homeowners 	Salary/Expenses Related to Septic Systems 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Vaccine - BOH 	BOH Director 	Fees collected From insurance and Users 	Vaccinations for flu and other 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Fire Training 	Fire Chief 	Fees 	High Angle Training 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
RFR Study 	Community Development Director 	Fees collected From applicant 	Radio Frequency Study 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Dental - BOH 	BOH Director 	Fees collected From insurance And Users 	Child Dental Services 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Solid Waste/Recycling 	DPW Director 	Fees collected From Users 	Materials/Supplies For Recycling Program 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
City Clerk Pres. Perm. Records 	City Clerk 	Fees 	Archival Preservation 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Vacant Building 	Inspectional Services Director 	Fees 	Secure Vacant Buildings 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Lanes Cove Fish Shack 	DPW Director 	Fees 	Repairs to the Fish Shack 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Various Fire Trainings 	Fire Chief 	Reimbursements 	Training 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
DPW - Newell Stadium Maintenance 	DPW Director 	Fees collected From users 	Maintenance for Newell Stadium 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
DPW - Stage Fort Park Maintenance 	DPW Director 	Fees 	Maintenance for Stage Fort Park 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Police - Student Officer Training & Equipment 	Police Chief 	Reimbursements From Student Officers 	Training for Student Officers 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
Fire Decon. Drill Training 	Fire Chief 	State Reimbursements 	Training 	None 	None 	Fiscal Year 2018 and Subsequent years 
 
(Ord. No. 2017-189, 10-10-2017)  
Secs. 2-623—2-649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CIVIL DEFENSE[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—11 of a nonamendatory ordinance adopted January 19, 1988, has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as article VII, §§ 2-650—2-660. 
 
Sec. 2-650. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Civil Defense Ordinance of the City of Gloucester." 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 1)  
Sec. 2-651. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an office that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all the city's facilities and combat disasters resulting from attack or other emergency situations. 
(b)  The city office of civil defense will be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with civil defense; it will be the instrument through which the mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in him in the appendix of to M.G.L. c. 33, as amended, and this article. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 2)  
Sec. 2-652. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this article: 
Civil defense shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces other than the National Guard are primarily responsible, for the purpose of minimizing and repairing injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by attack, sabotage or other hostile action; or by riot or other civil disturbance; or by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes. Said functions shall include specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, firefighting and police services other than the actual control or suppression of riot or other civil disturbance, medical and health services, rescue, engineering and air raid warning services, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons of defense, emergency transportation, existing or property assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions. 
Civil defense forces shall mean the employees, equipment and facilities and all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies. 
Civil defense volunteer shall mean any person duly registered, identified and appointed by the director of the office of civil defense and assigned to participate in the civil defense activity. 
Director shall mean the director of the city office of civil defense, appointed as prescribed in this article. 
Mayor shall mean the mayor or the acting mayor as provided in Charter, § 3-10(a), except that the acting mayor shall assume such office immediately upon the mayor's becoming unable to perform the duties of the office. 
Regulations shall include plans, programs and other emergency procedures. 
Volunteer shall mean contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the civil defense organization without remuneration. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 3)  
Sec. 2-653. - Organization and appointments. 
(a)  The mayor is authorized and directed to establish an organization for civil defense in accordance with the commonwealth civil defense plan and program. Said organization is to be known as the city office of civil defense. 
(b)  The organization shall be constituted as follows: 
(1)  There shall be a director who shall be appointed by the mayor and who shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the city office of civil defense, subject to the direction and control of the mayor. 
(2)  Every agency and all members of every department and division of the government of the city may be employed as part of the civil defense organization. 
(3)  Whenever the federal government or any agency or officer thereof, or any person, firm or corporation, shall offer to the city services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds, by way of gift, grant or loan for purposes of civil defense, the city, acting through its city council, may accept such offer, and upon acceptance, the city council may authorize any officer of the city to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the city, and subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the officer. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 4)  
Sec. 2-654. - Emergency powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor. 
(1)  The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to fulfill his general powers and duties as defined in the city Charter, article 3. The city council may convene to perform its legislative and administrative powers as the situation demands, and shall receive reports relative to civil defense activities. Nothing in that article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or restrictions of the city council as defined in the city Charter, article 2. 
(2)  During any period when disaster threatens or when the city has been struck by disaster, within the definition or this article, the mayor may promulgate such regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources. Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of civil defense forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city. 
b.  Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster. 
c.  Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and safety. 
d.  Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by newspaper and radio. These regulations will have the force of ordinance when duly filed with the city clerk. 
(3)  The mayor may obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of health, life and property of the people, and bind the city for fair value thereof. 
(4)  The mayor may require emergency services of any city officer or employee. If regular city forces are determined inadequate, the mayor may require the services of such other personnel as he is able to obtain, including citizen volunteers. All duly authorized persons rendering emergency services shall be entitled to such privileges and immunities as are provided by commonwealth law, the city Charter and ordinances for regular city employees and other registered and identified civil defense and disaster workers. 
(5)  The mayor shall cause to be prepared the basic plan herein referenced, shall exercise his ordinary powers as mayor, all of the special powers conferred upon him by the city Charter and this Code, and all powers conferred upon him by any commonwealth statute, or other lawful authority. 
(b)  Director of the office of civil defense. 
(1)  The director, under the supervision of the mayor, shall be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the civil defense activity in the city. He shall maintain liaison with the commonwealth and federal authorities and the authorities of other nearby political subdivisions as to ensure the most effective operation of the civil defense plan. The director's duties shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Developing or causing to be developed, in collaboration with other public and private agencies, mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal civil defense aid and assistance in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
b.  Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for civil defense purposes. 
c.  Developing and coordinating plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
d.  Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for the civil defense purposes and designating suitable buildings as public shelters which comply with standards for shelters promulgated by the commonwealth director of civil defense. 
e.  Educating the civilian population, through public informational programs, as to actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property in case of enemy attack, or disaster, as defined herein, either impending or present. 
f.  Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation of the civil defense forces and to familiarize residents with civil defense regulations, procedures and operations. 
g.  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any civil defense activity. 
h.  Assuming such authority and conducting such activity as the mayor may direct to promote and execute the civil defense plan. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 5)  
Sec. 2-655. - Civil defense and disaster basic plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive civil defense and disaster basic plan shall be adopted and maintained by resolution of the council upon the recommendations of the mayor. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to city organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The basic plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as defined in this article, has been proclaimed. 
(b)  The mayor shall prescribe in the basic plan those positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the mayor a current list of three persons as successors to this position. The list will be in order of succession and will as nearly as possible designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned duties and functions. 
(c)  Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the basic plan shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned city employees and volunteers. Each chief shall formulate the operational plan for his service which, when approved, shall be an annex to and a part of the basic plan. 
(d)  Amendments to the basic plan shall be submitted to the mayor. If approved, the mayor will submit the amendments to the city council with his recommendations for their approval. Such amendments shall take effect 30 days from the date of approval unless action is taken by the council disapproving the mayor's submission. In the event an amendment is pending at the time that a disaster is proclaimed under provisions of this article, the amendment will be considered approved immediately and will remain effective unless specifically revoked by the council. 
(e)  When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not available within the city government, the mayor is authorized to seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so assigned to carry out such duties in reasonable anticipation, during, and after the occurrence of a disaster. Such services from persons outside of government may be accepted by the city on a volunteer basis. Such citizens shall be enrolled as civil defense volunteers in cooperation with the heads of city departments affected. 
(f)  Some of the duties ascribed to the mayor in this section will ordinarily be handled as a matter of routine by the director, but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the mayor. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 6)  
Sec. 2-656. - No municipal or private liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city nor agents and representatives of said city, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, or any of the agents thereof in good faith and in the absence of gross negligence, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained by persons or property as the result of said activity. The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of any person to benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under the State Civil Defense Act, Workmen's Compensation Act, pension and other similar law. 
(b)  Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 7)  
Sec. 2-657. - Violation of regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense organization as herein defined in the enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulation or plan issued thereunder. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 8)  
Sec. 2-658. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.00 and costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 9)  
Sec. 2-659. - Severability. 
Should any provision of this article be declared invalid for any reason, such declaration shall not affect the validity of other provisions, or of this article, as a whole, it being the legislative intent that the provisions of this article shall be severable and remain valid notwithstanding such declaration. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 10)  
Sec. 2-660. - Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. of 1-19-1988, § 11)  
Secs. 2-661—2-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-701—2-750. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ARCHIVES AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1994, adopted August 23, 1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001; Ord. of 7-8-2003. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees, § 2-400 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-751. - Ownership and management of public records. 
All public records, as defined in M.G.L. c. 4, § 7, and c. 66, § 3, shall be the property of the city and under the management control of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 4, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-751))  
Sec. 2-752. - City clerk; management control. 
(a)  The city clerk shall oversee the execution of policies and orders of the supervisor of public records, and provisions of M.G.L. c. 66. To that end, the city clerk shall develop a program comprising procedures, standards and techniques for ensuring adequate custody, preservation and accountability of records and for archives management, as follows: 
(1)  Advise departments in the administration and safekeeping of records and archival materials; 
(2)  Appraise all inactive municipal records for their historical, administrative, legal, fiscal, cultural or other important value; 
(3)  Establish procedures for the lawful transfer and disposition of all noncurrent records, including those of semi-active status which must be retained for varying periods of time, but which are not needed frequently for the transaction of current business; 
(4)  Plan and provide one or more records centers for accepting, storing, retrieving, servicing and protecting such records; 
(5)  Implement retention and disposition schedules (see sections 2-756 and 2-757); 
(6)  Receive from city agencies for permanent archival storage records scheduled for permanent retention and those records which have an enduring historical value, when those records are no longer necessary for conducting current business; 
(7)  Plan, establish and operate an archives repository in order to store, secure, process and conserve said records and to make them available for governmental reference and public use; 
(8)  In consultation with agencies having custody, identify the records most vital to the operation of the city, which records shall be preserved in protected storage in order to survive disaster; 
(9)  Prepare plans and schedules relative to the retention, disposition and preservation of records, and ensure the compliance with commonwealth regulations governing them; 
(10)  Prepare inventories, indexes, guides and other resource aids to facilitate the use of the public records of the city; 
(11)  Establish procedures for identifying the authoritative copy of record of documents, reflecting all amendments made during the approval process and identifying the office responsible for retaining the copy of record. 
(b)  In order to carry out the duties and procedures set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk may request advice from the records management advisory board and/or the archives committee. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 5, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-752))  
Sec. 2-753. - Archivist; appointment; duties. 
(a)  There shall be within the office of the city clerk, an archives and records clerk, appointed by the city clerk, and hereinafter called the archivist. Said archivist shall oversee the city clerk's program (see section 2-752) for the administration and preservation of the records of the city under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 66. 
(b)  The archivist shall be the liaison between the city clerk and the various agencies of the city regarding the safekeeping and administration of city records. 
(c)  The city clerk may employ, within budget constraints, temporary professional and technical assistance to the archivist as may be required in the performance of the duties of that office. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 2, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-753))  
Sec. 2-754. - Archives committee; appointment; duties. 
(a)  Members of the archives committee shall be appointed by the mayor for three-year terms (or the unexpired portion thereof) expiring on February 15, such appointments to be confirmed by the city council. 
(b)  The committee shall assist the city clerk and the departments in the performance of such tasks as are mutually agreeable to the committee, the city clerk and the departments as applicable. The committee shall have no independent authority. 
(c)  One member of the committee may be appointed to serve also on the records management advisory board. 
(d)  All members of the committee shall serve without compensation. They shall be deemed special municipal employees under section 2-44 for the purposes of M.G.L. c. 268a. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 3, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-754))  
Sec. 2-755. - Records management advisory board established; appointments; duties. 
(a)  In order to promote adequate assurance of the longterm storage, security, preservation and accessibility of all records held by the city, there shall be in the city a records management advisory board hereinafter called the board. 
(b)  The board shall consist of seven persons, one of whom may be a member of the archives committee, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Members shall be appointed for three-year terms (or the unexpired portion thereof) expiring on February 15. In making such appointments the mayor shall give preference to persons with broad management experience and familiarity with the care and custody of records and with the use of archival materials. 
(c)  The chairperson, vice-chairperson and recorder shall be elected by the members of the board. The city clerk shall serve as a nonvoting consultant. Department representatives may be invited as consultants when needed. Minutes of meetings of the board shall be submitted to the office of the city clerk on a regular basis. 
(d)  All members of the board shall serve without compensation. They shall be deemed special municipal employees under section 2-44 for the purposes of M.G.L. c. 268a. 
(e)  The board shall continually review and assess the records storage and preservation systems of the city and advise the administration, the city council and the city clerk about records management issues. The board shall render annually to the mayor and city council a report regarding the development and status of municipal archives and records management and the adequacy of planning therefor. 
(f)  The board shall, at intervals chosen by the members, review its mission and suggest changes in the ordinances that govern its actions. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 1, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-755))  
Sec. 2-756. - Agencies of the city; custody and preservation of records. 
Unless otherwise provided for by law, records shall be kept in the custody of the manager of each city agency, or his designee. The manager of each city agency shall: 
(1)  Make and preserve public records containing proper documentation of its organization, functions, policies and procedures; 
(2)  Establish and maintain effective controls over the creation, maintenance and use of records and guard against the loss or the unauthorized or unlawful removal of city records; 
(3)  Apply the provision of approved records retention schedules to execute the orderly disposition of records including transfer to the city's records center or archives repository of noncurrent or inactive records; 
(4)  Designate a liaison between the agency and the city clerk on all matters relating to the department's records and recordkeeping practices; and 
(5)  Certify to the city clerk through the personnel exit interview process that all records have been delivered to his successor. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 6, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-756))  
Sec. 2-757. - Destruction or disposal of records. 
(a)  The city clerk or the designated records manager of each agency shall make the determinations on the potential administrative, fiscal, legal, research or historical value of each record and the applicable laws and retention schedules of the commonwealth. 
(b)  Requests to dispose of records shall be accompanied by a description of the records by series, inclusive dates, quantities with reference to state and city retention schedules and shall include notification of intended time, place and method of disposal. 
(c)  The master copy of any record (called the copy of record) shall be not be destroyed except in full compliance with all commonwealth laws, and only by those authorized to do so under pertinent laws and city ordinances. 
(d)  Upon disposal of the records, the records manager of the agency which requested the disposal shall submit to the archivist a certificate of disposal listing the records and certifying to their disposal. Said division shall ensure the proper destruction of those disposable records, in accordance with the preceding provisions, within 90 days of the date of eligibility. 
(e)  Records designated as archival shall be retained for historical or research purposes and shall be transferred to the municipal archives for permanent custody. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 8, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-757))  
Sec. 2-758. - Return or recovery of public records. 
(a)  The city clerk shall seek the return of missing municipal records, provide for the reproduction of said records, or provide information concerning the location of these records if they are maintained in a safe and usable manner and are available for public use. 
(b)  Upon request of the city clerk, the general counsel may take action to recover any municipal records, artifacts or documents deemed to have historical significance which have been transferred, loaned or otherwise removed from the city without proper authorization. 
(Ord. No. 15-1994, § 9, 8-23-1994; Ord. of 11-13-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(01), § II(2-758))  
Chapter 3 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Public display of fireworks, § 8-3; parks and recreation, ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Theatrical exhibitions, public amusements, etc., generally, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 181—185G. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Right of entry on premises. 
Any duly authorized city employee shall have the right to lawfully enter any place of amusement or exhibition at any time. 
(Code 1970, § 3-1)  
Secs. 3-2—3-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 3-15. - Required. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140, § 181, no theatrical exhibitions, public shows, public amusements or exhibitions of any description, to be held on weekdays only, and to which admission is obtained upon payment of money or upon the delivery of any valuable thing or by a ticket or voucher obtained for money or any valuable thing, or in which, after free admission, amusement is furnished upon a deposit of money in a coin-controlled apparatus, shall be conducted in the city until a license therefor has first been obtained from the licensing commission. All licenses so granted shall be subject to all laws of the commonwealth relating to public amusements and to such other terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
(b)  Sunday activities. No person shall conduct any game, sport, entertainment or other activity, mentioned in M.G.L. c. 136, § 4, on Sunday, unless a license therefor has been granted by the licensing commission. Such license and the procedure for its issuance shall be subject to all of the provisions of M.G.L. c. 136, § 4. 
(c)  Jugglers, street musicians and other such street entertainers shall be required to be permitted through the licensing commission under this article with fee as specified in section 3-18(b)(3) whether or not any remuneration is received as payment or donation, but shall not be permitted on Western Avenue from the tavern to its intersection with Hough Avenue, excluding any city sanctioned events. 
(Code 1970, § 3-12; Ord. of 7-10-2001(01), § I)  
Sec. 3-16. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  The application for a license under this article shall be in writing and shall fully and specifically describe the conditions of the proposed exhibition, show, or amusement and the premises upon which the proposed exhibition, show, or amusement is to take place, to the extent that such conditions or premises would affect the public safety, health or order. Upon written request of the mayor or the licensing commission, the applicant shall in addition furnish reasonable information concerning the conditions of the premises and actions to be taken in order to prevent danger to the public safety, health, or order. Within 30 days following receipt of any such application, the license shall be granted or a hearing shall be ordered, preceded by at least ten days' written notice to the applicant. Within 45 days next following the close of any such hearing, the license shall be granted or denied upon a finding that issuance of such a license would lead to the creation of a nuisance or would endanger the public health, safety or order, in the area in which the premises is located, by the following: 
(1)  Unreasonably increasing pedestrian traffic; 
(2)  Increasing the incidence of disruptive conduct; 
(3)  Unreasonably increasing the level of noise. 
(b)  Notice of denial of an application under this section shall be delivered to the applicant in writing and shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefor. No application shall be denied if the anticipated harm is not significant or if the likelihood of its occurrence is remote. The mayor or the licensing commission may impose conditions upon a license, but the commission conditions may only relate to compliance with applicable laws or ordinances, or to public safety, health or order, or to steps required to be taken to guard against creation of a nuisance or to ensure adequate safety and security for patrons or the affected public. 
(c)  No applicant having been denied a license as provided in this section shall submit the same or a similar application within one year of denial without including in the new application facts showing that the circumstances upon which the original denial was based have substantially changed. 
(d)  All licenses granted under the authority of this article shall be issued and signed by the city clerk, as clerk of the licensing commission. The clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1970, § 3-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 181.  
Sec. 3-17. - Insurance required of certain applicants. 
No license shall be issued under this article for a traveling carnival, circus or other such traveling amusement which does not have its principal place of business within the commonwealth unless the licensee certifies that he has provided by insurance for the payment of compensation and the furnishing of other benefits under M.G.L. c. 152 to all persons to be employed by the licensee and that such insurance shall continue in full force and effect during the term of the license. Any such licensee shall further certify that he has obtained a policy of public liability insurance in the amount of at least $25,000.00 to pay any claims or judgments rendered against him in favor of patrons or others to recover damages resulting from the negligence of the licensee. The amount of insurance of the policy required by this section or in effect shall not limit or impair any right of recovery to which any plaintiff may be entitled in excess of such amount. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 181.  
Sec. 3-18. - Fees. 
(a)  Licenses. The following fees shall be charged for licenses for theatricals, exhibitions, public shows, public amusements, bowling, motion pictures, exhibitions and amusements of every description for which a charge is obtained in the form of payment of money or collection of money or the delivery of any valuable consideration for the privilege of being present thereat or engaging therein, or by any ticket or voucher obtained for money or any valuable consideration: 
(1)  For an annual license beginning January 1 in any year or on any day thereafter and extending to January 1 in the succeeding year: $100.00. 
(2)  Pool or billiard tables, for each, per year: $20.00. 
(3)  Temporary exhibitions, for each day: $20.00. 
(4)  Circus or carnival license, each event: $50.00. 
(5)  Circus or carnival games, per game: $15.00. 
(6)  Circus or carnival rides, per ride: $15.00. 
(7)  For all other licenses unless otherwise provided by ordinances or statutes: $20.00. 
(b)  Permits. The following fees shall be charged for permits: 
(1)  Carnivals, for each ride: $10.00. 
(2)  Circuses: $10.00. 
(3)  Entertainment, for each day: $5.00. 
(4)  Circus games: $15.00. 
(5)  Carnival games: $15.00. 
(6)  Circuses, per ride: $25.00. 
(Code 1970, § 3-13; Ord. No. 35-1992, § I, 11-17-1992; Ord. No. 49-1997, § I, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 124-1998, § I, 9-29-1998)  
Sec. 3-19. - Suspension or revocation. 
The licensing commission may suspend or revoke a license granted pursuant to the provisions of this article upon finding, after a hearing preceded by ten days' written notice to the licensee, that conditions exist which would have justified denial of the original application for the license provided, that the mayor or the licensing commission may petition the superior court department of the trial court to enjoin any violation of this article. 
(Code 1970, § 3-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 181.  
Secs. 3-20—3-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Automatic amusement devices, M.G.L. c. 140, § 177A et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-30. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise expressly provided: 
Automatic amusement device shall mean any mechanism whereby, upon the deposit of a coin or token therein, any apparatus is released or set into motion or put in a position where it may be set in motion for the purpose of playing any game involving, in whole or in part, the skill of the player or for the amusement of the player. The term "automatic amusement device" includes pinball machines but excludes vending machines in which gaming or amusement features are not incorporated, any coin-operated mechanical musical devices such as jukeboxes and slot machines as defined in M.G.L. c. 23K. 
Automatic amusement device arcade or arcade shall mean and include any location or premises for which five or more automatic amusement devices or other coin-operated games are duly licensed. Any location or premises licensed for five or more such devices shall be conclusively presumed to be engaged in the business of offering such devices for public use and not offering such devices as an incident to a separate primary business or occupation. 
Proprietor shall mean any person who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor or employee has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which an automatic amusement device is placed or kept for use or play, or an exhibition for the purpose of use or play. 
(Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I(16); Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Automatic amusement device defined, M.G.L. c. 140, § 177A(2).  
Sec. 3-31. - Hours of operation. 
No proprietor shall permit or allow the use or play of automatic amusement devices except during the following times: 
(1)  Monday through Thursday: 11:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Fridays and Saturdays: 11:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(3)  Sundays and Holidays: 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I(17(a))  
Sec. 3-32. - Use of automatic amusement devices by schoolchildren. 
(a)  No proprietor shall permit or allow the use, play or operation of any automatic amusement device by any person between the ages of five and 16 during the hours which such person is required by law to attend school. The hours of required school attendance shall be presumed to be from 7:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. It shall be presumed that school is in session and attendance is lawfully required if the public schools are in session in the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the presumptions as to the ages and times of required school attendance shall be rebuttable by evidence that a particular child is not required by law to attend school or is enrolled in a school which is not in session at the particular time or date in question. 
(Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I(18)) 
Cross reference— Schools, ch. 18.  
Sec. 3-33. - Adult supervision. 
No proprietor shall permit or allow the play, use or operation of any automatic amusement device unless the place of business where such device is located is under the supervision of a person 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I(19))  
Sec. 3-34. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140, § 177A. 
(Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I(20))  
Secs. 3-35—3-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PORTABLE SHOWS 
 
Sec. 3-45. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Owner shall mean the proprietor, operator, agent or possessor of a portable show. 
Portable show shall mean any circus, carnival or other similar exhibition. 
(Code 1970, § 3-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-46. - Permit required. 
No portable show shall be held within the city unless the owner thereof obtains a permit therefor from the licensing commission. 
(Code 1970, § 3-22)  
Sec. 3-47. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Not less than 15 days before exhibiting any portable show in this city, the owner thereof shall make application on a form provided by the city clerk which application shall contain such information as required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The following information shall be provided on applications for permits under subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of sponsoring organization; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of portable show owner; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of portable show manager; 
(4)  The proposed dates of portable show operation; 
(5)  The proposed location of portable show operation; 
(6)  The name and address of insurance carrier and amounts of public liability insurance provided pursuant to section 3-25. 
(Code 1970, §§ 3-23, 3-24)  
Sec. 3-48. - Proof of financial responsibility required. 
Before exhibiting any portable show in this city, the owner thereof shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages on account of any physical injuries or property damage suffered by any person by reason of any act or omission on the part of the owner, his agents or employees in such amount, character and form as the commissioner of insurance for the commonwealth determines to be necessary for the protection of the public or $1,000,000.00 which is greater. Proof of financial responsibility shall be in the form of a certificate of insurance containing an endorsement providing 30-day written notice to the city clerk before insurance naming the city as a co-insured in the amount of $100,000.00 per incident for any personal injuries or property damage sustained by individuals occurring at the location of the portable show operation while such individuals are in attendance at the operation. A certificate shall be provided to the city clerk as proof of the co-insurance and said certificate shall have an endorsement providing the 30-day written notice to the city clerk before insurance cancellation or addition of restrictive amendments. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from all damages should the required insurance lapse prior to any claims or awards. 
(Code 1970, § 3-25; Ord. of 3-1-1983, § I; Ord. of 12-22-1987) 
State Law reference— Insurance for such shows, M.G.L. c. 140, § 181.  
Sec. 3-49. - Requirements for temporary permits. 
The licensing commission shall not issue a temporary permit for the operation of a portable show until the following requirements have been satisfied: 
(1)  Evidence of insurance has been judged satisfactory by the licensing commission; 
(2)  Evidence of compliance with commonwealth equipment certification requirements; 
(3)  The owner agrees that the following requirements must be met before a final permit will be issued: 
a.  The owner shall have the portable show completely set up a minimum of one day prior to the approved opening date for the purpose of affording inspectional agencies time to inspect the show, order corrections, provide for reinspection of corrections and file the necessary reports with the licensing commission prior to the final permit issuance. Show rides, tents, food concessions, etc., not ready or available for inspection by 8:30 a.m. on the day before the approved opening will not be inspected and will not be approved for use. 
b.  Inspection and approval by the board of health; 
c.  Inspection and approval by the city electrician; 
d.  Inspection and approval of all rides and related equipment by a safety engineer who is a registered professional engineer in the commonwealth, which inspection shall determine whether the rides will be reasonably safe for public attendance and use with inspection to commence after said rides have been assembled for use on the dates proposed in the permit application; 
e.  Inspection and approval of all moving devices and rails from the ground up to the interface of all rides and related equipment by the building inspector's office as provided under section 19 of the state building code, portable shows; 
f.  Notification by the chief of police that adequate police protection at the carnival site and along Western Avenue has been engaged by the owner or sponsor of the portable show; 
g.  Notification by the fire chief that the character and arrangement of the seating, means of egress, lighting and firefighting appliances make the portable show reasonably safe against both fire and casualty hazards; 
h.  Any and all fees resulting from inspection set forth in subsection (3) of this section shall be borne by the owner of the portable show; 
i.  Written approval from the director of public works for the use of city-owned land and facilities or the school department for school property and facilities must be obtained. The approving authority must establish requirements to ensure an adequate work force is engaged by the owner for daily and final site cleanup, provision of adequate bathroom facilities for workers and the public (i.e., numbers of portable toilets), and other requirements deemed necessary; 
j.  The carnival or show period shall not exceed seven days and shall open no earlier than 1:00 p.m. and close no later than 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  The sponsoring organization or representative shall be available, during normal business hours, at their listed telephone number, for problem resolution. The sponsoring organization is responsible for all requirements should the show owner fail to comply with city requirements. 
All approvals and notifications set forth in this section shall be in the form of a written communication to the city clerk. 
(Code 1970, § 3-26; Ord. of 7-22-1976, § 1(A), (B); Ord. of 8-3-1982, § I; Ord. of 12-22-1987, §§ III—VI)  
Sec. 3-50. - Games, contests, etc., offering money prizes prohibited. 
No game, contest, amusement, activity or device, which offers a prize of money, coin and/or token shall be permitted as part of a portable show. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1976, § 1(C); Ord. No. 118-1998, § I, 9-1-1998)  
Sec. 3-51. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Permits may be revoked immediately, upon authorization from the licensing commission chairperson, or in his absence, another commission member, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Violations of any permit restrictions. 
(2)  Failure to comply with any lawful order of the police department or other inspectional agencies listed under section 3-49(3). 
(b)  Following said revocation, the licensing commission shall hold an emergency public meeting, as soon as practical, to review the revocation and take remedial action as necessary. 
(Code 1970, § 3-27; Ord. of 12-22-1987, § VII)  
Sec. 3-52. - Prohibition. 
Carnivals shall be prohibited at Stage Fort Park. 
(Ord. of 12-22-1987, § I)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Shellfish, seaworms and eels, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, M.G.L. c. 272, § 77 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Certain animals not to be at large on streets. 
(a)  No owner or person, having the charge of any horse, cow, swine, goat or other grazing animal, shall permit the same to go at large in any street. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "at large" shall mean the animal is off the premises of its owner or keeper and not under the direct control of a competent person. 
(Code 1970, § 20-24) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to pass ordinances regulating animals in streets, M.G.L. c. 85, § 10; strays generally, M.G.L. c. 134.  
Sec. 4-2. - Feeding or disturbing wildlife. 
(a)  No person shall disturb harass, harbor or feed directly or indirectly gulls, pigeons, waterfowl, coastal shorebirds, or crows on any streets, beach or other public property or anywhere in the city unless properly permitted by the appropriate state and federal wildlife authorities. Violation shall be subject to a $300.00 fine per incident/violation. 
(b)  No person shall feed either directly or indirectly any coyotes on any public or private property. Violation shall be subject to a $300.00 fine per incident/violation. 
(Ord. No. 102, § I, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 2017-049, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 2019-041, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-041, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, amended § 4-2 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Disturbing and/or feeding of coyotes, gulls and pigeons" to "Feeding or disturbing wildlife," as set out herein.  
Sec. 4-3. - Confinement of animal in a motor vehicle causing exposure to extreme heat or cold; protection of animal by animal control or law enforcement officer or fire fighter; penalties. 
(a)  A person shall not confine an animal in a motor vehicle in a manner that could reasonably be expected to threaten the health of the animal due to exposure to extreme heat or cold. 
(b)  After making reasonable efforts to locate a motor vehicle's owner, an animal control officer as defined in M.G.L. c. 140, § 136A, law enforcement officer or fire fighter may enter a motor vehicle by any reasonable means to protect the health and safety of an animal. An animal control officer, law enforcement officer or fire fighter may enter the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of assisting the animal and may not search the vehicle or seize items found in the vehicle unless otherwise permitted by law. 
(c)  An animal control officer, law enforcement officer or fire fighter who removes or otherwise retrieves an animal under this section shall leave written notice in a secure and conspicuous location on or in the motor vehicle bearing the officer's or fire fighter's name and title and the address of the location where the animal may be retrieved. The owner may retrieve the animal only after payment of all charges that have been accrued for the maintenance, care, medical treatment and impoundment of the animal. 
(d)  An animal control officer, law enforcement officer or fire fighter who removes or otherwise retrieves an animal from a motor vehicle under subsection (b), and the agency or municipality that employs the officer or firefighter shall be immune from criminal or civil liability that might otherwise result from the removal. 
(e)  After making reasonable efforts to locate a motor vehicle's owner, a person other than an animal control officer, law enforcement officer or fire fighter shall not enter a motor vehicle to remove an animal to protect the health and safety of that animal in immediate danger unless the person: (i) notifies law enforcement or calls 911 before entering the vehicle; (ii) determines that the motor vehicle is locked or there is no other reasonable means for exit and uses not more force than is reasonably necessary to enter the motor vehicle and remove the animal; (iii) has a good faith and reasonable belief, based upon known circumstances, that entry into the vehicle is reasonably necessary to prevent imminent danger or harm to the animal; and (iv) remains with the animal in a safe location in reasonable proximity to the vehicle until law enforcement or another first responder arrives. 
(f)  A person who removes an animal from a motor vehicle pursuant to subsection (e) shall be immune from criminal or civil liability that might otherwise result from the removal. 
(g)  A violation of subsection (a) shall be a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $150.00 for a first offense, by a fine of not more than $300.00 for a second offense, and by a fine of not more than $500.00 for a third or subsequent offense. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall preclude prosecution under M.G.L. c. 272, § 77. 
(Ord. No. 2018-058, 4-10-2018)  
Sec. 4-4. - Endangered/threatened wildlife buffer zone. 
Buffer zone of 50 feet around an area will be established around any area designated as protected for wildlife. Prohibited activities in the buffer zone include whiffle ball, Frisbee, soccer, volleyball, paddle ball, kites, inflatable balls and any other activities that involve objects that can fly or roll into the restricted area. Violation shall be subject to a $300.00 fine per incident/violation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-041, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-041, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, added provisions intended for Code § 4-3. Inasmuch as said Code section already existed, said provisions have been added as § 4-4, as set out herein and at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 4-5. - Giving away live animals as prize or award. 
No person shall offer or give away any live animal as a prize or an award in a game, contest or tournament involving skill or chance. The provisions of this section shall not apply to awards made to persons participating in programs relating to animal husbandry. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 2017-169, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-168, 8-22-2018; Ord. No. 2019-041, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-058, adopted April 10, 2018, and Ord. No. 2019-041, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, added §§ 4-3 and 4-4 to art. I, and in so doing renumbered former § 4-3 as § 4-5, as set out herein.  
Secs. 4-6—4-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Chief of police to act as dog constable, § 17-21; dogs prohibited in school grounds or buildings, § 18-6. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate dogs, M.G.L. c. 140, § 173. 
 
Sec. 4-15. - Running at large prohibited. 
(a)  No person owning or keeping a dog in the city shall permit such dog at any time to run at large in the city (unless expressly authorized under section 4-16a or section 4-16d). Each incident in which a dog, licensed or unlicensed, is on public or private property without authorization and is not under the direct control of its owner by a leash not exceeding six feet in length shall be a violation of this section. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "at large" shall mean the dog is off the premises of its owner or keeper and not under the direct control of a competent person by a leash not exceeding six feet in length. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1977, § I; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-337, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-202, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 4-16a. - Dogs allowed on public beaches at certain times. 
(a)  Good Harbor Beach: Dogs shall be prohibited from Good Harbor Beach from April 1—September 30 annually. In addition, unleashed dogs shall be allowed on Good Harbor Beach from October 1 to March 31 annually, subject to the following conditions: Off leash on even-numbered days of the month at Good Harbor Beach. 
(b)  Wingaersheek Beach: Dogs shall be prohibited from Wingaersheek Beach from May 1—September 30 annually. In addition, unleashed dogs shall be allowed on Wingaersheek Beach from October 1 to April 30 annually, subject to the following conditions: Off leash on odd-numbered days of the month at Wingaersheek Beach. 
(c)  Plum Cove and Cressy Beaches: Unleashed dogs shall be allowed on Plum Cove Beach and Cressy Beach in the off season from October 1 to April 30 annually. 
(d)  Crab Beach: Dogs shall be allowed on "Crab Beach" off leash at all times subject to the enumerated conditions contained in section 4-16a. 
(e)  All other public beaches: Dogs shall be prohibited from public beaches from May 1 to September 30 annually. Dogs shall be allowed on public beaches from October 1 to April 30 annually and shall be under the control of the owner or keeper. 
(f)  [Expiration.] Unless renewed or made permanent by the city council and signed by the mayor, the provisions of this section shall expire on the occasion of the last scheduled meeting of the ordinances and administration committee during the month of December 2019. 
(g)  Fine of $300.00 per violation. Fines for violations will be double in season for beaches and other off-leash areas as determined. 
(h)  [Responsibility of owners.] Owners, those with direct care, custody and control of a dog, must remain with and monitor their dogs while in a designated off-leash area. 
(Ord. No. 95-1998, § I, 7-7-1998; Ord. of 7-23-2002, § I; Ord. No. 2014-337, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-202, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 2016-012, 1-12-2016; 2016-236, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-037, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 2019-042, 2-26-2019; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-1998, § I, adopted July 7, 1998, repealed the former § 4-16 and enacted §§ 4-16a and 4-16b as set out herein. Section 4-16 pertained to dogs prohibited on beaches at certain times and derived from § II of an ordinance adopted February 8, 1977, and § 2 of an ordinance adopted August 11, 1981.  
Sec. 4-16b. - Dogs prohibited in city-owned cemeteries at all times. 
Dogs shall be prohibited from all city-owned cemeteries at all times. 
(Ord. No. 95-1998, § I, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 4-16c. - Dogs prohibited on athletic fields. 
Dogs shall be prohibited from all city-owned athletic fields at all times. 
(Ord. of 1-22-2002(01), § I; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 4-16d. - Off-leash dog areas. 
(a)  Unless otherwise expressly authorized under this chapter, the department of public works director may designate, with the approval of the mayor and the city council, specific lands for use as off-leash dog areas, with their operation being subject to regulations enacted pursuant to Section 7-16(b) of the City Charter. 
(b)  Dog park establishment and use. 
(1)  There is established an enclosed dog park at Stage Fort Park for the use and enjoyment of dogs of residents of the city. 
(2)  Use of the dog park is subject to the following rules and regulations: 
a.  The dog park shall be open from dawn to 9:00 p.m. and may be closed as conditions require; 
b.  Dogs must be accompanied by a guardian at least 14 years of age; 
c.  Minors under the age of 14 must be accompanied by an adult; 
d.  Maximum of three dogs per guardian at any one time; 
e.  Dogs must display a municipal dog tag license and current vaccination tag; 
f.  Guardians must have voice control over their dogs at all times; 
g.  Guardians must immediately clean and properly dispose of waste; 
h.  Holes dug by dogs must be filled; 
i.  All dogs must be leashed upon entering and exiting the dog park; and 
j.  Users of the dog park are responsible for any damage or injury inflicted by their actions and/or those of their dog(s). Neither the city nor any of its agents shall be liable for any injury or damage caused in the dog park. 
k.  Dogs that weigh 25 pounds or less are not allowed in areas designated for large dogs. 
l.  Dogs that weigh 26 pounds or more are not allowed in areas designated for small dogs. 
(3)  The following are prohibited inside the dog park: 
a.  Dogs displaying aggressive behavior (subject to immediate removal from the park by the animal control officer or his designee); 
b.  Female dogs in heat, unaltered male dogs, all dogs younger than four months in age; 
c.  Choke, prong or spike collars; 
d.  Toys of any kind, except for tennis balls; 
e.  Children under the age of eight; 
f.  Food, smoking tobacco or marijuana, marijuana and marijuana products, alcoholic beverages and glass; and 
g.  Bicycles, strollers, skateboards, roller blade and bare feet. 
(4)  Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 4-21d. In addition, the dog officer may revoke the use of the dog park for those who violate any provision of this section. The decision of the dog officer shall be final. 
(c)  Dogs shall be allowed on "Crab Beach" off leash at all times subject to the enumerated conditions contained in section 4-16a. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2010(01); Ord. No. 2014-091, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 2014-337, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-202, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 2016-200, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 2018-056, 4-10-2018; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 4-16e. - Dogs prohibited from all city-owned flower beds at all times. 
Dogs shall be prohibited from all city-owned flower beds at all times. The animal control officer shall issue to the owner or keeper of any such dog a citation for the violation of this article a fine of $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-146, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 4-16f. - Chaining or tethering dog to stationary object; confinement; restrictions; penalty. 
(a)  No person owning or keeping a dog shall chain or tether a dog for longer than five hours in a 24-hour period and outside from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. unless the tethering is for not more than 15 minutes and the dog is not left unattended by the owner, guardian or keeper. A tethering employed shall not allow the dog to leave the owner's, guardian's or keeper's property. The tether shall be designed for dogs and no logging chains or other lines or devices not designated for tethering dogs shall be used. No chain or tether shall weigh more than one-eighth of the dog's body weight. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a person from walking a dog on a hand-held leash. No dog under the age of six months shall be tethered outside for any length of time. 
(b)  A person shall not leave a dog outside when a weather advisory, warning or watch is issued by a local, state or federal authority or when outside environmental conditions including, but not limited to, extreme heat, cold, wind, rain, snow or hail pose an adverse risk to the health or safety of the dog based on the dog's breed, age or physical condition, unless the tethering is for not more than 15 minutes. 
(c)  An exception to a restriction on outdoor confinement under this section that is reasonably necessary for the safety of a dog shall be made for a dog that is: (i) present in a camping or recreational area pursuant to the policy of the camping or recreational area; or (ii) actively engaged in conduct that is directly related to the business of shepherding or herding cattle or other livestock or engaged in conduct that is directly related to the business of cultivating agricultural products. 
(d)  No person owning or keeping a dog shall subject the dog to cruel conditions or inhumane chaining or tethering at any time. For the purpose of this subsection, "cruel conditions and inhumane chaining or tethering" shall include, but not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Filthy and dirty confinement conditions including, but not limited to, exposure to excessive animal waste, garbage, dirty water, noxious odors, dangerous objects that could injure or kill a dog upon contact or other circumstances that could cause harm to a dog's physical or emotional health; 
(2)  Taunting, prodding, hitting, harassing, threatening or otherwise harming a tethered or confined dog; and, 
(3)  Subjecting a dog to dangerous conditions, including attacks by other animals. 
(e)  A person who violates this section shall, for a first offense, be issued a written warning or punished by a fine of not more than $50.00; for a second offense, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00; and for a third or subsequent offense, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, and be subjected to impoundment of the dog in a local shelter at the owner's, keeper's or guardian's expense pending compliance with this section, or loss of ownership of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 2018-057, 4-10-2018)  
Sec. 4-16g. - Guide dogs. 
Any blind person, or deaf or hearing handicapped person, or other physically handicapped person accompanied by a guide dog, shall be entitled to any and all accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of all public conveyances, public amusements and places of public accommodation pursuant to M.G.L. c. 272, § 98A. 
(Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-045, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, added provisions intended for Code § 4-16d. In as much as said section already existed in the Code, said provisions have been added as § 4-16g, as set out herein and at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 4-17. - Female dogs in heat to be confined. 
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or secured enclosure in such a manner that it cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1977, § I; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § 1)  
Sec. 4-18. - Impoundment; notice to owner; transfer of custody. 
(a)  The city's dog officer shall catch and confine any dog found to be in violation of any provision of this article. When any dog has been impounded, the owner shall be notified within 24 hours of the violation and fine which is being assessed. The owner or keeper of an impounded dog shall have ten days in which to recover the dog. 
(b)  Except as provided below, any dog which is held in confinement by the dog officer that shall not have been claimed by the owner or keeper at the end of the ten day period shall be transferred to the care and control of the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or some other similar organization, or to any person offering to pay the fee for confinement. In no case shall a dog be sold or delivered to or given to any person or organization intending to use the dog or vivisection purposes. 
(c)  Impoundment under this chapter shall also include the placement by the dog officer of the dog in a kennel licensed by the commonwealth. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1977, § I; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § 1; Ord. of 4-18-1989, § I)  
Sec. 4-19. - Redemption of impounded dogs. 
(a)  No dog confined for a violation of this article shall be released to its owner or keeper except as provided herein. The dog officer shall issue to the owner or keeper of any such dog a citation for the violation of this article. The violations shall bear a fine of the following: 
(1)  For the first and subsequent offenses: $50.00 
(b)  In the case of the first and each succeeding violation, no dog shall be released prior to the receipt by the dog officer of due notice of the payment of the fine for all outstanding notices of violation or of the deposit of the amount of the fines as a security for the payment of said fines and proof of valid license. In every case in which the owner or keeper refuses to pay such fines or a deposit for security for such fines, the dog shall be held until a hearing on the charged violation has been held and the owner shall be liable for all confinement charges as provided herein. As used in this subsection, the term "outstanding notices of violation" shall include only those notices of violation resulting in confinement. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, no dog so confined shall be released prior to the payment of confinement and care charges of the actual contract cost to the city of confining, impounding or boarding the dog. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person or organization who owns, keeps or maintains any dog as part of a canine corps for the commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions while actually engaged in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1977, § I; Ord. of 11-1-1977, § I; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § 1; Ord. of 4-18-1989, § I; Ord. No. 2014-337, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-202, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 4-20. - Pound; dog officer. 
(a)  The city shall make provisions to shelter stray dogs, dogs impounded due to violations of this article, or dogs rescued from danger or distress. The operation of the shelter shall incorporate the regular services of a licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  The city shall make provision for the services of at least one fulltime dog officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article, of the licensing laws relevant to dogs, and of other relevant commonwealth law. The dog officer shall have the power to decide on the merit of complaints of citizens with regard to what they feel are nuisance dogs and issue citations to owners which, unless appealed under commonwealth law, shall be referred to the district court if citation is ignored. The dog officer shall have the authority to prioritize responses to complaints or other notifications of violations based on their emergency or non-emergency nature. Emergency complaints or notifications are those in which there is imminent threat to the life, health or safety of humans or dogs. All other complaints or notifications of violations are non-emergency. 
(Ord. of 2-8-1977, § III; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § 3; Ord. of 4-18-1989, § I; Ord. No. 2014-337, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-202, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 2016-237, 12-13-2016) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-40. 
State Law reference— Animal pounds generally, M.G.L. c. 49, § 22 et seq.; dog officers generally, M.G.L. c. 140, § 151.  
Sec. 4-21. - Dog fouling. 
(a)  Duty to dispose . It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any fecal matter deposited by the dog on any sidewalk, gutter, park, beach when permitted, street or other public area or on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person. 
(b)  Duty to possess means of removal . No person, who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, gutter, park, beach when permitted, street or other public area without the means of removal of any fecal matter left by such dog. Furthermore, no person who owns, possesses or controls such dog, shall appear on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person without the means of removal of any fecal matter left by said dog. 
(c)  Method of removal and disposal . For the purposes of this subsection, the means of removal shall be any plastic bag or mutt mitt, tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such fecal matter, unexposed to said person and unexposed to the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such fecal matter to a place or receptacle suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of fecal matter, otherwise designated and certified as appropriate by the board of health. Fecal matter placed in a plastic bag and securely tied and knotted may be disposed of in public trash containers approved for collection by the city. When trash receptacles are not available, a carry in/carry out trash approach applies. 
(d)  Fines for violation . Violation of this regulation shall be punished by a fine of $100.00 per day for each offense and dog(s) may have off leash beach privileges revoked by animal control. Owners must have in their possession an adequate number of "poop" bags or other appropriate device for removal of their dog(s) fecal matter. 
(e)  Enforcement . Violations of this section shall be enforced in accordance with all other applicable laws governing municipal ordinances; however, at the option of the enforcing person, violation may be enforced noncriminally pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, §21D and as provided in section 1-15, rather than by a criminal complaint in district court. Authorized enforcement personnel: City of Gloucester Police Department and Animal Control Officers. 
(f)  Exemption . This regulation shall not apply to a person who employs a "service dog" as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(g)  Severability . The provisions in this section are severable; and, if any of the provisions of this section shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(h)  Notification . Upon licensing of a dog, the owner shall be given subsections (a) through (h) of this section by the dog officer, city clerk or persons issuing the license. 
(Ord. No. 13-1994, § I, 8-9-1994; Ord. No. 2016-234, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 4-22. - Fees and penalties. 
(a)  Revised fees for dog licenses, effective beginning 2013. Male/female/neutered/spayed, each dog: $15.00 and male/female/non-neutered/non-spayed, each dog $16.00. 
(b)  Late penalty, effective April 30, 1993. The owner shall pay a penalty of $10.00 for any dog whose license fee has not been paid by April 30 of the current licensing renewal year. 
(c)  Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 140, § 147, the city clerk shall retain $0.75 for each dog license issued and said money shall be placed in a "Receipts Reserved for Appropriation Fund" to be designated for city clerk department expenses only as determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-16-1993; Ord. No. 121-1998, § I, 9-29-1998; Ord. of 5-28-2002(06), § I; Ord. of 6-6-2006; Ord. of 1-8-2013(015); Ord. No. 2016-169, 8-23-2016)  
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to city building committee, § 7-18. 
Cross reference— Inspector of buildings, § 2-115 et seq.; power of department of public works pertaining to buildings and building regulations, § 2-283; fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; planning, ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21; numbers to be affixed or inscribed on buildings, § 21-4; utilities, ch. 23; sewers generally, § 23-15 et seq.; building sewers and connections, § 23-36; water, § 23-55 et seq.; trees to be protected when buildings are erected or repaired, § 24-22. 
State Law reference— Adoption of state building code authorized, M.G.L. c. 23B, §§ 16, 17; applicability of state code throughout state, M.G.L. c. 143, § 3A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Furnishing street lines and grades prior to erection or alteration of fences, walls or buildings. 
No person shall proceed to erect or make any alterations in the location or grade of any fence, wall or building, a part of which is to abut upon a public street, lane, square or alley, without first applying to the city engineer for the lines and grades of the street, lane, square or alley upon which he intends to build. Any such application shall be made at least five days before the work is begun, and the city engineer shall, within the time named, furnish the required lines and grades without charge, if in his power so to do. 
(Code 1970, § 2-217) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21.  
Sec. 5-2. - Fencing of swimming pools required. 
(a)  Any person owning land in the city on which there is situated a swimming pool, in-ground or above-ground, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either surrounding the property or pool area, sufficient to make the pool inaccessible to small children. Any such enclosure, including gates therein, must be not less than four feet above the underlying ground. All gates must be self-latching with latches placed four feet above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. Any such enclosure shall be located at least a distance of five feet away from the pool. Fences located on aboveground pool decks shall not be considered as meeting the requirements of this section unless specifically approved by the inspector of buildings. Aboveground pools with a wall height of five feet or more will be exempt from the fencing requirement, but a gate must be placed around the access to any such pool. 
(b)  This section shall apply retroactively to all in-ground and aboveground pools within the city. Preexisting lawfully installed pools may be exempt from the above requirements if enclosures are provided which offer the same degree of protection as above and are acceptable to the inspector of buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-23-1978, § 1; Ord. of 8-30-1978, § I) 
State Law reference— Fencing, inspection of public or semipublic outdoor in-ground swimming pools, M.G.L. c. 140, § 206.  
Sec. 5-3. - Excavation and trench safety. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall excavate a trench either on private property or a public way without first obtaining a trench permit from the inspector of buildings in accordance with 520 CMR 14.00, excavation and trench safety, M.G.L. c. 82A. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for the trench permit shall be $50.00; however, the inspector of buildings may waive the fee if another city permit was issued and paid for relative to said trench. Failure to obtain a trench permit prior to the start of excavation will result in the fee being increased to $150.00. 
(c)  Violation. If a trench is deemed to be unsafe in accordance to 520 CMR 14.00 the inspector of buildings shall take the necessary action to make said trench safe (filling in trench/hiring police detail, etc). The cost of this expense shall be recovered as a municipal charges lien. 
(Ord. of 7-14-2009)  
Sec. 5-4. - Outdoor illumination standards, including standards for illuminated signs. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards pertaining to the outdoor illumination of streets and public ways, property used for commercial and industrial uses and multifamily dwellings, so as to reduce light pollution, energy consumption and related costs, to enhance pedestrian and vehicular safety, to support property values and to promote the aesthetic appearance of the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the inspector of buildings or his authorized representative is the enforcing agent. 
Footcandle (FC) means a measurement of the amount of light reaching an object. A footcandle is the measurement of the intensity of one lumen of light falling on one square foot of surface area one foot away from the source. 
Full cutoff fixture design (fully shielded) means a luminaire which is designed, constructed, and installed so that no light is emitted at an angle above the horizontal plane through the lowest light emitting part (including refractors, reflectors or other devices) of the luminaire. 
Light trespass means illumination from a luminaire that goes beyond the lot lines of the lot on which the luminaire is located at a footcandle level greater than the original (natural) illumination level as measured at the lot line in a horizontal and vertical plane. 
Lumen means the basic unit of measurement for light at its source. For the purposes of this section, the lumen output shall be the initial lumen rating listed by the bulb manufacturer's specification data sheet at the rated voltage and power (watts). Example: The illuminance of a full moon is 0.01 footcandles or 0.01 lumens per square foot. 
Luminaire means a complete lighting unit or fixture, consisting of a lamp, ballast (when applicable), and any part designed to distribute the light, position the unit, protect the lamps (housing), and/or connect lamps to the power supply. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(2) of this section, the illumination standards established by this section apply to any outdoor luminaire, or to any outdoor illuminated sign, or any commercial or industrial use, or any multifamily residential dwelling, street, roadway or walkway lighting in the city. 
a.  Exemptions. The following lights shall be exempt from the specific requirements of this section but shall be placed and directed to minimize the detrimental effects of glare on motorists, boaters, pedestrians and abutting lots. 
b.  Temporary holiday lighting not to exceed 20 days per holiday event. 
c.  Emergency lighting such as used by the police, fire department or other government official or utility emergency personnel. 
d.  Temporary lighting used on construction sights. The construction lights should be limited to the hours during which construction is permissible under the zoning ordinance. 
e.  Lighting during special events such as festivals fairs, celebrations or concerts that are either sponsored by the city or have received authorization from the city. 
f.  Warning and alarm lights that alert to a malfunction or emergency situation. 
g.  Search lights for emergency situations of less than 24 hours duration. 
h.  The illumination of outdoor recreational facilities such as, but not limited to, playing fields, pools, rinks, tennis courts, driving ranges, ski areas or skateboard parks. 
(2)  Any outdoor luminaire or outdoor illuminated sign that was in existence prior to April 17, 2007, shall be exempt from the standards established by this section, until such time as the luminaire or sign is replaced or redesigned. 
a.  Replacement of a luminaire or sign shall be considered to include replacing a mounting arm, reflector, hardware, wiring and/or sign structure. 
b.  Replacement of any bulb used in a luminaire or sign will not by itself be considered a replacement of such luminaire or sign. 
(d)  Standards pertaining to luminaires. 
(1)  Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1,800 or more initial lumens shall utilize full cutoff fixture design and shall be installed in a horizontal orientation. 
(2)  Any wall-mounted (wall-pack) luminaire with lamp or lamps rated at a total of 1,800 or more initial lumens shall utilize full cutoff fixture design. 
(3)  Freestanding and wall-mounted luminaires shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(4)  Light trespass onto residential property is prohibited, except for lights associated with street, roadway or public safety lighting. 
(5)  Luminaires shall be designed and maintained so that the average illumination levels for general parking and pedestrian areas and vehicle use areas, when a commercial or industrial use is open for business, will not exceed the following levels, as derived from the National Energy Marketers Association: 
Level of Activity 	Average of Footcandles on Illuminated Pavement 
General parking and pedestrian areas 	
	High 	3.6 
	Medium 	2.4 
	Low 	0.8 
Vehicle use areas 	
	High 	2.0* 
	Medium 	1.0 
	Low 	0.5 
High: major regional shopping centers 
Medium: community shopping centers 
Low: neighborhood shopping 
*Level of 2.0 footcandles equals two lumens per square foot, and 2.0 footcandles are 239 times brighter than a full moon. 
 
a.  Recommended high-pressure sodium bulb lighting levels, or equivalent lumens, for use with full cutoff shielding: 
b.  Side streets, lanes and courts in primarily residential areas: 35—50 watts/3,000—4,000 lumens. 
c.  Busier streets in residential and commercial/residential mixed-use areas: 50—75 watts/4,000 + lumens. 
d.  Heavily used traffic, commercial, recreation or pedestrian safety areas: 100 watts/9,600 lumens. 
e.  When a commercial or industrial use is closed for business, illumination levels for general parking or pedestrian areas shall be reduced from the levels specified in this subsection (d)(5) to a partial level required for security. For any activity not addressed by this section, luminaires shall be designed and maintained so that the average illumination level does not exceed the average illumination level published for such activity by the IESNA handbook. 
(6)  No luminaire shall be installed or maintained so that its light output is aimed, directed or focused at pedestrians or operators of boats or motor vehicles. 
(7)  External illumination of displays, buildings and architectural or landscape features shall be performed with luminaires rated at a total of less than 2,000 initial lumens. Lighting shall be specifically targeted at particular architectural or landscape features, and shall not project beyond such features. 
(e)  Standards pertaining to illuminated signs. 
(1)  No off-premises illuminated signs are allowed. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsections (e)(2)a and b of this section, externally illuminated signs shall be illuminated from the top pointing downward (luminaires mounted from below the sign are not permitted). 
a.  Building-mounted facade signs may be illuminated from the bottom of the sign under the following conditions: 
1.  The sign must be mounted on the building at least eight feet above ground level (as measured from the bottom of the sign), but below the roofline; 
2.  Only fluorescent tube lighting with concentric metallic opaque shielding is allowed; and 
3.  The luminaire or luminaires must be shielded to direct the light onto the sign only with no projection beyond the building face. 
b.  Uplighting of externally lighted signs is prohibited except for illumination of the United States Flag, a building facade or a public monument. For any uplighting, the luminaire shall be equipped with shields as necessary. It shall be focused directly at the area of the target and shielded so that the lamp is not visible from the street or abutting lots. 
(3)  The fixtures used to illuminate externally-illuminated signs must be fully shielded to prevent glare to pedestrian and vehicular traffic i.e., such fixtures must be designed to ensure that motorists and pedestrians in the area do not have a direct view of the light source. 
(4)  The average illumination level of the surface of an externally-illuminated signs shall not exceed: 
a.  20 footcandles for white or light-colored backgrounds; and 
b.  50 footcandles for black or dark-colored backgrounds. 
(5)  Box signs (luminous element signs) shall utilize a dark (density) translucent or opaque background color (not white) with lighter (color or density, not clear or transparent) translucent or opaque lettering and/or graphics. 
(6)  Internally lighted signs shall not exceed the following peak levels of illuminance: 
Areas of Application 	Luminance (lumens per sq. ft.) 
Low brightness areas/dark surroundings 	20 
Lighted facades and fascia signs 	30 
Community and neighborhood commercial areas 	55 
Bright fascia signs as in shopping centers 	80 
 
(7)  Animated or motion signs are prohibited. 
(f)  Verification of compliance. The owner of any lot or property on which a luminaire or sign subject to this section is located or proposed to be located shall have the burden of demonstrating that the existing or proposed luminaire or sign complies with the standards established by this section. The manufacturer's specification sheet may be used to establish the lumen level of a luminaire and, if required, to verify the use of full cutoff fixture design. Illumination levels may be verified through the use of manufacturer's photometric data sheet and/or photometric site drawing or through on-site calibrated light level meter readings. 
(g)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the administrator. 
(2)  The administrator is authorized and empowered to institute and maintain, in the name of the city, any and all enforcement proceedings seeking injunctive relief and any other appropriate remedy. In the alternative, this section may be enforced by ticketing through non-criminal disposition as provided in M.G.L. c. 40D, § 21D. 
(Ord. of 4-17-2007(01); Ord. of 2-2-2010(01))  
Secs. 5-5—5-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-15. - Building permit fees. 
(a)  No permit required by the state building code shall be issued by the inspector of buildings unless and until the fee therefor as specified in this section is first paid to such inspector for the use of the city. All fees collected hereunder shall be deposited with the city treasurer accompanied by an itemized list of all permits issued hereunder. Unless otherwise specified, all fees herein established upon increments of $1,000.00 of "cost of construction" as that term is defined in this section. The following schedule of fees for the issuance of building permits is hereby established: 
Type 	Fees 
Building permits 	$50.00 minimum; $10.00 per $1,000.00 total cost of construction 
Demolition of buildings 	$100.00 per story 
Release stop work order 	$100.00 
 
(b)  The cost of construction shall generally be determined by the inspector of buildings to be an amount equal to the product of the square footage area of the construction multiplied by $150.00 per square footage. In cases where it is impossible or impractical to determine the cost of construction by the method prescribed by this subsection then such cost of construction shall be as the inspector of buildings shall, in his discretion, determine 
(c)  Building permit fees shall not be required, and are hereby waived, for work done to buildings, structures, or parts thereof owned by the city and used for a public purpose by the city. 
(d)  Fees cited in table 106 of the state building code (780 CMR) are modified as follows: 
Places of assembly 	$100.00 per certification period 
Day care centers 	$100.00 per certification period 
Institutional 	$200.00 (plus sub note "d" of 780 CMR, state building code) 
Residential (R-1) 	$100.00 (plus sub note "e" of 780 CMR, state building code) 
 
(e)  Plumbing and gas-fitting permit fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Plumbing permit: $3.00 per $1,000.00 of construction cost as stated on building permit. If no building permit required then: 
a.  $50.00 plus $20.00 per fixture single- and two-family residence. 
b.  $100.00 plus $50.00 per fixture three-family and more residence including all commercial work. 
(2)  Residential gas-fitting permit: 
a.  $50.00 plus $20.00 per fixture single- and two-family residence. 
b.  $100.00 plus $40.00 per fixture three-family and more residence, including all commercial work. 
(f)  Reinspection fee for building, plumbing and gas work: $50.00 collected prior to reinspection. 
(g)  Building, plumbing, gas and mechanical work done without permits is subject to triple the permit fees. 
(h)  Building, plumbing, gas and mechanical permit fees are nonrefundable. 
(i)  Plan reviews. For buildings over 35,000 cubic feet, at the building inspector's discretion, he may require that plans for any construction or alteration of such buildings be reviewed by a certified plan reviewer, and such expense shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1970, § 4-37; Ord. of 9-6-1988, § I; Ord. of 9-14-1989, § I; Ord. No. 14-1990, § I, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 60-1997, § I, 8-19-1997; Ord. of 6-11-2002(01), § I; Ord. No. 02-20, § I, 6-25-2002(02); Ord. No. 06-13, 6-13-2006)  
Sec. 5-16. - Building permits to be posted in city hall. 
(a)  The inspector of buildings or his designee shall, on the day of issuance of building permits, post such permits on the bulletin board located on the first floor of city hall, and such permits shall remain posted for at least 20 consecutive days. Copies of building permits so posted shall be forwarded to the local newspaper. 
(b)  All building permits posted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include the name of the applicant and the location and type of the permit issued. 
(Ord. of 1-25-1977, § 1(4-30))  
Sec. 5-17. - Fire district established. 
The city shall have a fire district which is hereby established and shall include the following area: 
Beginning at a point on the harbor commissioner's line near Pavillon Beach, such point shall be the southwesterly extension of the westerly wall on the property known as The Tavern; thence running northeasterly from such point and by the westerly wall of The Tavern so-called to a point at the center line of Western Avenue; thence running easterly about 100 feet by the center line of Western Avenue to a point; thence running northeasterly about 440 feet by the center line of Western Avenue to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Angle, Washington and Main Streets; thence running northwesterly by the center line of Washington Street to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Washington and Middle Streets; thence running easterly by the center line of Middle Street to a point at the intersection of center lines Middle and Pleasant Streets; thence running northerly by the center line of Pleasant Street to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Pleasant and Federal Streets; thence running easterly by the center line of Federal Street to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Federal and Elm Streets; thence running northeasterly in a straight line to a point at the top of the Winchester Court steps and the center line of Winchester Court, such point being 320 feet southeasterly from the center line of Prospect Street and Winchester Court; thence running southeasterly by the center line of Winchester Court to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Winchester Court and Spring Street; thence running southwesterly by the center line of Spring Street to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Spring and Main Streets; thence running easterly by the center line of Main Street to a point at the intersection of the center lines of Main Street, Eastern Avenue and East Main Street; thence running easterly and southerly by the center line of East Main Street to a point, such point being the northwesterly boundary extension of No. 239 East Main Street and about 430 feet northerly of the intersection of the center lines of East Main Street and Gerring Road; thence running northwesterly by the southwesterly boundary of No. 239 East Main Street to a point on the harbor commissioner's line; thence running northeasterly, northwesterly, northeasterly, northwesterly, northerly, westerly, southwesterly, southerly, southwesterly, northwesterly, westerly, southerly, southeasterly, southwesterly and northwesterly to the point of beginning, such harbor commissioner's line as more particularly shown on a plan entitled Gloucester Harbor, Mass., from a survey made for the harbor commissioners by A. Boschke, C. E. dated 1865 and as amended in red lines, on file in the city engineer's office. 
(Code 1970, § 4-1) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8.  
Sec. 5-18. - Statute relating to lodging houses adopted. 
The state building code is amended by adopting section M.G.L. c. 140, § 22, relating to lodginghouses. 
(Code 1970, § 4-46)  
Sec. 5-19. - Inspection of buildings erected on pilings. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Engineer shall mean a structural engineer licensed by the Board of Licensing of Professional Engineers in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Notification shall mean a written and dated notification produced by the building inspector. 
Other property shall mean all property supported by, or built at least in part upon, pilings that are not residential such as retail, business, commercial and industrial. 
Pilings shall mean, for the purposes of this section, property with a structure or structures on it. 
Ramp shall mean a gangway connecting the piling supported structure or one's property to a float. 
Report shall mean a written document produced by an engineer that indicates that the engineer has visually inspected the pilings and they appear to have no visual material defects. If there are visual material defects the engineer shall make recommendations for repairs. 
Residential property shall mean one and two family structures supported by, or built at least in part upon, pilings. 
Structure shall have the same meaning as defined in the zoning ordinance and include those that are supported by, or built at least in part upon, pilings. 
(b)  Requirements: notifications; time limits . 
(1)  Property owners of structures supported by, or built at least in part upon, pilings are required to keep those structures safe at all times. 
(2)  Effective January 15, 2016, the building inspector shall issue notification to property owners and require them to have their pilings inspected, by an engineer. 
(3)  Notification shall be issued every ten years thereafter for residential property owners and every five years thereafter for all other property owners. 
(4)  Within 30 days of the issuance of a notification, the owner shall demonstrate to the building inspector that either the structure owner has entered into a contract with an engineer to inspect the structure and the pilings upon which it sits and issue a report a copy of which shall be delivered to the building inspector after it has been issued, or the property owner shall produce a report issued within the five year period prior to the notification for the building inspector by an engineer. 
(5)  Upon production of a report by the property owner to the building inspector, the building inspector may, in his/her discretion, postpone the next notification for up to ten years. 
(6)  If the building inspector shall determine that by continuing use of the structure in question until it is inspected and a report has been issued, the building inspector may order the owners of the property to cease occupancy until such time as repairs are completed and until such time as the structure and the pilings upon which it sits are inspected and a new certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(7)  The building inspector shall keep a log book of all notices sent and all reports received beginning February 15, 2016. 
(8)  Failure to timely supply the report of the engineer, to perform the repairs, or cease occupancy may constitute a continuing violation of this section and may be subject to penalties under section 1-15. 
(c)  Exemptions . Structures that are not covered by this section are as follows: 
(1)  Ramps and floats; 
(2)  Bridges which are required by state or federal laws or regulations to be periodically inspected; 
(3)  Boardwalks for single-family residential use which are eight feet wide or less; and 
(4)  Any piling supported structure less than or equal to 400 square feet in total footprint; 
However, the building inspector retains jurisdiction to require emergency repairs to any such boardwalks or structures of less than 400 square feet which, at any time, he/she deems to be unsafe. 
(d)  Penalty . The penalty for violation of this section is $300.00 per day and may be applied at the discretion of the building inspector if a notice under clause (b)(1) properly addressed to the owner has been issued. 
(e)  Enforcing persons . The persons responsible for enforcing this section are the building inspector and the police. 
(Ord. No. 77-1998, § I, 2-17-1998; Ord. of 9-6-2005, § I; Ord. No. 2015-253, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 5-20. - Demolition of buildings. 
Prior to issuance of a demolition permit, the applicant shall obtain all required approvals from the conservation commission, board of health, fire department or department of public works as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 66-2000, § I, 6-27-2000)  
Secs. 5-21—5-24. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOVING OF BUILDING 
 
Sec. 5-25. - Supervision by director of public works. 
The moving of any building in any public street or way shall take place under the direction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 4-58) 
Cross reference— Department of public works, § 2-280 et seq.  
Sec. 5-26. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall move a building in a public street or way of the city, without a permit so to do granted by the licensing commission. The application for such permit shall state the location of the building to be moved, its length, width, height and the material of which it is constructed, and the location of the lot on which it is proposed to be placed. It shall definitely describe the route over which the building is to be moved, the length of time required to move the same, and whether it will be necessary to remove any shade trees or branches thereof. 
(b)  The application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by the written consent of the director of public works to place the building on the lot proposed, together with a certificate from the director that the building has been examined and is in proper condition for removal, and also a certificate from the director approving the described route. 
(c)  The city clerk, as clerk of the licensing commission, shall sign and issue the permit required by this section. The clerk shall keep a record of all permits so issued. 
(Code 1970, § 4-56) 
State Law reference— Moving buildings in public way, M.G.L. c. 85, § 18.  
Sec. 5-27. - Bond or insurance required. 
No person shall move or carry a building through the streets of the city without first giving a bond to the city in the sum of not less than $100,000.00, with two or more sureties, one of whom shall be the owner of the building, to save harmless and indemnify the city from all damages which may occur by such moving. Any such bond shall be satisfactory to the licensing commission before the permit required by this article is issued. In lieu of such bond, a liability insurance policy approved by the mayor may be posted. 
(Code 1970, § 4-57)  
Sec. 5-28. - Cutting or removing trees. 
The consent of the director of public works shall be obtained before any shade trees are removed, or the branches cut or trimmed, by any person moving a building pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1970, § 4-59) 
Cross reference— Trees and shrubs, § 24-15 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to trim, cut or remove shade trees obstructing moving of buildings, M.G.L. c. 87, § 5.  
Sec. 5-29. - Interference with fire alarm telegraph. 
The consent of the city electrician shall be obtained before any wires of the fire alarm telegraph are cut or removed by any person moving a building pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1970, § 4-60) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-139, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed div. 3, §§ 5-30—5-34, which pertained to the Stretch Energy Code and derived from an Ord. of 8-3-2010(02). 
 
Secs. 5-30—5-34. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VACANT BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 2, 2008, set out provisions intended for use as Div. 3, §§ 5-30—5-36. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, these provisions have been included as a new Div. 4 at the direction of the city. 
 
Sec. 5-35. - Purpose. 
The city has found that vacant buildings are eyesores and hazards which often offer easy shelter for criminal activities, arson and accidental fires. As well, vacant buildings cause surrounding areas to suffer from stagnant or declining property values and create significant costs to the city by virtue of the need for constant monitoring and occasional cleanup. Accordingly, the purpose of this division is to require the registration of all vacant buildings, both residential and commercial, which will assist the city government in protecting the public health, safety and welfare of its residents by encouraging the prompt rehabilitation and permanent occupancy of such abandoned structures. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-30)  
Sec. 5-36. - Definition. 
For purposes of this division, a "vacant" building means any commercial building in which no person or entity actually conducts a lawfully licensed business in such building; or any residential building in which no person lawfully resides in any part of the building; or a mixed use building in which neither a licensed business nor a lawful resident exists. Further, any building in which more than one-half of the total exterior windows and/or doors are broken, boarded or open without a functioning lock shall be deemed "vacant" regardless of occupancy. A condo unit is not considered a building on its own. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-31; Ord. of 7-24-2012(01))  
Sec. 5-37. - Registration. 
Within 45 days of a building becoming vacant, each owner of a vacant building shall register the building with the inspectional services department by filing a form, created by the department, with the name, address and telephone number of each owner, and the street address, map, and lot number of the building. If none of the owners reside in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, then the registration shall also include the name, address and telephone number of a Massachusetts resident who is authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the owners, and who shall be designated as a responsible local agent, both for purposes of notification in the event of an emergency affecting public health, safety and welfare, and of service of any and all notices issued pursuant to this division. The failure to timely register a vacant building shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-32)  
Sec. 5-38. - Registration fees. 
A registration fee will be due 90 days after a building has been determined to be vacant. If said building remains vacant thereafter, an annual registration fee will be due on November 15 of each calendar year. The owners of any vacant building shall pay to the inspectional services department a registration fee to cover the administrative cost of monitoring and enforcing proper maintenance of buildings under this division. The annual registration fee shall be based on the duration of the vacancy as of November 15 each year according to the following schedule: 
Residential buildings containing up to three dwelling units, the registration fee shall be: 
For properties that have been vacant for less than one year ..... $ 500.00 
For properties that have been vacant for one year or more but less than two years ..... 1,000.00 
For properties that have been vacant for two years or more but less than three years ..... 2,000.00 
For properties that have been vacant for three years or more ..... 3,000.00 
Commercial buildings including residential with four or more dwelling units, and mixed use that are less than 7,500 feet of floor area, the registration fee shall be: 
For properties that have been vacant for less than one year ..... $ 500.00 
For properties that have been vacant for one year or more but less than two years ..... 1,000.00 
For properties that have been vacant for two years or more but less than three years ..... 2,000.00 
For properties that have been vacant for three years or more ..... 3,000.00 
For any commercial building over 7,500 square feet of floor space, the following formula shall be added to the above registration fees: square feet area of floor space × $0.20 = $ amount. This extra fee would be justified by the work involved by the inspector to verify that both the sprinkler and fire alarm systems are maintained. 
A failure to timely pay the registration fee shall be a violation of the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances. The full fee shall be deemed an assessment resulting from a violation of this division. Said fee shall be a municipal charges lien and shall be collected in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 58. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-33; Ord. of 7-24-2012(01))  
Sec. 5-39. - Billing statement. 
On or before October 15 of each calendar year, the inspectional services department shall send a billing statement, setting forth the required registration fee, to each owner of a vacant building. However, the registration fees set forth in section 5-65 shall be due and payable on November 15 of each year regardless of the delivery or receipt of such billing statement. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-34)  
Sec. 5-39.1. - Other violations. 
The provisions of this division are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any and all other applicable provisions of this Code, and the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-35)  
Sec. 5-39.2. - Enforcement. 
Any person or entity violating this division, by failing to register a vacant building, or failing to pay the registration fee, shall be subject to a fine of up to $300.00 per offense. Each day that the owner is in violation shall constitute a separate offense. The inspector of buildings or his/her designee shall have the right to enforce this division pursuant to the non-criminal disposition procedures set forth in section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(05), § 5-36)  
Sec. 5-39.3. - Removal of building from list. 
A building may be removed from the vacant building list by: 
(1)  Building being sold; 
(2)  Building permit being issued; 
(3)  Building being demolished; 
(4)  Building being occupied. Owner must notify the inspector of buildings in writing. 
(Ord. of 7-24-2012(01))  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 5-40. - Compliance with state electrical code required. 
The city electrician shall require that the rules and regulations of the current edition of the state electrical code, form FPR-11, shall be complied with, both for outside and interior construction. 
(Code 1970, § 7-6) 
Cross reference— City electrician, § 2-135 et seq.  
Sec. 5-41. - Permits—For electrical work generally. 
No person shall change the position or make additions to any wiring system, or install any new work or electrical apparatus, without first obtaining a written permit from the city electrician, giving him full opportunity to inspect the same before any such work is completed. 
(Code 1970, § 7-3)  
Sec. 5-42. - Same—For power and lighting connections. 
In no case shall a current of electricity be connected with a system of wiring or apparatus intended to be used for power or lighting without permission being first obtained and a written permit granted by the city electrician. 
(Code 1970, § 7-4)  
Sec. 5-43. - Same—For concealed wires. 
When any electric wires designed to carry any electric light or power current are to be concealed, a written permit must be obtained from the city electrician, and he shall give written permission and approval for all such work and connections immediately, unless in his judgment any such apparatus or wiring endangers life or property or is not in accordance with the laws of the commonwealth and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 7-5)  
Sec. 5-44. - Fees for electrical work. 
(a)  New construction and additions (building permits issued) . 
(1)  Residential . Based on estimated cost as stated on building permit ..... $3.00 per $1,000.00 
(2)  Commercial . Minimum commercial ..... $50.00 
Based on estimated cost as stated on building permit ..... $4.00 per thousand 
(b)  Services . 
(1)  Residential . 
a.  100—200 amps (one to three meters) ..... $30.00 
Over three meters ..... $5.00 per additional meter 
b.  201—600 amps (one to three meters) ..... $50.00 
Over three meters ..... $5.00 per additional meter 
(2)  Commercial . 
a.  100—200 amps (one to three meters) ..... $50.00 
Over three meters ..... $10.00 per additional meter 
b.  201—600 amps (one to three meters) ..... $75.00 
Over three meters ..... $10.00 per additional meter 
c.  Over 600 amps ..... $100.00 
  ..... $10.00 per 100 amps over 600 amps. 
(c)  General wiring (residential and commercial). 
(1)  Annual maintenance permit ..... $300.00 
(2)  Feeder and panel wiring ..... $30.00 
(3)  General outlet wiring ..... $30.00 
(4)  Machine and motor wiring ..... $30.00 
(5)  Temporary wiring (temp. service) ..... $30.00 
(6)  Swimming pools ..... $30.00 
(7)  Gasoline stations (complete) ..... $125.00 
(8)  Gasoline pumps ..... $30.00 
(9)  Carnivals and shows ..... $100.00 
(10)  Laundromats ..... $200.00 
(11)  Complete fire and/or burglar alarms 
a.  Residential ..... $30.00 
b.  Commercial ..... $100.00 
(12)  Electric signs ..... $30.00 
(13)  Furnaces ..... $30.00 
(14)  Smoke detectors ..... $30.00 
(15)  Appliances ..... $10.00 ea./Minimum $30.00 
(16)  Electric heat (per 2,000 watts) ..... $7.50 with a minimum of $30.00 
(17)  Siding permits ..... $30.00 
(18)  Well pump ..... $30.00 
(19)  Sewer ejector pump ..... $30.00 
(20)  Reinspection fee ..... $50.00, payable prior to inspection 
Work without a permit is subject to three times the permit fee. All permit fees are non-refundable. 
(Code 1970, § 7-5.1; Ord. No. 15-1990, § I, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 60-1997, § II, 8-19-1997; Ord. of 6-25-2002, § I, Ord. of 6-6-2006)  
Sec. 5-45. - Interior wires, appliances, etc., to be safe; city electrician to have right of access. 
All wires, appliances and apparatus in the interior of public buildings, or on private premises, which are intended for the transmission of electricity, either for insulation, lighting or power, or to be connected with an outside circuit, shall be made, placed and kept safe to the satisfaction of the city electrician, and the city electrician may, at all proper and reasonable times, have access to any such wires and apparatus. 
(Code 1970, § 7-7) 
Cross reference— City electrician, § 2-135 et seq.  
Secs. 5-46—5-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION OR RESTORATION OF CITY-OWNED BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 5-61. - Clerk of the works. 
When a building committee is appointed pursuant to Charter § 5-5, such a committee shall when necessary request the mayor to appoint either a city employee or a professional as clerk of the works. 
(Ord. No. 15-1992, § I, 5-19-1992) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-1992, § I, adopted May 19, 1992, provided for the addition of § 5-46 to article IV. In keeping with the format of the Code, said section has been redesignated as § 5-61 by the editor.  
Chapter 6 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances establishing prices for grave sites in any city-owned cemetery saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); power of department of public works pertaining to cemeteries, § 2-283. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted September 10, 1985, § I, deleted the existing cemetery chapter, §§ 6-1—6-3 hereof, which derived from Code 1970, §§ 5-1, 5-3; an ordinance of March 18, 1982, § I(5-4); and an ordinance of April 15, 1980, § I. Sections II through V of the September 10, 1985 ordinance added provisions which have been included herein as §§ 6-1—6-4. 
State Law reference— Cemeteries and burials, M.G.L. c. 114, c. 272, § 70 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Sale of lots and grave sites restricted. 
(a)  The sale of burial lots and grave sites within city-owned cemeteries shall be limited to persons residing within the city. 
(b)  Except lots and grave sites may be transferred or resold by the owner only under the following conditions: 
(1)  To the city for the original purchase price; or 
(2)  With the approval of the cemetery records clerk of the city-owned cemeteries, to a resident of the city or a member of the owner's family. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "family" shall include only spouse, parents, children, brothers and sisters. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1985, § II; Ord. No. 92-1998, § I, 7-7-1998)  
Sec. 6-2. - Improvement fund for burial grounds/sale of lots. 
(a)  All income, funds, gifts and donations to the city from the sale of burial lots and grave sites and for the improvement of the city-owned cemeteries shall be deposited in the sale of lots fund. The funds may be used for improving, extending and purchasing city-owned cemeteries. Sale of lots is under the custody of the city treasurer. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall invest the sale of lots funds as directed by the board of commissioners of trust funds, and in accordance with state law. 
(c)  Grave site foundations as specified in the cemetery advisory committee's rules and regulations, are required. 
(d)  Income from the fees charged for the city opening and closing graves shall be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1985, § III; Ord. No. 92-1998, § I, 7-7-1998) 
State Law reference— Deposits, investment of deposits for care and improvement of burial places or lots, M.G.L. c. 114, § 19; disposition of proceeds of sales of lots, M.G.L. c. 114, § 43C.  
Sec. 6-3. - Perpetual care and perpetual care endowment fund. 
(a)  All lots and grave sites in city-owned cemeteries shall include perpetual care. A one-time perpetual care fee is required for all lots and grave sites purchased and shall be paid at the time of purchase. Receipt of perpetual care funds shall be recorded by the department of public works in the records of said lots and grave sites. 
(b)  All funds obtained for perpetual care shall be deposited in the perpetual care endowment fund under the custody of the city treasurer, who shall keep a record of such fund and invest it, as directed by the board of commissioners of trust funds, and in accordance with state law. 
(c)  The earned income from the perpetual care fund may be collected quarterly by the director of public works and shall be expended annually for the perpetual care of all lots and grave sites. The principal of the perpetual care fund may not be used for perpetual care or for any other purpose. 
(d)  All donations for perpetual care above the required amount shall be deposited in the perpetual care fund account. These funds shall be used for the same purpose as the required perpetual care fee, and shall be expended in the same manner as stated in subsection (e) of this section. The donor of such funds shall be informed of this when the donation is offered to the city. All donations over $500.00 must be accepted by the city council, as stated by law. 
(e)  Perpetual care is the maintenance provided by or through the city as periodic intervals for the grounds of lots or grave sites. This care includes the cutting, trimming, raking and cleaning of lots and grave sites. No foundation repair work or repair of sunken graves, slowing of grass, retopping of lots, resetting of overturned stones or similar functions shall be considered perpetual care. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1985, § IV; Ord. No. 92-1998, § I, 7-7-1998)  
Sec. 6-4. - Visitors' conduct. 
(a)  No person or vehicle shall enter or remain in a city-owned cemetery for any purpose other than to attend a funeral; to view, visit or attend to a lot or grave; or for an authorized business purpose. Children under 12 years of age shall not be permitted within the cemetery unless accompanied by an adult responsible for their supervision. 
(b)  Persons visiting a city-owned cemetery are prohibited from picking wild or cultivated flowers, disturbing any floral design, or writing upon, moving, damaging, rubbing, or defacing any memorial, monument, marker or fragment thereof, fence or other structure within cemetery grounds. 
(c)  No motor vehicle or bicycles shall be admitted to, or shall be operated in a city-owned cemetery, except as may be in attendance of funerals, transporting persons visiting or attending to lots or graves, or those present for authorized business purposes. No motor vehicle or bicycle shall be operated at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour. No privately owned recreational or snow vehicle shall be admitted to or shall be operated in a city-owned cemetery. 
(d)  Littering or disposing of rubbish in any part of a city-owned cemetery other than in a designated receptacle is prohibited. 
(e)  The following actions and activities are prohibited at city-owned cemeteries: 
(1)  Loud or disruptive actions or noise; 
(2)  Loitering on the grounds of the cemetery; 
(3)  Bringing food or refreshments into the cemetery or consuming them on the grounds; 
(4)  Peddling or soliciting the sale of any commodity or service within the cemetery; 
(5)  Placing of signs, notice or advertisements of any kind within the cemetery, except by the city; 
(6)  Bringing firearms into the cemetery, except when brought by an official military escort accompanying a funeral or memorial service or used for a military burial service; 
(7)  Lighting of fires; 
(8)  Metal detectors are prohibited in city-owned historic burial grounds except by written permit from the historical commission and/or the historic burial grounds committee; 
(9)  The practice of gravestone rubbing is prohibited in the city-owned historic burial grounds except by written permit from the historical commission and/or the historic burial grounds committee or the city cemetery clerk; 
(10)  Alcohol, marijuana and marijuana products and illegal drugs and consumption thereof are strictly prohibited in all city-owned cemeteries; 
(11)  Dogs shall be prohibited generally in all city-owned cemeteries however, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 272, § 98A, any blind person, or deaf or hearing handicapped person, or other physically handicapped person accompanied by a guide dog, shall be entitled to any and all accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of all public conveyances, public amusements and places of public accommodation. 
(12)  No wildlife shall be disturbed, injured or removed from city-owned cemeteries. 
(f)  Visitors to city-owned cemeteries shall not offer, and employees, agents and officials shall not accept, any gratuity. 
(g)  Penalties for violations of this section shall be set at a minimum of $50.00 for the first violation with further violations to be up to $300.00; with the exception of subsection (e)(11) of this section. Penalties for violation of subsection (e)(11) of this section shall be in accordance with chapter 4, animals. 
(Ord. of 9-10-1985, § V; Ord. No. 23-1990, § I, 10-23-1990; Ord. No. 92-1998, § I, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019)  
Secs. 6-5—6-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY-OWNED CEMETERIES ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-026, adopted Feb. 17, 2015, repealed §§ 6-21—6-24 and reenacted said sections as set out herein. Former §§ 6-21—6-24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 34-1992, adopted Nov. 17, 1992. Ord. No. 34-1992 provided for the addition of article II, §§ 6-5—6-8; however, in keeping with the format of this Code, these sections were redesignated as §§ 6-21—6-24, as herein set out at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 6-21. - Established. 
There is hereby established a city-owned cemeteries advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-026, 2-17-2015)  
Sec. 6-22. - Composition, appointment and terms. 
The City-Owned Cemeteries Advisory Committee shall consist of three members and up to two alternates, all of whom shall be residents of the city; one non-voting advisory member who is engaged in either the funeral, monument, or florist business; and the DPW Director or his designee as an ex-officio. 
All appointments are to be for three years and made by the mayor subject to the approval of the city council. Member terms shall be for three years. 
(Ord. No. 2015-026, 2-17-2015)  
Sec. 6-23. - Powers and duties. 
The committee shall have the authority to recommend a yearly budget relative to the management and maintenance of all city-owned cemeteries subject to the approval of the DPW Director and the mayor with final approval by the city council. The committee shall advocate for the wellbeing of all city-owned cemeteries. The committee shall recommend to the director any changes in the rates for perpetual care lots in city-owned cemeteries, and the Director shall propose any rate increases to the mayor under Charter section 7-16(a) who shall provide the proposed rates to the city council for their approval under Charter section 7-16(a). Absent a recommendation from the committee, the director may propose such changes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-026, 2-17-2015)  
Sec. 6-24. - Regulations. 
The committee may propose regulations relative to the management of the city-owned cemeteries subject to the approval of the DPW Director and the mayor under Charter section 7-16(b) and approval and adoption by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-026, 2-17-2015)  
Chapter 7 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to nominations and elections, § 8-1 et seq.; provisions relating to citizen initiative measures, § 9-2; provisions relating to referendum proceedings, § 9-3. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections, M.G.L. c. 50—57. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Board of registrars of voters. 
(a)  There is hereby established a board of registrars of voters consisting of the city clerk and three other persons, who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council, as provided in subsection (b) of this section. In February or March in every year one registrar shall be appointed for a term of three years, beginning with April 1 following. 
(b)  The mayor shall make appointments to the board of registrars of voters so that the members of the board shall represent the two leading political parties. Appointments shall be made such that the board membership, including the city clerk as a member, is comprised of at least one but no more than two members of the same political party. Every such appointment shall be made by the mayor from a list to be submitted to the mayor by the city committee of the political party from which the position is to be filled. The list submitted to the mayor shall contain the names of three enrolled members of the party who reside in the city and who have been selected by a majority vote of the committee at a duly called meeting for which a quorum was present. In the event the political party membership requirements, as stated herein, are met, in order that the mayor may appoint an independent voter to the board, the mayor shall then follow the requirements for appointments to city boards as set out in section 3-3 of the Charter. 
(Code 1970, § 6-1; Ord. No. 13-1990, § I, 6-5-1990) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees, § 2-400 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 51, § 15.  
Sec. 7-2. - Residence of candidates for public office and elected public officials. 
(a)  All candidates for election to any public office in the city shall be inhabitants of and duly qualified registered voters in the city as provided by M.G.L. c. 41, § 1 and by the city Charter §§ 1-1, 2-1(b), and 10-9(m) and shall throughout the term of their office remain a registered voter whose domicile and residence shall be within the city as provided by M.G.L. c. 41, § 109. If an elected public official removes himself from the city the official shall be deemed to have vacated their office. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section the following terms apply: 
Inhabitant shall mean that a person dwells or has his home there. 
Removes shall mean that the official is no longer: 
(1)  An inhabitant of the city and no longer has his primary residence and home in the city; and 
(2)  Qualified to be a registered voter of the city. 
Residence shall mean the individual's home as demonstrated by both his presence there and his intent to make it his home. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989)  
Secs. 7-3—7-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WARDS AND VOTING PRECINCTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances describing the boundaries of the wards and precincts of the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(12). 
State Law reference— Wards and precincts, M.G.L. c. 43, § 6, c. 54, § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-15. - Division of city into five wards. 
In accordance with the authority vested in the city council by the general laws of the commonwealth and the Charter, the city is divided into five wards. 
(Code 1970, § 6-11) 
Charter reference— Authority to divide the city into five wards, section 8-6.  
Sec. 7-16. - Boundaries of wards and precincts. 
The boundaries of the various wards and precincts of the city shall be as shown on the records which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1970, §§ 6-12—6-22)  
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of city electrician relative to fire alarms and police signals systems, § 2-136; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; establishment of fire district, § 5-17; interference with fire alarm telegraph by moving of buildings, § 5-29; electrical regulations, § 5-40 et seq.; reward for information resulting in arrests and conviction of arsonists, § 14-9; alarm system, § 14-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fires, fire departments and fire districts, M.G.L. c. 48; fire prevention, M.G.L. c. 148. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - License for storing inflammables; fees. 
(a)  Upon application to the city council for a license to store inflammables, the applicant shall be responsible for payment of fees for advertising and postage for legal notices to all abutters. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application to store inflammable, the license fee therefor shall be $100.00. 
(c)  The annual fee for renewal of certificate of registration shall be $100.00. 
(Ord. of 7-13-1982, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-011, 1-8-2013) 
State Law reference— Licenses for storage of inflammables, M.G.L. c. 148, § 13.  
Sec. 8-2. - Permit for transportation, storage and use of explosives. 
No person shall transport, store or use any explosives named in M.G.L. c. 148, § 9, within the city without a permit from the fire chief, acting as the agent of the state fire marshal. 
(Code 1970, § 9-1) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate explosives, M.G.L. c. 148, § 9.  
Sec. 8-3. - Public display of fireworks after 10:30 p.m. 
No public display of fireworks shall commence or continue after 10:30 p.m. The fire chief, at the time when any display is scheduled, may extend this period for not more than one hour in the event of inclement weather or on account of conditions which he might deem to be an emergency. 
(Code 1970, § 9-2) 
Cross reference— Amusements, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Sale, possession, use, etc., of fireworks, M.G.L. c. 148, § 39; permits for display of fireworks, M.G.L. c. 148, § 39A.  
Sec. 8-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-036, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed § 8-4, which pertained to annual homecoming ceremonial bonfires and derived from Ord. No. 133-1998, § I, adopted Nov. 10, 1998.  
Sec. 8-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-036, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed § 8-5, which pertained to hazardous materials process or processing for permit and inspection requirements of $50.00 per permit and a $50.00 inspection fee and derived from Ord. No. 10-22-2013(245).  
Sec. 8-6. - Use of sky lanterns. 
Sky lanterns, using an open flame (or any similar object or device), are not permitted in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-207, 11-14-2017)  
Secs. 8-7—8-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments generally, § 2-260 et seq.; police officers not to be firefighters, § 17-19; authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic, § 22-21; right-of-way of fire engines, § 22-95; restrictions on use of ways upon approach of fire apparatus; crossing fire hoses, § 22-96; leaving vehicle unattended on private ways so as to block access to fire apparatus prohibited, § 22-152. 
State Law reference— Provisions relating to fire departments in cities, M.G.L. c. 48, § 44A et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-15. - Established. 
There is hereby established a department of the city to be known as the fire department.  
Sec. 8-16. - Fire chief. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint the fire chief who shall hold the office for a term of at least three years but no more than five years. The appointment of the fire chief shall be subject to confirmation by the city council. The fire chief is exempt from the provisions of M.G.L c. 31. 
(b)  Within three business days of the position of the fire chief being declared vacant, the mayor shall appoint a temporary fire chief who shall serve until a permanent chief is selected in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. 9-10-2013(217)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 11, 2011, repealed § 8-16 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 8-16 pertained to composition of the fire department and derived from § 9-15 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 8-17. - Selection of fire chief—Qualifications. 
The fire chief shall be selected by the mayor and have the following qualifications or equivalent qualifications as the mayor deems appropriate: 
(1)  The fire chief shall be a fire safety professional with 15 years or its equivalent experience in federal, state, county, municipal or military firefighting, at least five years or its equivalent shall be in a progressively responsible fire safety management position; 
(2)  The fire chief shall have a Bachelor's Degree. Related experience or other educational background may be substituted for an undergraduate degree. 
(3)  Preference maybe given to candidates who have experience with the following: 
a.  A multi-lingual and multi-cultural fire safety environment in municipalities with a population of 30,000 or more residents and possess managerial experience in the command structure similar to the city fire department; 
b.  A second language reflecting the linguistic diversity of the citizens of the city; 
c.  Holding the minimum rank of deputy chief or higher for a minimum of three years in a fire fighting environment or equivalent experience or demonstrated expertise; 
d.  A nationally recognized fire leadership program or its equivalent; 
e.  Financial management, innovations in fire operations, and information technology as it pertains to fire safety; 
f.  Labor relations, community relations, mediation and facilitation skills; and including staff development and training; 
g.  The equivalent education, skills, and experience may be substituted for any of the above. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 11, 2011, repealed § 8-17 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 8-17 pertained to appointments of the fire department and derived from § 9-16 of the 1970 Code.  
Sec. 8-18. - Screening of fire chief—Manner of appointment. 
(a)  Upon such time as the mayor shall become aware of a vacancy in the office of fire chief, the mayor shall commence the process to fill the vacancy in the manner prescribed in this section. The mayor may select an interim fire chief to serve until a permanent fire chief is hired. 
(b)  The mayor shall select a qualified recruitment and assessment consultant. The consultant shall establish an assessment process that shall include a screening committee appointed by the mayor. The consultant and the screening committee shall hold at least one public meeting to discuss the process and the candidates. At the conclusion of the assessment process, the screening committee, with guidance and input from the consultant, shall select three candidates to forward to the mayor for consideration. 
(c)  The mayor shall make a selection from the three candidates and negotiate a contract with the successful candidate; the term of said contract shall be for at least three years but no longer than five years. The mayor shall appoint a candidate from the list subject to a comprehensive background check investigation conducted by the consultant as well as the funding of the contract and confirmation of the candidate by the city council. 
(d)  The mayor may reappoint the fire chief for subsequent contractual terms of at least three years but no longer than five years subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 3-27-2012(02); Ord. of 9-10-2013(217); Ord. No. 2018-039, 3-27-2018) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 11, 2011, renumbered the former §§ 8-18—8-25 as §§ 8-21—8-28 and enacted new §§ 8-18—8-21 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 8-19. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall manage the fire department. He/she shall be responsible for the discipline and efficiency of the department. He/she shall have control of the department, its officers and members, the care of the fire stations, the care and custody of all the property of the department and shall keep a record of its business. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-20. - Composition. 
The fire department shall consist of the fire chief, who is not subject to the civil service laws, and as many officers, mechanics, inspectors and firefighters subject to the civil service laws as may be deemed necessary. The department may also include supporting administrative staff. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-21. - Qualifications and appointment of firefighters. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the power to appoint all firefighters who shall hold their office at the discretion of the mayor subject to the laws pertaining to civil service and to the collective bargaining agreement. The fire chief is exempt from civil service laws and the terms of the collective bargaining agreement. All firefighters are required to be citizens of the United States and within nine months of his/her appointment, to reside within 15 miles of the limits of the city as required by M.G.L. c. 41 § 99A. 
(b)  Appointment of fire fighter shall be subject to the age restrictions (32 years or veterans of up to 36 years) of M.G.L. c. 31, § 58A. 
(c)  Any firefighter of the fire department who shall fail to meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section may be discharged from the department in accordance with the provisions of civil service regulations and any applicable contract. 
(d)  All newly hired city firefighters shall attend the recruit training program at the state firefighting academy with satisfactory completion of the recruit training program be a condition of employment. Completion of the program shall be, whenever possible, with the employees' probationary period prescribed by M.G.L. c. 31, § 61. If a firefighter begins the recruit training program during the probationary period, the probationary period shall be suspended until the firefighter completes the program. If the probationary period would expire prior to the firefighter entering the academy, the mayor will make a written request to the personnel administrator to extend the probationary period until the program is completed. 
(Code 1970, §§ 9-18, 9-23; Ord. No. 4-1992, § I, 2-11-1992; Ord. 6-1992, § I, 2-18-1992; Ord. No. 34-1995, § I, 6-13-1995; Ord. No. 47-1995, § I, 11-14-1995; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 3-22-2011(01); Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of municipal firefighters, M.G.L. c. 31, § 58. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-22. - Physical examination of firefighters. 
All firefighters appointed to the fire department shall pass the physical examination required by the civil service department of the commonwealth, as well as a city physical. 
(Code 1970, § 9-17; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
State Law reference— Civil service provisions dealing with firemen, M.G.L. c. 31, § 58 et seq. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-23. - Appointees must signify willingness to obey rules. 
Before becoming a firefighter in any capacity, any person so appointed shall signify his agreement to abide by the rules and regulations of the department and all laws laid down for firefighters by duly constituted authorities, and shall signify his willingness to carry out the duties and orders given him by the officers of the department. 
(Code 1970, § 9-19; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-24. - Firefighters to have motor vehicle license. 
Every person who shall become a firefighter shall be required to possess a valid state motor vehicle operator's license. 
(Code 1970, § 9-20; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-25. - Military substitutes. 
A military substitute shall be considered a firefighter, if appointed as a military substitute for a firefighter. Any such military substitute shall be entitled to all of the benefits and privileges and be subject to all the rules and regulations of the firefighter whose place he is taking for as long as he shall fill the position of such military substitute. 
(Code 1970, § 9-26; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-26. - Fire chief to act as forest warden. 
The fire chief, in addition to his other duties, shall have, possess and exercise the powers and duties heretofore exercised by the forest warden. 
(Code 1970, § 9-27; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-40 et seq. 
State Law reference— Forest wardens, M.G.L. c. 48, § 8 et seq. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-27. - Aid to other cities, towns or fire districts. 
The fire chief or, during his absence, one of the deputy chiefs, or in the event of the absence of the fire chief and the deputy chiefs, the permanent captain who may at the time be in charge of the floor at the central fire station, shall have the authority to take both apparatus and firefighters to the aid of another city, town or fire district for the purpose of extinguishing fires therein. While in the performance of their duties in extending such aid, the firefighters shall have the same immunities and privileges as if performing the same within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 9-31; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217)) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to provide aid to other cities, towns and fire districts, M.G.L. c. 48, § 59A. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Sec. 8-28. - Destruction of buildings to prevent spread of fire. 
Whenever it shall be determined by the fire chief or one of the deputy chiefs, that it is necessary to pull down or demolish any building in order to prevent the spread of any fire, the authority is hereby vested in the chief or deputy chief so to do. 
(Code 1970, § 9-32; Ord. of 1-11-2011; Ord. of 9-10-2013(217); Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017) 
State Law reference— Powers of fire officials; demolition of buildings, M.G.L. c. 48, § 4. 
Note— See the editor's note to § 8-18.  
Secs. 8-29—8-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions enacted by an ordinance adopted October 2, 1979, have been included herein at the direction of the city within article III hereof. These provisions were formerly saved from repeal by Code § 1-17(11). 
 
Sec. 8-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-036, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed § 8-40, which pertained to objectives and derived from Ord. of 10-2-1979.  
Sec. 8-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-036, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed § 8-41, which pertained to the adoption by reference and derived from Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 1.  
Sec. 8-42. - Duties of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code 527 CMR 1 shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention, which is hereby established, in the fire department of the city and which shall operate under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  A deputy chief shall be assigned in charge of the bureau of fire prevention. His assignment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed except for cause. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspector, as shall from time to time, be necessary. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually by deputy chief of the fire prevention bureau and transmitted to the fire chief and chief executive officer of the municipality; it shall contain all proceedings under this Code; with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein; the chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to these ordinances, which in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 2; Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017)  
Sec. 8-43. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Corporation counsel, as used in the fire prevention code, shall be held to mean the attorney for the city. 
Impact protection means wherever a structural member or a hazardous accessory to an occupancy is subject or may be subject to impact or collision damage from a moving object or other activity, protection shall be by corner guards adequate to provide full protection where applicable, or other substantial protection as approved by the bureau of fire prevention. 
Municipality, as used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the city. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 3)  
Sec. 8-44. - Limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents prohibited. 
The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited in Fire District No. 1, as set forth in the building code of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 4)  
Sec. 8-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 114-1998, § I, adopted August 3, 1998, repealed § 8-45 which pertained to establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable fluids in outside aboveground tanks is to be prohibited and derived from § 5 of an ordinance adopted October 2, 1979.  
Sec. 8-46. - Limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases prohibited. 
Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted in any area in the city not zoned for business or industrial use. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 6)  
Sec. 8-47. - Routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents. 
The route referred to in section 12.70 of the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents shall be established by the bureau of fire prevention upon written application for a permit to transport explosives or blasting agents in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 7)  
Sec. 8-48. - Vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles. 
The routes referred to in section 20.14 of the fire prevention code for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles shall be established by the bureau of fire prevention upon written application for a permit to transport hazardous chemicals or other dangerous articles in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 8)  
Sec. 8-49. - Fire lanes on private or public property devoted to public use. 
The fire lanes referred to in section 28.16 of the fire prevention code may be established upon written application made by the proper person stating the width and route of such lanes with specific description thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 9)  
Sec. 8-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-036, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed § 8-50, which pertained to amendments and derived from Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 10.  
Sec. 8-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-036, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed § 8-51, which pertained to modification and derived from Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 11.  
Sec. 8-52. - Appeals. 
Appeals of decisions by the fire chief or his designee related to a direct question of fire or explosion hazard shall directed to the state fire marshal within ten days of the act, order or decision as prescribed in 525 CMR 1 Section 1.05. 
Appeals of decisions by the fire chief or his designee related to fire protection requirements for buildings or structures shall be directed to the fire prevention regulations appeals board within 45 days of the act, rule, order, decision, requirement or directive as prescribed in M.G.L. 22D § 5. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 12; Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017)  
Sec. 8-53. - New materials; processes or occupancies which require permits. 
The building inspector, the chief of the fire prevention bureau and the chief of the fire department shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new material, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such a list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 13)  
Sec. 8-54. - Penalties. 
As established by M.G.L. c. 148 § 34C and M.G.L. c. 148A. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 14; Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017)  
Sec. 8-55. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
(a)  All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this article or of the code hereby adopted are hereby repealed. 
(b)  Specific reference is hereby made to the city ordinance of September 2, 1965, an ordinance creating a fire prevention code, prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, and establishing a bureau of fire prevention and providing officers therefor and defining their powers and duties. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 15)  
Sec. 8-56. - Validity. 
The city council hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of this article or of the code hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the city council that it would have passed all other portions of this article independent of the elimination therefrom of any such portion as may be declares invalid. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 16)  
Sec. 8-57. - Savings clause. 
Nothing in this article hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 17)  
Sec. 8-58. - Date of effect. 
This article is subject to the approval of the mayor and shall become effective on and after 31 days from the date of ordainment. 
(Ord. of 10-2-1979, § 18)  
Sec. 8-59. - Fire department access to property. 
(a)  Key boxes . 
(1)  When a property is protected by an automatic alarm system or a system of automatic sprinklers or access to or within a structure or an area on that property is unduly difficult because of secured openings and where immediate access is necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes, the fire chief or his designee may require a key box to be installed in an approved location. 
(2)  The key box shall be listed in accordance with UL 1037 and a type approved by the Gloucester fire department. 
(3)  The owner or person in control of the building or facility shall cause to be placed in the key box easily identified keys for the following areas: 
a.  Locked points of access in the exterior of the building or facility 
b.  Locked points of access to common areas, such as hallways or utility rooms 
c.  Locked mechanical rooms 
d.  Locked electrical rooms 
e.  All other locked areas' other than individual apartments or rented rooms, as directed by the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Access to gated properties . All gated properties in the city shall provide a means of entry into the property to the fire department for emergency response. The device or system provided shall be approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
(c)  Access maintenance . The owner or person in control of the building or facility provided with a key box required by (a) and (b) of this section shall notify the fire chief when access is modified and fire department access is impacted. Updated keys shall be made available for placement into the key box. 
(Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017)  
Sec. 8-60. - Automatic sprinklers in new or substantially rehabilitated residential structures containing four or more dwelling units. 
(a)  All new or substantially rehabilitated motels and hotels with more than four units shall install a residential sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13R. If such structure exceeds four stories in height, a suitable automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13 shall be installed. 
(b)  All new or substantially rehabilitated residential structures containing four or more units shall be protected with an approved system of automatic sprinklers in accordance with NFPA 13D. 
(c)  All new or substantially rehabilitated structures with mixed residential/nonresidential uses with four or more residences shall be equipped with approved automatic sprinklers in accordance with the provisions of 780 CMR, the Massachusetts State Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-012, 1-24-2017; Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017) 
State Law reference— Multiple dwelling units; new construction; automatic sprinkler systems, M.G.L. c. 148, § 26I.  
Sec. 8-61. - Chimineas and outdoor fireplaces. 
(a)  The use of a chiminea or outdoor fireplace is allowed without a permit from the fire department provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The fire and/or smoke does not pose a hazard to any property; 
(2)  The smoke does not create a nuisance or health hazard in the neighborhood; 
(3)  Only ordinary firewood shall be burned in the chiminea or outside fireplace; no construction debris, leaves, household trash, hazardous waste, or chemicals may be burned at any time; 
(4)  The chiminea or outdoor fireplace shall be on a non-combustible surface at grade-level (i.e. not on a deck) and is not under any type of overhang, roof, or canopy; 
(5)  A water supply or fire extinguisher capable of extinguishing the fire is within 75 feet of the chiminea or outdoor fireplace; 
(6)  The fire shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire is extinguished; 
(7)  Fires shall not be located within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material; 
(8)  All conditions that could cause fire to spread from the area adjacent to the device shall be eliminated prior to ignition; 
(9)  Flammable liquids shall not be used to ignite the fire. 
(b)  The fire chief or his designee may order any outside fire permitted by this section to be extinguished in response to a complaint or hazardous condition. 
(Ord. No. 2017-036, 2-14-2017) 
State Law reference— M.G.L. c. 48, § 13.  
Chapter 9 - TRASH, RECYCLING AND LITTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Power of department of public works pertaining to garbage, refuse and waste, § 2-283; demolition of pier, wharf or buildings along the waterfront, § 10-84; unlawful deposits in harbor and related tidal waters, § 10-85. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, adopted August 3, 1998, repealed the former article I, §§ 9-1—9-10, and enacted a new article I as set out herein. The former article I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1970, §§ 10-12—10-16, 10-19, 10-23—10-26, and 10-28. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appliances means refrigerators, ranges, dishwashers, water heaters, freezers, air conditioners, washing machines, dryers, dehumidifiers, and trash compactors, which were originally intended for residential dwelling application. 
Automotive recyclables means: 
(1)  Tires, not including large truck tires; 
(2)  Motor oil, not contaminated with any other liquid, dirt or leaves; 
(3)  Oil filters; 
(4)  Car and boat batteries. 
Bulk item means furniture predominantly non-metallic, weighing over 50 pounds not fitting into official PAYT bag. 
Bulk item sticker means the sticker required for curbside bulky item pick up. 
Cathode ray tubes (CRTs) means the leaded glass picture tubes found in televisions, computer monitors and video games. 
Commingled collection means the collection program in which residents are required to place glass, metal, and plastic containers in recycling receptacle. 
Composting means the recovery of discarded organic materials for processing into a soil amendment, fertilizer and/or mulch. 
Corrugated cardboard means paper in which a portion has been made to have wavy surface (ridges and grooves) and is placed between two flat surfaces for the sake of strength and is commonly used to form cartons. 
Glass means unbroken clean jars and bottles, but not including: dishes, ceramics, plate glass and flat glass (commonly known as window glass), Pyrex, lightbulbs, drinking glasses, crystal and mirrored glass. 
Household means the single residential unit within a single or multi-family dwelling. 
Litter means any waste material, including but not limited to tobacco, marijuana and marijuana products or parts thereof (other than the ashes), and waste material deposited on or near a waste receptacle which cannot accommodate more waste, and which waste material, if thrown or deposited in a manner prohibited by this article I, tends to create a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or tends to create a danger to the quality of life including an unsightly appearance that would reasonably discourage others from using the property for its intended purpose. 
Municipal collection program means the program that collects solid waste and recyclable materials including yard waste, white goods (Freon and non-Freon bearing), all televisions and all computer displays from all eligible residents, all mixed use buildings, all municipal facilities or locations and city schools. 
Newspapers, magazines and junk mail means advertisements, newspapers, and comics. The term "magazines" includes all periodicals and catalogs. The term "junk mail," as used herein, includes materials received in the mail which are made of paper. 
Park means and includes park, a reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
PAYT (pay as you throw) program means the city pay as you throw trash collection program whereby residential trash must be contained in an official PAYT trash bag or bear a bulky item sticker. 
Plastic containers means polyethylene terephtalate (PET), high-density Polyethylene (HDPE), plastic #1 through #7 only. The term "plastic containers" includes containers used for packaging soda, milk, juices, drinks and water, but not including oil or any other hazardous materials with a chemical residue. 
Private premises means and includes any yards, grounds, walks, driveways, porches, steps, docks, wharves or mailboxes belonging to or appurtenant to any dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means and includes any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Recyclables shall mean glass containers, plastics #1 through #7, "junk mail," newspapers, clean corrugated cardboard, and tin/steel containers. 
Recycling means any method, technique or system authorized to process or treat discarded materials so that its components, materials or substances may be beneficially used or reused. 
Residential unit or dwelling means a dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of persons and comprised of not more than four units. 
Solid waste means household trash generated within the home and bulky items such as furniture, not including recyclable material, construction materials, or hazardous waste material or construction and demolition materials from remodeling. 
Tin/steel cans means tin and steel food cans, cleaned and flattened or nested if desired, but not included are paint cans or any product with a hazardous chemical residue. 
Trash means material considered worthless, unnecessary or offensive that is usually thrown away. The term "trash" is generally defined as dry waste material, but in common usage it is a synonym for garbage, rubbish or refuse, but not to include recyclables or yard waste. 
Vehicle means every device in, or upon which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, or public way. 
Yard waste means vegetation that includes: grass clippings, leaves, twigs, branches, brush (including Christmas trees), weeds and all organic material that can be composted, but not including, railroad ties or other yard related materials that has been treated with chemical preservatives. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. of 5-25-2004(01), § I; Ord. of 4-12-2011(01); Ord. No. 2015-212, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-2. - PAYT containers. 
(a)  All households who are eligible for the municipal collection program are required to place solid waste in official PAYT (pay as you throw) bags, either in or out of barrels. Any bag and/or barrel weighing more than 50 pounds will not be picked up by the contractor who holds a permit for the collection of trash from the board of health. Any owner of a building with five or more residential units, any business, nonprofit, and any private or charter school shall provide private trash collection. Official Gloucester PAYT bags, either in or out of a barrel shall be placed at the curb not later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(b)  Homeowners and tenants will be required to clean up immediately all trash/recyclables spilled on the ground due to torn bags or overturned containers. 
(c)  Trash/recycling receptacles shall not be put out for collection before 4:00 p.m. the day preceeding the day of collection and shall be removed from curbside location and returned to their proper place on the same day of collection. 
(d)  The City of Gloucester shall provide each resident with one recycling container per residential unit which receives municipal trash pick-up. Residents of each premises shall: 
(1)  Take proper care to protect such container from misuse, loss or damage. 
(2)  Recycling container must remain with the premises for use by subsequent when unit is vacated. 
(3)  Residents are responsible for the replacement of containers which are lost, or damaged beyond normal wear and tear. The City of Gloucester is not obligated to replace lost, stolen, or damaged containers. Residents may purchase a replacement or additional bin from the DPW business office. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. of 10-9-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 4-12-2011(01))  
Sec. 9-3. - Independent trash haulers and dumpsters; permits. 
(a)  All persons collecting trash in the city shall obtain a permit from the board of health. 
(1)  Trash hauling permit shall be valid for one calendar year, renewable annually on January 1 subject to review and approval from the board of health. 
(2)  No permit shall be transferable except with approval from the board of health. 
(3)  Any application which fails to include all information requested in the board of health regulations shall be deemed incomplete and shall be denied. 
(4)  As part of the application, each applicant shall submit to the board of health a list of customers served, time of day and frequency of collection, tons of solid waste and recyclables handled on a regular basis. 
(b)  Each permittee shall provide recycling services in compliance with the commonwealth's solid waste plan and DEP regulations. Each permittee shall submit monthly reports listing the tonnage of refuse and recyclables that has been collected. Said report shall include a list of customers served, time of day and frequency of collection, and a process for resolving residential complaints or permit violations. All permitted haulers are required to provide weight slips or vendor receipts to document tons of recyclables collected and trash collected. Said report shall be submitted to the department of public works beginning one month from the application approval date and continuing each month during which the applicant holds a valid permit. Failure to provide this required information may result in a revocation, suspension of the permit. 
(c)  Dumpsters serviced by haulers permitted under this section shall not be dumped, delivered or maintained before 6:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday or before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. 
(d)  Any member of the board of health or its agents, inspectional services, police officers, or DPW director or designated person shall enforce this section. Any violation of the ordinances, the department of environmental protection regulations or of the state general laws by the permittee shall be grounds for suspension, modification or revocation of the permit by the board of health. 
(e)  Fines for violations of subsection 9-3(c) shall be: First offense shall be a written warning; second offense and offenses thereafter shall be a $100.00 fine for each offense; after three fineable offenses, the health department and board of health may revoke the license or permit. 
(f)  Exemptions: The board of health may by board of health regulations exempt certain dumpsters from the requirements of subsection 9-3(c). 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 2014-238, 7-8-2014)  
Sec. 9-4. - Transportation of trash. 
(a)  No person shall transport in any truck or other vehicle, or in any other manner, through public streets of the city to which the public has access, or over any land owned or controlled by the city, trash, boxes, barrels or other containers of merchandise or discarded material of any kind or description, consigned to any destination, unless the same is conveyed or transported in a truck, vehicle or other manner entirely covered or enclosed so that material cannot escape while being transported. Any such material shall be transported in an entirely enclosed truck, vehicle or otherwise, being transported shall be covered by a canvas, or a covering of similar nature securely fastened so as to prevent the material from escaping from the truck, vehicle or otherwise onto the streets, sidewalks, ways, public land or private property. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person transporting any such materials to stop and recover the same, in the event of any escape or loss thereof, irrespective of the cause of escape or loss. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998) 
State Law reference— Permit required for transportation of garbage, M.G.L. c. 111, § 31A; municipal authority to regulate removal of garbage, M.G.L. c. 111, § 31B.  
Sec. 9-5. - Leaf and yard waste composting program. 
(a)  Yard waste shall not be mixed with any household waste or trash nor any hazardous or toxic material. 
(b)  Yard waste shall not be set out with regular trash for collection. It may be composted on the property on which it was generated or it may be transported to the municipal composting facility or any approved private composting facility at the owner or occupant's expense. 
(c)  Yard waste delivered to the designated location of the municipal composting facility at a designed location shall have any bag or container removed prior to depositing such bag or container at the facility. 
(d)  A schedule for leaf and brush collection or municipal composting facility opening shall be determined by the DPW director and public notice will be given. 
(e)  Any person shall bring leaf and yard waste into the composting facility. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998)  
Sec. 9-6. - Unlawful use of litter receptacles. 
No person shall deposit household trash in public litter receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998)  
Sec. 9-7. - Duty to maintain private property free of litter. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times, maintain his premises free of litter so that the same does not constitute a danger to the public health, safety and public welfare. This section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(b)  The board of health, or its agents, police officers, building inspector, or DPW director is hereby authorized and empowered to request the owner of any open or vacant private property within the city or agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Any such request shall be by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his last registered address. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998)  
Sec. 9-8. - Littering prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drop, release, or otherwise dispose of directly or indirectly into any harbor, river, or pond or on to any beach, or any public property garbage, refuse, rubbish, bottles, cans, containers, paper, cigarette butts, balloons, wrapping material, glass, filth or any noxious or dangerous liquid or solid. Violation shall be subject to a $300.00 fine per incident/violation. 
(b)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or any litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. 
(c)  No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, in such a manner that it tends to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare, whether owned by such person or not except the owner or person in control of private property may maintain private receptacles for collection, as authorized by this article. Litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements from any such occupied private property, to the street, sidewalk or other private place or upon any private property. 
(d)  No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, so that the same shall create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  No person shall deposit litter in or near any waste receptacle that cannot accommodate additional waste. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 2015-213, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 2019-043, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Littering in or near public highways, M.G.L. c. 270, § 16.  
Sec. 9-9. - Dismantled, wrecked, etc., motor vehicles. 
(a)  No person in charge or in control of any real estate within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked motor vehicles to remain on his property longer than 60 days, without a valid state inspection sticker issued and displayed in accordance with the requirements of the general laws of the commonwealth. This section shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, or to a vehicle on the property of a lawful business or farming enterprise necessary to such operation, nor to motor vehicles at the place of business of a holder of a class license under M.G.L. c. 140. 
(b)  This section shall be enforced by the building inspector or by police officers. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998) 
Cross reference— Junk dealers, antique dealers and dealers in used goods, § 19-15 et seq.  
Sec. 9-10. - Penalty for violation of section 9-8. 
Upon finding violation of section 9-8, the district court shall fine the violator according to the severity of the violation of up to $300.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 115-1998, § I, 8-3-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for violation of sections 9-1 and 9-9, § 1-15.  
Sec. 9-11. - Regulations for curbside collection of recyclable material; mandatory. 
(a)  Purpose and goal. The goal of this chapter is to promote recycling in the city and to comply with state mandated waste bans, and to assist in cost reduction for residential waste collection. 
(b)  Separation of recyclable material from trash. Each residential unit which receives municipal waste disposal services shall separate recyclables from their trash. The term "recyclables" is defined in section 9-1, which includes, but is not limited to: newspaper, magazines, junk mail, glass, plastics, tin/steel, corrugated cardboard, CRTs, appliances and automotive recyclables. No recyclables shall be placed in the same container as trash. All trash and recyclables shall be set out for collection in accordance with section 9-2. If it is determined that there is more than negligible quantities of recyclable materials in trash set out for collection, the trash may be deemed rejected for collection and left uncollected. Trash that has not been separated for recyclable material and deemed rejected for collection shall be considered litter and subject the owner to a fine of not more than $300.00 if it is not removed from the curbside within 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 6-22-2004, § I)  
ARTICLE II. - PLASTIC BAGS 
 
Sec. 9-12. - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings: 
Building inspector means the building inspector or his/her designee. 
ASTM D6400 means the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International "Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics." 
ASTM D7081 means ASTM International "Standard Specification for Biodegradable Plastics in the Marine Environment." 
Compostable plastic bag means a plastic bag that (1) conforms to the current ASTM D6400 for compostability; and (2) is certified and labeled as meeting the ASTM D6400 standard specification by a recognized verification entity. A plastic bag that is made of polyethylene, polyethylene terephthalate, polyvinyl chloride, polypropylene, or nylon is not deemed "compostable". 
Department means the city's building department. 
Marine-degradable plastic bag means a plastic bag that conforms to the current ASTM D7081 standard specification for marine degradability. A plastic bag that is made of polyethylene, polyethylene terephthalate, polyvinyl chloride, polypropylene, or nylon is not deemed "marine-degradable". 
Recyclable paper bag means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: (1) is 100 percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40 percent postconsumer recycled material; and (2) is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the ASTM Standard D6400. 
Retail establishment means any commercial business facility that sells goods and/or services directly to the consumer including but not limited to grocery stores, pharmacies, liquor stores, convenient stores, restaurants and retail stores selling clothing, food and personal items, and dry cleaning services. 
Reusable checkout bag means a sewn bag with stitched handles that is either (a) made of cloth or other machine washable fabric; or (b) made of plastic other than polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride that is durable, non-toxic, and generally considered a food-grade material that is more than 2.25 mils thick. 
Single-use plastic bag means a plastic bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale for the purpose of removing products purchased within that retail establishment. Thin-film plastic bags used to contain dry cleaning, newspapers, produce, meat, cheese, bulk foods, wet items and other similar merchandise, typically without handles, are permissible. 
(Ord. No. 2017-208, 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 9-13. - Requirements. 
(a)  No retail establishment as defined in this article shall provide a single-use plastic bag to a customer or customers unless the bag complies with the requirements of being either a recyclable paper bag, a compostable and marine-degradable plastic bag, or a reusable checkout bag. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit customers from using bags of any type that they bring in to the retail establishment themselves or from carrying away goods that not placed in a bag in lieu of bags provided by the retail establishment. 
(c)  The building inspector may promulgate rules and regulations to implement this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-208, 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 9-14. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The building inspector shall investigate any report of a failure to comply with this article. 
(1)  If the building inspector determines that a violation has occurred, the building inspector shall issue a warning notice to the retail establishment for the initial violation. 
(2)  The penalty for each violation that occurs after the issuance of the warning notice shall be $50.00 for each offense. Payment of such fines may be enforced through civil action in the district court. 
(3)  A retail establishment shall have 15 business days after the date that a notice of violation is issued to pay the penalty or the amount of the penalty payable shall be doubled. 
(Ord. No. 2017-208, 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 9-15. - Exemptions. 
The annual stamp out hunger food drive sponsored by the Open Door and National Association of Letter Carriers food drive shall be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-208, 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 9-16. - Effective date. 
All of the requirements set forth in this article shall take effect on January 1, 2019. 
(Ord. No. 2017-208, 11-14-2017)  
Secs. 9-17—9-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITION ON POLYSTYRENE-BASED DISPOSABLE FOOD SERVING ITEMS 
 
Sec. 9-20. - Polystyrene-based disposable food serving items prohibited. 
Effective January 1, 2019, polystyrene food and beverage containers shall not be used in the city to package or serve food or beverages if that packaging takes place on the premises of "food establishments" as defined in section 9-21. In the event that compliance with this article is not feasible for a food establishment because of either unavailability of alternative non-polystyrene containers or economic hardship, the director of health may grant a waiver of not more than six months upon application of the owner or owner's representative. 
(Ord. No. 2017-176, 9-12-2017)  
Sec. 9-21. - Definitions. 
Biodegradable means materials that will completely degrade and return to nature. 
Compostable means materials that will completely degrade into, or otherwise become part of, usable compost in a safe and timely manner. Compostable, disposable food service ware must meet ASTM-Standards for compostability and any bio-plastic or plastic-like product must be clearly labeled. 
Food establishment shall mean an operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human consumption. 
Polystyrene means and includes blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams, also referred to as expanded polystyrene (EPS), which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres, injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding; in this section referenced as "Foam Polystyrene". Foam Polystyrene is generally used to make cups and clamshell containers. The term also includes clear or solid polystyrene, which is also known as "oriented", and referenced in this section as "Rigid Polystyrene." Rigid Polystyrene is generally used to make clear clamshell containers. 
Recyclable means a material than can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. 
Reusable means any material that will be used more than once in its same form by a food establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-176, 9-12-2017)  
Chapter 10 - WATERWAYS ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Marshlands, ch. 12; shellfish, seaworms and eels, ch. 20. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-1993, adopted Dec. 14, 1993, amended former ch. 10, arts. I—III, relative to the harbor and related waters, in its entirety to read as herein set out. The substantive provisions of former ch. 10 derived from Code 1970. Sections 4-3, 10½-17—10½-25, 10½-27, 10½-29, 12-8, 12-18—12-21, 16-14, 16-16; and ordinances of Dec. 6, 1977; Jan. 10, 1978; Nov. 4, 1979; Feb. 3, 1983; Oct. 28, 1986; Aug. 4, 1987; Dec. 22, 1987; July 19, 1988; and April 4, 1989. 
State Law reference— Waterways, M.G.L. c. 91; provisions relating to Gloucester harbor, M.G.L. c. 102, §§ 3, 4; harbors and harbormasters, M.G.L. c. 102, § 17 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Waterways board. 
The purposes of the waterways board is to provide a broad-based citizen management organization that guides the use and development of the city's waterways and public waterfront facilities. The waterways board shall be the city body which establishes policies and regulations for the city's waterways. It is intended that the board adopt clear, concise and fair policies and regulations that promote improved access to the water for all citizens, including commercial fishermen, business owners and recreational boaters. In cooperation with the harbormaster and other city staff, the board is intended to ensure that our waterways are well planned and maintained, utilized to the maximum extent possible, safe, and reflect positively upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-2. - Composition and term. 
(a)  Composition. The city waterways board shall consist of nine citizens of the city appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The appointees shall include three persons who are directly involved with the fishing industry, two persons who are recreational boaters, two persons who are directly involved with economic development of the city, and two persons at large who need not be involved with any marine-related activity. 
(b)  Term. The term of all members shall be three years except that the initial terms shall be staggered so that the terms of no more than three members shall terminate in any one year. If a member resigns or is removed for any reason before his term expires, the mayor shall appoint a replacement within one month of the vacancy. Said appointment must be confirmed by the city council. Members of the waterways board and its standing committees shall be volunteers who are not compensated. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 10-3. - Authority and responsibilities. 
The city waterways board is hereby empowered, and authorized to: 
(1)  Promote implementation of the city harbor plan, dated 1992, and, in cooperation with the appropriate city bodies, amend said plan from time-to-time as circumstances warrant; 
(2)  Establish policies, rules and regulations for the use of the city's waterways and waterfront facilities, including but not limited to, mooring areas, public launch ramps, public landings, and city-owned commercial marinas; 
(3)  Recommend to the city council fee schedules for moorings, launch ramps, slips at city-owned commercial marinas, and other waterfront public facilities and a schedule of fines for violations of waterways rules and regulations; 
(4)  Oversee the operation and maintenance of all public launch ramps and related facilities, the city-owned commercial marinas, and public landings, floats or access ramps; 
(5)  Review and oversee the work programs, budget, staffing, training, effectiveness, management techniques and policies of the harbormaster's office and related city staff; 
(6)  Work cooperatively with the harbormaster's office and related city staff on harbor management issues, enforcement of waterways rules and regulations and waterways development projects; 
(7)  Review all waterfront development projects or zoning changes and report its findings and recommendations to the mayor, city council or other relevant board. The waterways board may required drawings, plans or other supporting documentation from project proponents for its review; 
(8)  Act as the policy liaison between the city and the Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Coast Guard, the state department of environmental protection, the state office of coastal zone management and other government agencies concerned with waterways; 
(9)  Work with the harbormaster's office and related city staff to plan, design and undertake new projects such as dredging, mooring fields and access facilities; 
(10)  Plan and encourage the development of signage and facilities for transient boaters and promote the city as a well-equipped and hospitable port-of-call; 
(11)  Work cooperatively with the harbormaster's office, police and fire departments, environmental police and other public safety agencies to ensure that the city's waterways policies, rules and regulations and operating practices will protect the rights and property of waterways users and waterfront land owners, while maximizing public safety; 
(12)  Delegate any of its responsibilities to a standing committee, the harbormaster or other staff person assigned by the mayor; 
(13)  Investigate new sources of revenue for waterways management and development. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 3-22-2011(02))  
Sec. 10-4. - Standing committees. 
(a)  Designation. There shall be two advisory standing committees of the waterways board, appointed by the chairman; a public facilities committee; and an operations and finance committee/safety committee. The committees shall review, research, investigate and make recommendations on matters referred to them by majority vote of the full board. The committees shall send their reports and recommendations only to the full board which shall review them and take appropriate action. The harbormaster shall be an ex-officio member of each committee. Every member of the board except the chairman shall be on at least one standing committee, and each committee shall elect its own chairman. The chairman of the board shall be an alternate member of all committees. 
(b)  Public facilities committee. 
(1)  This committee may be referred any matter dealing with: 
a.  Moorings; 
b.  Public launch ramps, including Dun Fudgin; 
c.  Public landings; 
d.  City-owned commercial marinas, including St. Peter's Square and Harbor Cove; 
e.  Signage; 
f.  Public access, including but not limited to, walkways to the water, access ramps and floats and dinghy floats, sewage pump-out facilities, waste oil recycling facilities; 
g.  Harbormaster floats and offices; and 
h.  Any other matter deemed appropriate by the board. 
(2)  This committee shall consist of three members of the board, an advocate of public landings appointed by the mayor; the director of public works or his designee; and a member of the tourism commission as needed. 
(c)  Operations and finance/safety committee. 
(1)  This committee may be referred any matter dealing with: 
a.  Harbor planning, design, engineering or construction; 
b.  Budgets; 
c.  Intergovernmental relations; 
d.  The harbormaster's office, including but not limited to: 
1.  Staffing; 
2.  Training; 
3.  Vessels and equipment; 
4.  Work and education programs; 
e.  Fees and fines. 
(2)  In matters of safety, the committee may be referred any matter dealing with: 
a.  Enforcement of boating laws and regulations; 
b.  Other enforcement activities including the need and nature of police patrols during various times of the year and during special waterfront events; 
c.  Fire prevention and suppression needs; 
d.  Hazardous materials; 
e.  Emergency medical services; 
f.  Hazards to navigation; 
g.  Rules and regulations regarding use of the city's waterways; 
h.  City ordinances dealing with the waterways or waterfront; and 
i.  Any other matter deemed appropriate by the board. 
(3)  This committee shall consist of three members of the board; a member of the fisheries commission; and a member of the city council. 
For matters of safety, the three board members shall be advised as needed by the chief of police or his designee, the city fire chief or his designee, and by a representative of Coast Guard Station Gloucester. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 3-22-2011(02); Ord. of 9-27-2011)  
Sec. 10-5. - Relationship to the harbormaster and city staff. 
(a)  The waterways board shall work cooperatively with the harbormaster and other assigned city staff to implement the city harbor plan, as amended, and pursue the policies and goals of the board. In addition, the harbormaster and the board shall work together closely to ensure that the harbormaster's office is efficient, effective, and fair to all waterway users through review of work programs, plans operating procedures and budgets. 
(b)  The waterways board shall work cooperatively with the harbormaster and other assigned city staff including police officers, such that the following duties are performed by the designated official or employee: 
(1)  Harbormaster. 
a.  Operate, maintain, manage equipment and vessels assigned (harbormaster boat). 
b.  Assign and oversee moorings. 
c.  Coordinate with and report to waterways board: meetings, staff, grants, etc. 
d.  Operate and manage public launch ramps, landings, city-owned commercial marinas and other public waterways facilities around the city. 
e.  Gather information and make recommendations relative to the harbor: commissioner's line, chapter 91, permits, CZM regulations and other waterways issues. 
f.  Promote the city as a hospitable port of call: provide information to visitors, provide water transport as directed by the mayor. 
g.  Manage and maintain a harbormaster's office. 
h.  Report to the mayor on administrative matters; report to board on policy matters. 
(2)  Police department. 
a.  Enforce all commonwealth laws while patrolling the city waterways. 
b.  Operate, maintain and manage equipment and vessels assigned (police boat/fire boat). 
c.  Investigate, prosecute criminal activity on waterways and waterfront in cooperation with other members of the city police department and other law enforcement agencies, U.S. Coast Guard, etc. 
d.  Make arrests on water. 
e.  Report to the chief of police. 
f.  Assist the fire department, U.S. Coast Guard with fire prevention and suppression, law enforcement, hazardous materials investigations and emergency medical services. 
g.  Check on lobster violations under the city ordinance and state laws. Enforce M.G.L. c. 130, §§ 31, 18, 39, 41, 41a, 43, 44, marine fisheries laws: 
1.  Destruction of weir-fish trap; 
2.  Lobster and crab licenses; 
3.  Markings on buoys—exhibition of license; 
4.  Display of license numbers and buoy colors; 
5.  Hours of tending traps; 
6.  Taking of female lobsters with eggs; 
7.  Possession of short lobsters. 
h.  Check properties on islands not accessible from land. 
(3)  Joint duties. 
a.  Enforce waterways laws, ordinances and rules and regulations: M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, fines and ticketing, section 1-15 and M.G.L. c. 90B, §§ 1—19, motorboats and other vessels and other enforcement per M.G.L. c. 102, §§ 17—28, shipping and seaman, harbor and harbormasters. Police: plus all other applicable city and state laws. 
b.  Patrol city waterways. Police: enforce all state laws. 
c.  Respond to emergencies within scope, training and resources. 
d.  Operate, maintain and manage equipment and vessels assigned (police boat/fire boat: police; harbormaster boat: harbormaster). 
e.  Coordinate with other agencies and assist within scope, training and resources. 
f.  Observe water quality, assist appropriate agencies. 
g.  Assist in keeping navigation channels clear, keep harbor free of debris. Harbormaster: primary responsibility. 
h.  Patrol major events to promote and protect public safety: Fiesta, 4th of July, schooner races, etc. Police: other occasions as directed by chief of police. 
i.  Issue citations on water. 
j.  Enforce the BWI, make arrests and bring complaints to court. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 21-1995, § I, 3-7-1995; Ord. of 3-22-2011(02); Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
Cross reference— Police duties and joint duties concerning harbor management, § 17-1.  
Secs. 10-6—10-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 10-20. - Harbormaster appointment; qualifications and authority. 
(a)  Appointment. In accordance with M.G.L. c 102, § 19, the harbormaster shall be appointed for a term of three years by the mayor after joint interviews and consultation with the waterways board, and confirmed by the city council. The mayor shall fix the compensation of the harbormaster after an annual performance review conducted by the board and the mayor or his designee. The harbormaster shall report to the mayor on administrative matters and to the waterways board on policy matters. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  The harbormaster shall possess the following skills, knowledge or experience: 
a.  Small boat handling in heavy weather; 
b.  Navigation; 
c.  Rules of the road; 
d.  Waterways laws, rules and regulations and their enforcement; 
e.  Budget preparation; and 
f.  Staff management. 
(2)  Desirable skills or knowledge include: 
a.  Water safety and life-saving; 
b.  Marine fire prevention and suppression; 
c.  Emergency medical care at the EMT level; 
d.  Waterfront construction techniques; 
e.  Waterways permitting process; 
f.  Waterfront facilities management; 
g.  Water pollution control techniques; and 
h.  Grant writing. 
(c)  Authority. The harbormaster shall have all authority set forth in: 
(1)  The Massachusetts General Laws, including, but not limited to, chs. 90B, 91 and 102; 
(2)  The Code of Massachusetts Regulations; 
(3)  Applicable federal laws and regulations; and 
(4)  This Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 11-12-2002(01), § I)  
Sec. 10-21. - Fines. 
The harbormaster and assistant harbormasters shall have the authority to enforce any section of this chapter by way of the ticketing procedures set forth in M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D and section 1-15. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-22. - Responsibilities. 
The harbormaster shall be responsible for the following tasks unless otherwise assigned by the mayor: 
(1)  Enforce all laws, ordinances and rules and regulations within the authority set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  Patrol all waterways within the city's jurisdiction during the entire year with more intense patrolling from May 1 to November 1, and provide a continuous radio watch during patrol hours; 
(3)  Respond to all emergencies on the city's waterways, and provide all reasonable assistance within the scope, training and resources provided; 
(4)  Operate, maintain and manage vessels and related equipment used for harbor patrols; 
(5)  Assign and oversee all moorings in the city's waterways; 
(6)  Cooperate with, and report to, the waterways board and its committees by: 
a.  Attending all board meetings; 
b.  Providing staff, technical support and advice; 
c.  Preparing reports and other documents, including budget proposals and grant applications; 
d.  Representing the commission; and 
e.  Enforcing the board's policies, rules and regulations; 
(7)  Cooperate with other boards, commissions and other departments, including, but not limited to, the fisheries, conservation, and tourist commissions, and the community development and public works departments; 
(8)  Assist the city fire department, U.S. Coast Guard and other relevant agencies with fire prevention and suppression, law enforcement, hazardous materials, investigations and management, and emergency medical services by providing technical and staff assistance, sharing information, joint training, and the loaning of vessels and equipment for operations or investigations; 
(9)  Operate and manage the maintenance of all public launch ramps, public landings, city-owned commercial marinas and other public waterways facilities owned by the city; 
(10)  Observe the water quality of all waterways, take immediate steps to stop or contain pollution on an emergency basis, notify appropriate government agencies, and enforce all relevant city ordinances; 
(11)  Monitor and clear navigation channels and prevent encroachments beyond the harbor commissioner's line; 
(12)  Promote the city as a hospitable port-of-call for transient boaters by advertising the city's facilities, welcoming visiting boaters, and providing them with directions, technical assistance and advice as they operate on the city's waterways; 
(13)  Conduct educational programs that teach all boaters safe boating practices, rules of the road, hazardous areas of local waters, and the value of the city's waterways. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 3-22-2011(02))  
Sec. 10-23. - Relocation of vessels. 
(a)  Harbormaster's authority. The harbormaster may station and regulate all vessels in the city waterways and may remove any vessel to new location, or cause it to be so removed, if in his judgment any one of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)  If the vessel is improperly or illegally moored as described in section 10-51 herein; 
(2)  If a vessel occupying a berth at a wharf or pier is not removed within a reasonable period after notice from the owner of said wharf or pier to the master or owner of said vessel, and wharf or pier owner makes a complaint to the harbormaster; and 
(3)  If a vessel not discharging cargo or receiving cargo or services stands in the way of another vessel waiting to carry out any of these activities and the master or owner of the latter vessel complains to the harbormaster. 
(b)  Removal at expense of owner. The harbormaster may, at the expense of the master or owner thereof, cause the removal of any vessel which is not moved when directed by him. Upon the neglect or refusal of any such master or owner to pay on demand the expense of such removal, the harbormaster may recover the same from the master or owner in contract for use of the city. If the master or owner of the vessel cannot be found or located within the jurisdiction of the harbormaster, the harbormaster may proceed in rem directly against the vessel. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-24. - Harbormaster's office. 
(a)  General. There shall be a division within the city named the harbormaster's office. It shall be managed by the harbormaster and assist in the carrying out of his duties as well as those of the waterways board. The harbormaster's office shall have an annual operating budget and shall prepare an annual report. The harbormaster shall ensure that all staff members are adequately trained for their jobs, especially those that include boat operation. 
(b)  Permanent staff. The harbormaster's office shall have a small, permanent staff to assist in the operation and maintenance of records, boats, equipment, and public facilities. 
(c)  Seasonal staff. The harbormaster's permanent staff may be augmented by seasonal personnel who may be used for such tasks as safety patrols, launch ramp operation, mooring fee collection, and maintenance and repairs. 
(d)  Assistant harbormasters. In accordance with M.G.L. c. 102, § 19, the mayor, upon the recommendation of the harbormaster, may appoint permanent or seasonal staff as assistant harbormasters. Such assistants shall be subject to the direction and control of the harbormaster and shall have all authority given to, and be subject to all the duties required of harbormasters, assistant harbormasters shall receive no stipends. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-25. - Budgeting. 
(a)  The annual budget of the harbormaster's office shall include all operating expenses of the waterways board such as legal advertising. The budget shall be developed by the harbormaster in consultation with the operations and finance committee of the waterways board and shall be approved by the full board before it is transmitted to the mayor. The board shall assist the harbormaster at budget reviews by the mayor and city council. The budget shall not exceed the projected revenues of the waterways enterprise fund. 
(b)  The harbormaster, in consultation with the public facilities committee of the waterways board, shall prepare and submit project descriptions, justifications and budgets to the capital improvements advisory board for any applicable waterways project to be funded by the waterways enterprise fund. The waterways board shall assist the harbormaster during project reviews. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Secs. 10-26—10-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATERWAYS FUNDING 
 
Sec. 10-40. - Waterways enterprise fund. 
(a)  Created. In accordance with M.G.L. chs. 44-53E1/2, there shall be a waterways enterprise fund. Said fund shall be used to support the operations of the waterways board and all waterways management and enforcement activities, including the purchase of equipment, the planning, design and construction of public waterways facilities, such as mooring fields, ramps, piers and pump-out facilities. The fund shall have two distinct accounts each of which shall receive a portion of the receipts listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Management account. Funds from this account shall be used for management and enforcement operating expenses as well as for equipment and repairs which do not have to be included in the city's capital improvements program. The funds from this account shall be managed by the mayor in cooperation with the waterways board and harbormaster. 
(c)  Improvements account. Funds from this account shall be used for purchase of vessels, large equipment and the planning, design, construction or major repair of any public waterways facility. As required, expenditures from this account shall be included in the city's capital improvements program. This account shall be managed by the mayor in cooperation with the waterways board and harbormaster. 
(d)  Receipts. The waterways enterprise fund shall receive the following receipts: 
(1)  Mooring fees, both annual and transient; 
(2)  Dockage and slip fees from city-owned commercial marinas, launch ramp fees; 
(3)  All boat excise taxes; 
(4)  Fines; and 
(5)  Any other income derived from public waterways facilities including dedicated grants or gifts. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 3-22-2011(02))  
Secs. 10-41—10-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOORINGS, PUBLIC LANDINGS AND CITY-OWNED COMMERCIAL MARINAS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted March 22, 2011, changed the title of Art. IV from "Moorings, Public Landings and Public Marinas" to "Moorings, Public Landings and City-Owned Commercial Marinas." 
 
Sec. 10-50. - Definitions. 
In construing the provisions of this article, the following words shall have the meanings given below unless a contrary intention clearly applies: 
City waterways means all tidal waters within the boundaries of the city, its harbors, bays and coves, and the whole of the Annisquam River and its outlets, coves and bays. 
Harbormaster means the city official duly appointed in conformance with section 10-20. 
Mooring means a relatively permanent arrangement of an anchor, chain and floating buoy to which a vessel may be tied for extended periods. 
Permittee means a person to whom a permit has been granted for landing or mooring. 
Public landing means any area including uplands, ramps, floats, wharfs, piers, parking areas and water that has been set aside by the city for the landing of vessels to discharge or take on passengers or supplies, or for the launching of vessels, and for public access and recreation as set forth in M.G.L. c. 88, § 14. 
Public waters means all waters beyond the mean low-water mark. 
Recreational boater: means an individual who owns and/or operates a recreational vessel. 
Recreational vessel means a vessel used for personal, noncommercial enjoyment, recreation or sport. 
Vessel includes ships, boats, steamers, barges, or any other type of watercraft powered or under sail or tow, as well as such floating structures as buoys and rafts. 
Vessel length, for the purposes of determining the amount of the mooring fee, means the length overall (LOA) of a vessel exclusive of bowsprits, main boom, and boomkins. For the purposes of mooring assignments, the term "vessel length" includes bowsprits, main boom and boomkins. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-51. - Regulation of moorings. 
(a)  Regulations. The waterways board shall make regulations regarding the application process, size, type, construction and placement of all moorings within the city waterways. All moorings shall be placed under the direction of the harbormaster and are subject to inspection by the harbormaster prior to their initial placement and at intervals of three years. 
(b)  Permits. No person shall establish a mooring within the city waterways without first obtaining a permit from the harbormaster to do so. Mooring permits shall be renewable each calendar year. 
(c)  Applications. Applications for new permits shall be submitted on forms provided by the harbormaster. Applicants shall be placed on waiting lists by location preferred, in order of their receipt. The harbormaster shall keep the waiting lists updated by requiring applicants who wish to maintain their position on the waiting list to file an annual renewal prior to the last business day of December of each year. The harbormaster shall publicly post the waiting lists at the harbormaster's office and shall file a copy of same with the city clerk's office on April 30 of each year. The fee for such renewals shall be $10.00. Failure to timely file the annual renewal shall result in the applicant's removal from the waiting list, provided however that an applicant may, prior to the last business day of February of the following year, request reinstatement to his/her previous position on the waiting lists by filing with the harbormaster a request for reinstatement together with a late fee of $50.00 for a total of $60.00. 
(d)  Types of moorings. The harbormaster may issue permits for three types of moorings: 
(1)  Personal moorings for sole use by the single vessel of an individual and his or her immediate family; 
(2)  Municipal moorings which may be approved by the waterways board for public purposes; and 
(3)  Transient moorings which may be used by waterfront businesses or yacht clubs for transient vessels. 
(e)  Fees. The fee for each type of mooring shall be established by the city council. Fees for personal moorings shall be charged by the length of vessel at the rate of $8.00 per foot for city residents and taxpayers and at the rate of $10.00 per foot for nonresidents. The fee for transient moorings shall be $200.00 each. A daily fee of $40.00 shall be charged every vessel that utilizes a municipal mooring used for transient boats, operated by the harbormaster. The daily rental fee for transient boats shall include the services of the Gloucester Launch during regular service hours. Fees for 10A float permits shall be in the amount of $1.00 per square foot up to a maximum of $400.00. Fees for the use of the Gloucester Launch shall be $5.00 per person per one-way trip, with children 12 years of age or younger free. A season pass for permitted mooring holders within the boundaries of the Gloucester Harbor Launch with a limit of four people will cost $100.00. 
(f)  When application due; permit renewal. A completed renewal application by each mooring permit holder, including the renewal fee and proof of ownership, shall be returned to the harbormaster's office on or before the last business day in February of each year. After that time the mooring holder may renew the permit by filing a completed application, including the regular fee per foot, plus a late fee of $50.00, prior to the last business day of May of that same year. Failure to do so will result in the mooring permit being revoked. 
(g)  New mooring areas. The waterways board may, after a public hearing, designate new mooring areas. Moorings in those areas may be installed, maintained and operated by the harbormaster's office or by private businesses under license from the waterways board. The selection process for private operators shall include requests for proposals by the waterways board, submission of proposals and bids in conformance with M.G.L. c. 30B, and review of proposals and bids consistent with that law. 
(h)  Public chart. The harbormaster shall maintain a chart which clearly indicates the location, permittee, LOA of each moored vessel, and number of moorings in the city's waterways. A copy of this chart shall be publicly posted in the harbormaster's office and in the city clerk's office. 
(i)  Suspension and revocation. A mooring permit may be suspended or revoked by the harbormaster whenever, in his opinion, the vessel and/or mooring unduly threatens the safety of the mooring area or the reasonable use of that area by other vessels. Placing a mooring at a location other than that specified on the mooring permits will be grounds for revocation. Any person aggrieved by the action of the harbormaster in denying, revoking, suspending or imposing restrictions on a mooring permit may appeal the harbormaster's decision to the state division of waterways, provided the person files application for such appeal within 30 days after receiving notice of the harbormaster's decision. Failure to fully pay vessel excise taxes for the previous fiscal year shall be grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(1)  All mooring buoys improperly marked as outlined in section 4 A. "Mooring Balls" of the Waterways Rules and Regulations shall be subject to an assessment of $50.00. 
(2)  All vessels not properly displaying a mooring identification sticker shall be subject to an assessment of $50.00. 
(3)  Violations of the provisions set forth in section 7F "Use of Transient Moorings" of the Waterways Rules and Regulations shall be subject to an assessment of $50.00. 
(4)  There shall be a $10.00 administrative fee for replacement decals for mooring and 10A float permits. 
(j)  Violations. Whenever the harbormaster considers a mooring to be in violation of harbor regulations or to be a hazard to navigation, he may, after due notification of the owner, in person or by registered mail to the address of record, order the removal of the mooring, together with any vessel attached to it, to a new location. Such action may be taken without notification to or reply from an owner only, if in the determination of the harbormaster, the owner cannot be contacted within 72 hours or if emergency conditions required immediate action. Any expenses incurred in the removal or relocation of such mooring or any damages resulting shall be the responsibility of the owner. Floats, rafts and moorings held by anchors or bottom moorings, if installed in the public waters of the city without permission from the harbormaster, shall be considered a public nuisance, and may be removed by the harbormaster at the expense of the owner in the event he fails to remove same after notice in writing. 
In the event of the surrender of or revocation of a mooring, float or raft permit, installed in the public waters of the city, the permittee has 45 days to remove or transfer all ground tackle. There will be a $500.00 fine if mooring gear is left in water or not transferred after more than 45 days, plus an additional $10.00 a day fine after the 45 days to a maximum of $1,000.00. If mooring, float or raft permit is surrendered or revoked between October 1 and April 30 the 45 day removal period will begin on May 1. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 4-16-2002(01), § I; Ord. of 8-10-2004(06), § I; Ord. of 8-8-2006; Ord. of 3-22-2011(02); Ord. of 11-27-2012(01); Ord. No. 2012-261, 12-11-2012; Ord. of 5-28-2013(110); Ord. No. 2014-093, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-083, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-219, 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-223, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 2018-026, 2-27-2018)  
Sec. 10-52. - Use of public landings. 
(a)  General use. All public landings, along with the ramps and floats attached thereto, shall be used primarily for the landing of people from vessels, the docking of vessels while people are alighting or boarding, and by persons tying their vessel thereto while making purchases ashore. Public landings shall also provide public access for passive recreational activities. Where public landings have no floats, vessels may be pulled up on shore for the purposes set forth in this subsection. Parking areas at public landings shall be for the exclusive use of landing users unless otherwise designated by the waterways board. 
(b)  Tie-up period. No owner nor anyone else in charge of or operating a vessel of any description, shall use the head of any float moored or attached to any public landing for any greater period of time than ordinarily and reasonable required to load or unload the passengers or occupants of any such vessel, together with whatever merchandise might accompany or be in the possession of the persons or passengers alighting therefrom. In no case shall any vessel be tied to the head of a public landing float for more than 30 minutes except by permission of the harbormaster. However, dinghies, tenders and other auxiliary vessels less than 12 feet in length, used by mooring holders or transient boaters, may be tied up at the sides of undedicated floats at public landings for up to four hours while the owners thereof are purchasing goods and services. No such auxiliary vessel shall block the head of a float or interfere with permitted activities. The harbormaster may permit the seasonal tie-up of dinghies, tenders or other auxiliary vessels less than 12 feet in length at portions of any public landing so designated by the waterways board, provided that the fee set forth in subsection (g) of this section has been paid. Such permitted vessel shall be marked by an official sticker on their transoms. 
(c)  Conducting business or soliciting. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business, including vending on or from a public landing. The sale of tickets or the solicitation of passengers in any other manner for boat or fishing trips from any public landing is prohibited. However, any person operating a harbor sail, ferry, excursion vessel, vessel livery or party fishing vessel but maintaining a wharf headquarters or principal place of business elsewhere, may use a public landing as a port-of-call and may discharge or take-on passengers. The vessels engaged in such ventures shall not lie at any float at a public landing longer than shall be ordinarily and reasonable necessary for their occupants, passengers or customers to board or alight therefrom, and shall not block or otherwise interfere with other permitted activities. 
(d)  Other prohibited activities. No person shall clean fish, or leave ropes, lobster pots, barrels, rocks, bricks, boards or any other material on any public landing, or launching ramps, floats or piers thereof, for longer than is reasonable necessary in the act of loading or unloading the same onto or from vessels, unless authorized by the harbormaster. No person shall load or unload lobster pots, bait, or other gear on or from any public landing, or floats, wharfs or piers thereof, except those designated by the waterways board. No vessels, vehicles or trailers may be stored on any public landing. 
(e)  Encroachment. No person shall encroach upon a public landing in any way. 
(f)  Restrictions on hours. Stone Pier and Long Wharf shall be closed to prohibit all activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. Any use of this area between the prohibited hours shall constitute trespassing, a violation of section 14-6. Any person who violates said ordinance shall be subject to arrest under section 14-6 and/or fined pursuant to section 1-14. The city will use reasonable and practicable means to inform the public of such curfew. Further, this section is not intended to conflict with or supersede the authority of the conservation commission or any rules enacted by them under their M.G.L. c. 40, § 8C, powers. 
(g)  Fees. The annual fee for the seasonal tie-up of dinghies, tenders or other auxiliary vessels, less than 12 feet in length, at designated areas of public landings shall be $100.00. 
(h)  All vessels shall be removed from public floats at Cripple Cove and Lobster Cove by November 1 and Magnolia Pier by September 15 unless otherwise authorized by the Harbormaster. Any vessels left beyond September 15 and November 1 deadlines shall be assessed $25.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 16-1996, § J, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 6-1999, § I, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 2017-223, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 2018-026, 2-27-2018)  
Sec. 10-53. - Use of public ramp at Dun Fudgin. 
(a)  The fees for launching vessels at the Dun Fudgin public access ramp shall be as follows and as pursuant to M.G.L. c. 21A, § 2(8) and 320 CMR 2.00: 
(1)  Daily fee for all users, except commercial boat haulers, per vessel launched: $8.00. 
(2)  Season pass for any vessel per season: $75.00. 
(3)  Daily fee for commercial boat haulers, per vessel launched: $35.00. 
(4)  Season pass for commercial boat haulers, per season: $350.00 
(b)  Failure to pay fee as posted shall result in the issuance of a violation as specified in section 10-21 and section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 31-1997, § I, 3-4-1997; Ord. of 4-16-2002(02), § I; Ord. of 6-10-2003(03), § I; Ord. No. 2017-223, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 10-54. - Use of city-owned commercial marinas—Reserved.  
Secs. 10-55—10-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OTHER WATERWAY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-80. - Federal and state jurisdiction. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with the jurisdiction of the federal government with respect to enforcement of the navigation, shipping, anchorage, and associated laws of the United States, or any lawful regulation or law of the commonwealth and its agencies. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-81. - Scuba and skin diving. 
(a)  Every scuba diver or group of scuba divers while swimming on or under the surface of the waters shall display for each diver or group of divers as a warning device to boat operators, a diver's flag, so called, constructed of rigidly supported material at least 12 inches by 15 inches in area of red background with a white diagonal stripe. Such diver's flag shall be displayed on a boat or surface float and shall extend a minimum distance of three feet from the surface of the water. Divers shall remain in an area within 100 feet of such displayed diver's flag while at or near the surface of the water. A boat operator within sight of a diver's flag shall proceed with caution and within a radius of 100 feet of such flag shall proceed at a speed not to exceed three miles per hour. 
(b)  Distance from buoys. The diver shall maintain a distance of at least 25 feet and stay clear when vessels are hauling traps in the immediate area. 
(c)  Prohibition. The harbormaster may prohibit scuba or skin diving in areas within the city waterways where such diving cannot, in the harbormaster's opinion, be carried out safely without undue inconvenience to vessel operations. 
(d)  Beach regulations. Scuba or skin divers must comply with beach regulations promulgated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 2016-192, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-82. - Lobstering. 
No lobstering by any method shall be allowed in designated mooring areas, or within the confines of harbor channels or travel lanes in and out of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-83. - Fishing vessels unloading fish. 
Fishing vessels unloading fish, by use of open containers, such as mesh or canvas baskets, at piers in the city, shall place a net of sufficient size and mesh between the vessel and the pier or wharf to prevent fish from falling into the harbor waters and polluting same. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-84. - Demolishing a pier, wharf or building along the waterfront. 
Anyone demolishing a pier, wharf or buildings adjacent to or extending into the city's waterways shall install a boom around the pier, wharf or buildings for the purpose of containing debris, before commencing demolition. If said boom extends into navigable waters it shall display warning flags during daylight hours and warning lights during periods of darkness. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-85. - Littering and pollution. 
(a)  General prohibition. No person shall throw or deposit, intentionally or otherwise, in the city's waterways any litter, rubbish, filth, human waste, petroleum products, plastics, fuel or lubricating oil, fish oil or other greasy substance, dead animals or fish, fish waste, or any other foul or offensive substance. The term "litter" shall include, but not be limited to: bottles, glass, cans, wood, trash, tires, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, tuna heads, trees, brush and grass clippings. 
(b)  Discharge of oils. No land-based concern or vessel shall discharge, intentionally or otherwise, in the city's waterways oil in any of its forms: animal; vegetable; or mineral. 
(c)  Pumping engine rooms and bilges. No owner, operator or crew member of a vessel located in the city's waterways shall pump overboard engine room bilge water or engine compartment bilge water containing petroleum products or throw overboard any crankcase or lubricating oil or petroleum products except in extreme emergencies such as to prevent a vessel from sinking. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993)  
Sec. 10-86. - Vessel operation. 
(a)  Speed limit. No vessel shall exceed five miles per hour or cause a disturbing wake within the confines of mooring or anchorage areas and other areas posted by the harbormaster. 
(b)  Swimming areas. No person shall operate a vessel including jet skis, within 150 feet of any beach or swimming area without the permission of the harbormaster. 
(c)  Beaches. No vessel or watercraft shall be launched, landed or operated on life-guarded public beaches. 
(d)  Water skiers, aquaplanes, etc. No person shall operate a vessel towing water skiers, aquaplanes or similar devices within 300 feet of any beach or swimming area. 
(e)  Operation near scuba or skin divers. No person shall operate a power vessel in excess of three miles per hour when within 100 feet of a diver or his flag or marker. No person shall operate a power vessel within 50 feet of a diver or his flag or marker unless said vessel is being operated by a person identified with, working with, or rendering assistance to such scuba or skin diver. 
(Ord. No. 17-1993, 12-14-1993; Ord. of 4-12-2005, § I)  
Sec. 10-87. - Harbormaster patrol details. 
(a)  The harbormaster shall have the authority to conduct details for marine events such as but not limited to, bridge construction, movie or commercial work, construction of waterfront property, and marine permitted events requiring a safety/security boat. 
(b)  The harbormaster shall charge a fee of $65.00 per hour for the use of a vessel and one operator. In the event that two operators are required, an additional fee of $25.00 per hour will be charged to the permittee. 
(c)  Hourly rates are as follows: 1—4 hours a flat fee of $260.00; 4—8 hours $520.00; 8—12 hours $780.00. 
(Ord. No. 2016-220, 11-22-2016)  
Chapter 11 - HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT VENDORS AND SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sale, distribution of "silly string" prohibited, § 14-12; secondhand goods, ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-084, adopted May 12, 2015, changed the title of Ch. 11 from "Hawkers, Peddlers and Transient Vendors" to "Hawkers, Peddlers, Transient Vendors and Special Events," as set out herein. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 54-96, § I, adopted Dec. 10, 1996, amended former chapter 11, §§ 11-1—11-10, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-5-83, §§ 23-1—23-9; Ord. of 4-11-89, § I; Ord. No. 24-1991, § I, 7-9-91; Ord. of 4-27-92, § I; Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 54-96, uncodified Ord. Nos. 27-95, § I, adopted 4-18-95; and 44-95, § I, adopted 11-14-95 amended the chapter in its entirety. 
State Law reference— Transient merchants, hawkers and peddlers, M.G.L. c. 101, § 1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disabled veteran shall mean the same as defined in MGL c. 31, § 1. 
Farmer's market is a public market for the primary purpose of connecting and mutually benefitting Massachusetts farmers, communities and shoppers while promoting and selling products grown and raised by participating farmers. 
A proposed farmers market must meet the minimum qualification for Massachusetts Farmers' Markets as defined by the Massachusetts Department of Agricultural Resources (MDAR) that include, without limitation, two or more farmers primarily selling products that they grew, produced or raised; set hours of regularly scheduled operation; products that are clearly labeled as to origin; and written rules that govern the operation of the farmers market that 1) assure its primary purpose is to provide a direct marketing opportunity for Massachusetts farmers, foresters and fisheries, 2) addresses the terms and conditions of sales, including pricing and labeling, vendor eligibility and product source, and compliance by all vendors with local, state and federal laws and regulations, 3) include a written grievance procedure, and 4) address market and vendor liability, including any insurance requirements. 
Included in this definition are state licensed farm-wineries and fresh fish caught by local fishermen. 
All vendors participating in a farmer's market covered by this definition are exempt as vendors under section 11-14(a). 
Any other vendors participating in the farmer's market must obtain a local vendors license. 
Farmers markets are not included under zoning ordinance use schedule, "Open Uses," section 2.3.3 (1) and (2). 
Farmers' markets must comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
Hawker and peddler means any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation travels by foot, automobile, or any other type of conveyance, town to town or place to place in the same town, taking or attempting to lease or take orders for retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services including, but without limiting, the selling, distribution, exposing for sale or soliciting orders for magazines, books, periodicals or other articles of any nature, the contracting of all home improvements, or for services to be performed in the future whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for retail, sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payment on such retail sales or whether he is soliciting contributions for any purposes. 
Schedule of fees means any fee schedule or list of fees as periodically updated and provided by the city clerk's office. 
Special event means an event that is open to the general public which may be held on public or private property, including city streets and may feature entertainment, amusements, food and beverages. The event may be classified as a road race, bike ride, bike race, parade, walkathon or festival. 
Temporary or transient business means any exhibition, sale, rental, lease or services of goods, wares, or merchandise which is carried on in a tent, booth, building or other structure, unless such place is open for business during usual business hours for a period of at least 12 consecutive months. 
Transient vendor means any person, either principal or agent, who engages in a temporary or transient business in the commonwealth, selling goods, wares or merchandise either in one locality or traveling from place to place. 
Vendors includes hawkers and peddlers, transient vendors and persons who sell or offer for sale services including, but not limited to, face painting, photographers, etc. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. of 12-7-2010(01); Ord. No. 2015-084, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-021, 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, generally § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, M.G.L. c. 101, § 13.  
ARTICLE II. - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 11-2. - License/permit required. 
No vendor shall sell goods, wares, merchandise or services, as prohibited by M.G.L. c. 101, § 16. No vendor shall sell goods, wares, merchandise or services unless duly licensed by the director of standards of the commonwealth and/or permitted by the city licensing commission except for those articles permitted to be sold without a license under M.G.L., c. 101, § 17. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 11-3. - Local license/permit requirement for fixed vending locations; procedure to obtain. 
(a)  Anyone either principal or agent that sells from a fixed location and not licensed or required to be licensed under the definition in M.G.L. c. 101 as a transient vendor or hawker and peddler must first procure a permit from the local licensing authority for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise allowed to be sold under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 101, § 16. A local permit is required for vendor holding only a state license. 
(b)  Applicants for a fixed location permit for those areas established by this chapter within the city, shall follow the sealed bid procedure, as outlined in subsection (c) of this section. The cost for such permit shall be not less than $200.00 annually with no maximum, established by the city council. Permits will be issued for up to six specific locations throughout the city, as approved by the city council. The city council shall have the right to adopt and implement further lawful regulations and restrictions consistent with this article. 
(1)  Prior to bidding for a fixed location, a vendor shall be required to provide proof of valid, current hawkers and peddlers license and proof that they are a disabled veteran as defined in section 11-1. 
(2)  Vendors shall disclose general scope of sales. 
Approved permits and assigned locations shall be chosen by sealed bid procedure by the city's purchasing department on or before the first business day in February, 9:00 a.m., of each year. 
(c)  Sealed bid procedure will be as follows: Sealed bids will be submitted to the city's purchasing department following public notice and from the first secular day in January to the last business day in January, each year. Further, all bids received to be opened by the purchasing department, will be accompanied by a certified or cashier's check in the amount of the bid, payable to the city. Unsuccessful bidders' checks will be returned immediately following the bid opening. The sealed bid will be date and time stamped in the purchasing department. The purchasing department will open the sealed bids and if there is a tie between two or more vendors on the bid amount, then the bidder/vendor who is a disabled veteran shall be given preference over all other bidders provided they meet all other bid requirements. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. of 12-7-2010(01); Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 11-4. - Identification required. 
All fixed vendors operating within the city shall be required to prominently display a laminated permit, obtained from the office of the city clerk, which provides the name and address of, and bears a recent photograph of permittee. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 11-5. - Fixed vending; site specific locations (six). 
(a)  The following are specific locations for vending: 
(1)  Washington Street. Ten feet north from its intersection with Poplar Street. 
(2)  Washington Street. Water side at Plum Cove Beach. 
(3)  Western Avenue. Water side between the intersection with Middle Street and the Public Landing east of Middle Street, site. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Visitor's center parking lot, Stage Fort Park. 
(6)  Rogers Street. In front of the Fitz H. Lane parking lot and at the southwest corner of the east entrance to Harbor Loop. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Rogers Street. Twenty-five feet from its intersection with Harbor Loop at the southwest corner of the west entrance to Harbor Loop. 
(b)  Measurements will be taken to ensure the locations are site, specific and all fixed vending sites will have a sign posted "vendor parking only." 
(c)  Should a fixed vendor location established under this section be located in an area designated as a no parking area, pursuant to chapter 22, the no parking prohibition shall not apply to the fixed vendor location. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 18-1999, § I, 8-10-1999; Ord. of 11-9-2010(01); Ord. of 12-7-2010(01); Ord. of 3-22-2011(03); Ord. No. 2018-201, 11-27-2018)  
Sec. 11-6. - Conduct of business. 
All vendors shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)  No vendor shall cry his wares to the disturbance of the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the city. 
(2)  All vendors shall operate from carts which are neat and clean and do not leak. No vendor shall pitch a tent in addition to their cart or vehicle for the purpose of selling their wares at fixed vendor site. All food vendors operating mobile food units or push carts as regulated by 105 CMR 590.052(I) shall obtain the board of health inspection/permit prior to any sales. 
(3)  All vendors shall clearly and prominently post prices for all foods, beverages, goods, merchandise and services offered for sale. 
(4)  No vendor shall sell goods, wares, merchandise or services from a fixed location on private land without the written permission of the owner of private land. Such written permission shall be produced upon request of the licensing commission, police, sealer of weights and measures or building inspector. Said vendor shall comply with the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(5)  All hawkers and peddlers, except those permitted for a fixed location by the licensing commission under section 11-3 or those permitted by the special events committee under section 11-10, shall be moving at all times other than when servicing a customer. For vendors on foot or animal, moving shall be walking in a normal manner along a street, path or way with all goods, wares, merchandise or services. For vendors operating from vehicles, moving requires the vehicle to be driven along a street, path or way, stopping only to service customers and allow traffic to pass. 
(6)  No one shall sell or offer for sale on any public street, way or public place in the city, within 2,000 feet of any school in the city, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(7)  Hawkers, peddlers and transient vendors shall provide suitable receptacles for the placement of any trash and litter that may be expected to result from the sale of their wares and shall remove said trash and litter. 
(8)  Each permit or license, fixed or moving shall be a person-specific permit or license. 
(9)  All permits and licenses shall be kept with the vendor in a visible location at all times. 
(10)  There shall be no subleasing of site specific vendor locations. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. of 12-7-2010(01); Ord. No. 2018-201, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 11-7. - Business prohibited between certain hours. 
(a)  No vendor shall sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, services or merchandise, including publications, magazines, and books, or solicit subscriptions for publications, magazines, or books, in the city between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except that a duly licensed ice cream vehicle may sell or offer for sale any ice cream products from his vehicle in the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided he shall not use any sounding device between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Fixed vendors shall be exempt from prohibited hours during special events. 
(b)  Door-to-door solicitations require pre-approval by the chief of police; no door-to-door vendor shall sell or offer for sale their goods, wares services or merchandise door-to-door after 6:00 p.m. 
The usage of all public parking spaces must adhere to the Code of Ordinances and shall be allowed during business hours only. 
(c)  Fixed vendors may continue to sell or offer for sale their goods, wares, services or merchandise from their fixed locations during special events. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2018-201, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Sale, distribution or use of Silly String prohibited, § 14-12; secondhand goods, ch. 19; street, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Hawkers and peddlers, M.G.L. c. 101, § 13 et seq.  
Sec. 11-8. - Vendors prohibited upon certain streets, areas. 
Vendors are prohibited from selling upon the following streets, and all public property including but not limited to parks, playgrounds, sidewalks, grassy areas and beaches within the city except at those fixed locations specified in section 11-5 and special event locations approved in conformance with section 11-10. 
(1)  Nautilus Road. 
(2)  Beach Road. 
(3)  Bass Avenue. 
(4)  Harbor Road. 
(5)  Salt Island Road. 
(6)  Witham Street. 
(7)  Rockport Road. 
(8)  Essex Avenue. 
(9)  Manuel Lewis Road. 
(10)  Centennial Avenue. 
(11)  Western Avenue. 
(12)  Rogers Street. 
(13)  Main Street. 
(14)  Pleasant Street. 
(15)  Prospect Street. 
(16)  Railroad Avenue. 
(17)  Washington Street. 
(18)  Lincoln Avenue. 
(19)  Elderly housing complexes. 
(20)  Beaches. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2018-201, 11-27-2018)  
Sec. 11-9. - Revocation and expiration of permit. 
(a)  Any permit granted by the licensing commission and/or the city clerk's office under this chapter may be revoked by the licensing commission and/or the city clerk's office for good cause after reasonable notice to the permittee and a hearing upon the grounds of the revocation. Any permittee who violates any provisions of this article on three occasions shall be deemed to have provided sufficient cause for revocation of that permit. Unless sooner revoked, any permit granted by the licensing commission under this section shall be valid for the stated period and upon expiration shall revert to the city licensing commission. 
(b)  The enforcing agent shall be the police department, the health department and/or the building department. Said enforcing agent shall have the authority to issue tickets with fines consistent with this chapter. 
(c)  The police department, the health department and/or the building department shall have the authority to remove and/or shut down vendors who are in violation of this chapter; the police department shall also have the authority to arrest vendors who are in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 11-10. - Special events; transient vendors; parades. 
(a)  There shall be a special events committee comprised of the following city staff: the city clerk or his designee, the building inspector or his designee, the department of public works director or his designee, the chief of police or his designee, the fire chief or his designee, the emergency medical services director, the health department food inspector, the harbormaster or his designee and the community development director or his designee. The committee shall meet monthly and shall post notices of its meetings. 
(b)  The special events committee shall review all special events applications and shall assist applicants with any necessary approvals including approvals by the city council. The committee may in its own discretion refer any application to the city council for consideration. If city council approval is required due to the proposed closure of any road, the application shall be referred directly to the planning & development committee who shall have the authority to approve the special event permit. 
(c)  City sanctioned special events/parades shall be designated with restricted vending areas based on public safety considerations. Transient vendor permits shall be approved by the city clerk's office and the chief of police. For the purpose of this article, special events/parades shall be limited to: 
(1)  Fishtown Horribles Parade. 
(2)  St. Peters Fiesta Procession. 
(3)  Labor Day fireworks. 
(4)  Middle Street Walk. 
(5)  Gloucester Schooner Festival. 
(6)  Sidewalk Bazaar. 
(7)  Downtown block parties. 
(8)  All annual city council approved events. 
(d)  No vending shall be allowed on the Memorial Day Parade route. 
(e)  No vending shall be allowed within 300 feet of a cemetery within the city during Memorial Day or other special observance ceremony. 
(f)  The special events committee and/or the licensing commission may recommend and the city council may approve additional special events, parades relevant to this section. 
(g)  Forty-five days prior to any event, the event organizing committee shall submit their application for a special event permit, an application for transient vendor permits and a list of said transient vendors along with all applicable application fees to the city clerk's office for referral to and review by the special events advisory committee for approval. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 86-1998, § I, 3-31-1998; Ord. No. 2015-084, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, amended § 11-10 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Fixed vendors during special events; parades" to "Special events; transient vendors; parades," as set out herein.  
Sec. 11-11. - Special event permit; transient vendor permit; fee. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued for the special event/parade date and/or rain date only in each calendar year by the special events committee. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued for one transient vendor in one location and cannot be duplicated or transferred. 
(c)  All applicants for permits must complete applications provided by the city clerk's office and the police department and pay all application fees to the special event organizer prior to receipt of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, amended § 11-11 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Permit required; fee" to "Special even permit; transient vendor permit; fee," as set out herein.  
Sec. 11-12. - Books, magazines and other publications; licensing, registration required. 
Before doing any business in the city, any hawker, peddler or transient vendor of magazines, publications, books, or magazine or book subscriptions must be duly licensed by the director of standards of the commonwealth. Furthermore, such a hawker, peddler or transient vendor must record his name and residence with the chief of police of the city and receive a record number and a solicitor residence with the chief of police of the city, which must be carried on his person at all times, in addition to any permits/licenses issued by the licensing commission or director of standards. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed former § 11-12 and renumbered former § 11-13 as § 11-12 as set out herein. Former § 11-12 pertained to special event permit fees for fixed vending locations and derived from Ord. No. 54-96, § I, adopted Dec. 10, 1996 and Ord. No. 85-1998, § I, adopted March 31, 1998.  
Sec. 11-13. - Meats, butter, certain other food products—Licensing. 
(a)  Required; exception. Before selling any meats, butter, cheese, fish and fresh fruit or vegetables, any hawker, peddler or transient vendor must either be duly licensed by the director of standards of the commonwealth or permitted by the licensing commission; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person who peddles only fish obtained by his own labor or his family or to any person who peddles only fruits, vegetables or other farm products produced or raised by himself or his family. 
(b)  Qualifications of applicant; inspection, sealing of weighing, measuring devices. The licensing commission shall have authority to grant a permit under this section to any person of good moral character. No such permit shall be issued until a certificate from the sealer of weights and measures stating that all weighing and measuring devices intended to be used have been duly inspected and sealed. The health department shall have authority to grant a food permit under this section for all food (including meat, butter and cheese) except fish, fruits, vegetables and honey. 
(c)  Fee; issuance. Any permit issued by the licensing commission under this section shall be issued by and signed by the city clerk, as clerk of the commission, upon payment of a permit fee. Every hawker, peddler and transient vendor, so permitted shall be assigned a number by the city clerk, who shall keep a record of all permits issued. 
(d)  Revocation. Any permit granted by the licensing commission under this section may be revoked by the commission for good cause after reasonable notice to the permittee and a hearing upon the grounds for revocation. The use, or possession with intent to use, by any person permitted under this section by the licensing commission, of any false or unsealed weighing or measuring device shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of that permit. 
(e)  Expiration. Unless sooner revoked, any permit granted by the licensing commission under this section shall expire one year from March 1 in each year. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed former § 11-12 and renumbered former §§ 11-13 and 11-14 as §§ 11-12 and 11-13, as set out herein. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to permit such hawkers and peddlers, M.G.L. c. 101 § 17; municipal authority to impose permit fee on hawkers and peddlers, M.G.L. c. 101, § 22.  
Sec. 11-14. - Same—Inspection of products. 
Any meats, butter, cheese, fish and fresh fruit or vegetables offered for sale by a vendor must be inspected by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed former § 11-12 and renumbered former §§ 11-13—11-15 as §§ 11-12—11-14, as set out herein.  
Sec. 11-15. - Same—Penalty for possession, use of unsealed or false weighing or measuring device. 
Any hawker, peddler or transient vendor of any meats, butter, cheese, fish and fresh fruit or vegetables who use, or possesses with intent to use, any false, condemned or unsealed weighing or measuring device shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed: 
(1)  Fifty dollars for each use or possession of a false or condemned measuring device; and 
(2)  Twenty dollars for each use of an unsealed measuring device. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed former § 11-12 and renumbered former §§ 11-13—11-16 as §§ 11-12—11-15, as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Weights and measures, ch. 26.  
Sec. 11-16. - Temporary permits to sell articles for charitable purposes. 
The licensing commission shall, under such conditions as it may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged exclusively in charitable work, or to a part of any incorporated organization of veterans who served in the military services of the United States in time of war or insurrection, a special permit authorizing it, upon a particular day and for a charitable purpose named in such permit, to sell, through its accredited agents in the streets and other public places within the city, or in any designated part thereof, flags, badges, medals, buttons, flowers, souvenirs, and similar small articles; provided that no person under age 16 years of age shall be accredited as such agent, that each agent shall wear in plain sight while engaged in selling such articles, a badge provided by such organization or post and approved by the licensing commission, bearing upon it the name of such organization or post the date on which the permit is to be exercised, and that no such agent shall be authorized to make or attempt to make such sales in front of any private premises against the objection of the owner or occupant thereof. The exercise of the permits hereby provided for shall be subject to the provisions of all statutes, ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 54-96, § I, 12-10-1996; Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-044, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed former § 11-12 and renumbered former §§ 11-13—11-17 as §§ 11-12—11-16, as set out herein. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 101, § 33.  
Sec. 11-17. - Violations; fines. 
(a)  Penalties for failure to adhere to this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  The penalty for the first violation shall be a written warning. 
(2)  The penalty for the second violation shall be $50.00. 
(3)  The penalty for the third violation shall be $100.00. 
(4)  The penalty for the fourth and subsequent violations shall be $200.00. 
(5)  Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Further, any event organizing committee found to have misrepresented the number of transient vendors or failed to include all transient vendors in the list of transient vendors required under section 11-10 may be fined under subsection (a)(4) of this section, shutdown or barred from holding said event in the future. 
(Ord. No. 2019-044, 2-26-2019)  
Chapter 12 - MARSHLANDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Harbors and related tidal waters, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Improvement to low land and swamps, M.G.L. c. 252. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WETLANDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as Ord. No. 21-1990, adopted September 25, 1990 did not specify manner of codification, said ordinance has been deemed as superseding article II, §§ 12-10—12-21 by the editor. Formerly, article II pertained to the alteration of lands bordering waters and was derived from ordinances passed October 2, 1979, December 17, 1985, March 18, 1986 and May 6, 1986. 
 
Sec. 12-10. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Provide that land in the city subject to seasonal or periodic flooding as described in section 12-24 shall not be used in such a manner as to endanger the health or safety of the occupants thereof, or of the public generally, or to burden the public with costs resulting from individual choices of land use. 
(2)  Ensure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the watercourses within the city and to minimize the impact of coastal storms, in order to protect persons and property against the hazards of flood inundation. 
(3)  Protect the wetlands in the city by controlling activities deemed to have a significant effect either individually or cumulatively upon the following interests: 
a.  Public or private water supply; 
b.  Groundwater supply; 
c.  Flood control; 
d.  Storm damage prevention; 
e.  Prevention of pollution; 
f.  Protection of land containing shellfish; 
g.  Protection of fisheries; 
h.  Protection of wildlife habitat; 
i.  Prevention of erosion and sedimentation where erosion and sedimentation will have a detrimental effect upon wetland interests; 
j.  Protection of erosion and sedimentation where erosion and sedimentation provide a beneficial effect upon wetland interests. 
(4)  In determining whether activities will have a significant effect upon wetland interests, the commission may examine not only the effect of a particular activity but the cumulative effect of all activities contained within a resource area or the buffer zone within the applicant's proposal. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-11. - Statement of jurisdiction. 
(a)  Except as provided by this article or permitted by the Gloucester Conservation Commission (the "commission") no person shall remove, fill, dredge, alter or build upon or within any resource areas or the buffer zone. 
(b)  The following areas, also referred to as resource areas, are subject to protection under this article: 
(1)  Any bank, any freshwater wetland, any coastal wetland, any beach, any dune, any flat, any marsh, or any swamp, bordering on the ocean, any estuary, any creek, any river, any stream, any pond or any lake. 
(2)  Land under any of the water bodies listed in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  Any bog, swamp, marsh or wet meadow, not otherwise included in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(4)  Land subject to tidal action. 
(5)  Land subject to coastal storm flowage. 
(6)  Land subject to flooding. 
(7)  Areas designated by the secretary of environmental affairs as areas of critical environmental concern (ACEC), including without limitation the Parker River/Essex Bay ACEC. 
(8)  Land extending 100 feet horizontally outward from the boundary of an ACEC (hereinafter called the upland edge). 
(9)  Vernal pools as defined in section 12-14. 
(10)  Isolated land subject to flooding which contains at least 1,000 cubic feet of water volume at least once annually with an average depth of at least six inches, whether flooded by surface water or rising groundwater. Isolated land subject to flooding lacks a buffer zone. 
(c)  The following activities are subject to regulation under this article: 
(1)  Any activity proposed or undertaken within a resource area identified in subsection (b) of this section, which will remove, fill, dredge or alter that area. 
(2)  Any activity proposed or undertaken within 100 feet horizontally outward from the boundary of any resource area identified in subsection (b)(1) and (2) of this section and within 200 feet horizontally outward from the upland edge (hereinafter called the buffer zone) which, in the judgment of the commission, will alter a resource area. With respect to an ACEC, it is emphasized that the commission's jurisdiction extends a total of 300 feet horizontally outward from the ACEC itself, i.e., a 100-foot resource area known as the upland edge, plus another 200-foot buffer zone. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 63-2000, § I, 5-23-2000)  
Sec. 12-12. - Interpretation of article. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Liberally construed in favor of the protection of the interests as specified in section 12-10. 
(2)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under federal or state law. 
(3)  In the event of any conflict between the provision of this article and the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and Regulations, the more protective measures will take priority. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-13. - Exceptions. 
The permit and application required by this article shall not be required for: 
(1)  Maintaining or repairing (but not substantially changing or enlarging, nor the destruction and removal of trees) the following: 
a.  A utility structure or facility, existing at the time of the adoption of this article, and used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph or other telecommunication services; or 
b.  A public or private way, existing at the time of the adoption of this article; or 
c.  A private building, existing at the time of the adoption of this article; 
provided with respect to the activities set forth in this subsection that the work conforms to the performance standards set forth in this article. 
(2)  Removal of debris, by hand, from a resource area provided that the work does not change width, depth or direction of flow of water, and that the work conforms to the performance standards adopted in this article. 
(3)  Emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety of the public, provided that: 
a.  The work is to be performed by or has been ordered to be performed by an agency of the commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; 
b.  Advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the commission prior to commencement of work or within 24 hours after commencement; 
c.  The commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency project; 
d.  The work is performed only for the time and place certified by the commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate the emergency; and 
e.  Within 21 days of commencement of an emergency project a permit application shall be filed with the commission for review as provided in this article. 
Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of the commission, the commission may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation measures. 
(4)  The following activities, when undertaken within the buffer zone or within the upland edge: 
a.  The planting, tending, maintaining and harvesting of commercial crops and household lawns and gardens; 
b.  Installation or repair of fences; 
c.  Mowing of fields; 
d.  Erection and removal of seasonal produce or flower stands; 
e.  Grazing of animals; 
provided, that the work with respect to the activities set forth in this subsection conforms to the performance standards set forth in this article. 
(5)  The application of pesticides, herbicides or chemical fertilizers undertaken within the buffer zone, and not undertaken: 
a.  In conjunction with an activity otherwise subject to regulation under this article; and 
b.  Provided that application of the pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers is done in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. 
(6)  Repair and maintenance of pile-supported structures, with a proper building permit issued by the building inspector, shall not require the application and permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 79-1998, § I, 2-17-1998)  
Sec. 12-14. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Alter shall include, without limitation, the following actions: 
(1)  Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate material of any kind; 
(2)  Changing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns and flood retention characteristics; 
(3)  Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table; 
(4)  Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade water quality; 
(5)  Driving piles or erecting buildings or structures of any kind; 
(6)  Placing of obstructions whether or not they interfere with the flow of water; 
(7)  Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees; 
(8)  Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, nutrient levels or, other physical or chemical characteristics of the water; 
(9)  Placing of fill, or removal of material which would alter elevation; 
(10)  Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater; 
(11)  Application of pesticides, herbicides, or chemical fertilizers. 
Area of critical environmental concern (ACEC) means areas so designated by the executive office of environmental affairs. 
Buffer zone means the area extending: 
(1)  100 feet horizontally outward from the resource areas set forth in section 12-11(b)(1) and (2); and/or 
(2)  200 feet horizontally from the resource areas set forth in section 12-11(b)(8). 
Cumulative means increasing in effect by successive additions. 
Freshwater wetlands shall have the meaning ascribed in paragraph 7 of the Wetlands Protection Act. Additionally hydric soils may also be used in determining the existence of freshwater wetlands. 
Hydric soils are defined as soils that in their undrained condition are saturated, flooded, or ponded long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that favor the growth and regeneration of hydrophytic vegetation. 
Resource area is an area identified as a resource area in section 12-11(b). 
Tree means a woody perennial plant with one main stem which at a height of five feet is over six inches in diameter. 
Upland edge means land ending 100 feet horizontally outward from the boundary of an ACEC. 
Vernal pool means any body of water which has been certified by the state natural heritage endangered species program as a vernal pool. 
(b)  The following words and phrases (as well as any others used in, but not defined in the article) shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the Wetlands Protection Act regulations (M.G.L. c 131 § 40 and 310 CMR): 
Act 	Coastal wetlands 	Significant 
Activity 	Conditions 	Stream 
Agriculture 	Determination 	Swamp 
Aquaculture 	Dunes 	Wet meadows 
Bog 	Person aggrieved 	Wildlife 
Wildlife habitat 	Work 	
 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-15. - Presumptions of significance, performance standards, and burden of proof. 
(a)  Presumption of significance. 
(1)  The commission will presume that each of the resource areas identified in section 12-11(b) is significant to one or more of the interests identified in section 12-10(3). 
(2)  These presumptions are rebuttable, i.e., the presumption may be overcome based on a clear showing by credible evidence that the activity in the resource area does not play a role in protection of said interests. 
(3)  In making its determination as to a resource area, the commission will employ the standards and presumptions contained in parts II and III of 310 CMR 10.00, wetlands protection, with the following amplifications: 
a.  Where a proposed activity involves the removing, filling, dredging or altering of any marsh, swamp, bog or wet meadow, the commission will presume that the areas are significant to the same interests as bordering vegetative wetlands, which are specified in 310 CMR 10.55(1). 
b.  Where a proposed activity involves the removing, filling, dredging or altering of the upland edge of an ACEC, the commission will presume that such area is significant to the following interests: flood control; prevention of storm damage; protection of land containing shellfish and fisheries; wildlife habitat; and prevention of pollution. 
(b)  Performance standards. 
(1)  When the commission allows work to be performed in an area that it has determined to be significant to the protection of the interests identified in section 12-10(3) it will require the work to meet certain performance standards. Performance standards are intended to identify the standard of care to which the applicant must adhere, in order to achieve the protection of the affected interests. 
(2)  Performance standards vary according to the resource area affected. The commission will employ the performance standards contained in parts II and III of 310 CMR 10.00 of the Act, with the following amplifications: 
a.  Where a proposed activity involves the removing, filling, dredging or altering of any marsh, swamp, bog or wet meadow, the commission will employ the performance standards which apply to bordering vegetative wetlands, which are specified in 310 10.55(4) of the Act. 
b.  Where a proposed activity involves the removing, filling, dredging or altering of the upland edge the performance standards below shall apply: 
1.  No vegetation (other than exiting lawns, flowers, vegetables, crops and ornamental shrubs) shall be cut within the upland edge. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be added to land within the upland edge. Impervious surfaces include, but may not be limited to, roads and driveways as well as structures. 
3.  No components of any drainage system or septic system shall be installed within 100 feet of the upland edge; that is, within 200 feet of the ACEC. 
c.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b. above, the commission may issue a wetlands permit authorizing work which results in the loss or alteration of a portion of the ACEC and/or the upland edge and/or the buffer zone for any upgrade to or replacement of an existing septic system required by the board of health, when the applicant can show that there is no reasonable alternative location on the lot for the proposed activity and that any adverse impacts will be minimized. 
d.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b)(2)b.2 and b.3 of this section, the commission may issue a wetlands permit permitting such work which results in the loss or alteration of a portion of the upland edge or buffer zone for any of the following: 
1.  Lots in existence prior to adoption of subdivision control in the city in 1961; 
2.  Lots either already approved under subdivision control law or protected under law from zoning changes because of the subdivision process; and 
3.  Lots endorsed by planning board in accordance with ANR procedures of M.G.L. c. 41 § 81P or plans for lots submitted to the planning board prior to the adoption of this article, when the applicant can show that there is no reasonable alternative location on the lot for the proposed activity and that any adverse impacts will be minimized. Notwithstanding these performance standards, it shall be noted that resource areas such as a coastal bank, land under a body of water (stream or pond) or bordering vegetated wetland or marsh, bog or swamp may be contained within the upland edge. When this occurs on any given parcel, the more restrictive standards shall apply. 
A showing that the proposed activity will be limited to reconstruction within the same footprint of a building existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived will be sufficient to overcome this presumption. 
(3)  The performance standards contained in subsection (b)(2) of this section are minimum standards. Where these standards are not sufficient, in the commission's judgment, to protect the interests identified in section 12-10(3) of this article, the commission may impose such conditions as are necessary to provide the indicated level of protection, see section 12-20(a). 
(c)  Burden of proof. 
(1)  Any person who files a notice of intent to perform any work within the resource area or within the buffer zone has the burden of demonstrating to the commission: 
a.  That the area is not significant to the protection of any of the interests identified in section 12-10(3); or 
b.  That the proposed work will contribute to the protection of these interests by complying with the performance standards for the affected areas as established by section 12-15(b). 
(2)  Any person who requests the commission to regulate work taking place outside the commission's jurisdiction has the burden of demonstrating to the commission's satisfaction that the work is likely to alter a resource area. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. of 5-24-2011(01))  
Sec. 12-16. - Requests for determination of applicability and submission of notices of intent. 
(a)  Request for determination. Upon written application of any person, the commission shall make a written determination within 21 days as to whether this article applies to any land or work thereon. The commission shall accept the request for determination filed pursuant to the wetlands protection act, as an application under this article, and may require additional information to be answered as an addendum to the state's request for determination. 
(b)  Notice of intent. Any person desiring to perform any activity subject to section 12-11 and not described in section 12-12 shall file a notice of intent with the commission. The commission shall accept the notice of intent filed pursuant to the wetlands protection act as an application under this article, and may require additional information to be answered as an addendum to the state's notice of intent. 
(c)  Contents of notices of intent. The application shall include such information and plans as the commission determines necessary to describe the proposed activity, its impact on the environment, and its effect on the interests protected by this article. When the commission or its agent determines that an activity proposed in an application represents only a portion of a project, it may require information describing the entire project and its potential impact. 
(d)  Submittal of notice of intent. An application or notice of intent under this article shall be delivered by hand or sent by certified mail, receipt acknowledged to the commission, and shall be accompanied by the filing fee required in M.G.L. c. 131, § 40 and which is payable to the city, and an environmental assessment fee described in section 12-16(e). A notice of intent application may be filed before other permits, variances and approvals required by the city's zoning or subdivision control regulations or any other article or regulation have been obtained. 
(e)  Fees. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the number of interests presumed to be significant under the Act and potentially affected by the proposed action, as determined by the commission or its agent. The interests are described in section 12-10(3). The current fee structure is as follows: 
Residential construction 	Amount per interest 
	Number of lots and/or units 	
		One to five 	$50.00 
		Six to nine 	100.00 
		Ten to 19 	150.00 
		20 to 49 	200.00 
		50 or more 	250.00 
Commercial and industrial construction 	
	Construction cost* 	
		Less than $99,999.00 	$50.00 
		$100,000.00—249,999.00 	100.00 
		$250,00.00—499,999.00 	150.00 
		$500,000.00—999,999.00 	200.00 
		$1,000,000.00 or more 	250.00 
 
Note— * Fees are based on a $120.00 per square foot construction cost as determined by the building inspector's office. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. of 6-11-2002(02), § I; Ord. of 6-25-2002(03), § I)  
Sec. 12-17. - Hearing on permit applications. 
The commission shall open a public hearing on any notice of intent application within 21 days of its receipt. The commission shall combine its hearing under this article with the hearing conducted under M.G.L. c. 131, § 40, the Wetlands Protection Act. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the commission at the expense of the applicant, not less than five days prior to the hearing, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by mailing a notice, to the applicant, the city clerk, and abutters and abutters to the abutters, any such notice to be expedited by the city clerk's office or the planning division, and to such other persons as the commission may determine. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-18. - Effect of insufficient information. 
If the commission finds that the information submitted by the applicant is not sufficient: 
(1)  To describe the site, the work or the effect of the work on the interests identified in section 12-10; or 
(2)  To sustain the burden of proof as to the protection of those interests, as described in section 12-10(3); then this finding shall be sufficient cause for the commission to deny a permit or, in the commission's discretion, to continue the hearing to another date to enable the applicant or others to submit additional information. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-19. - Review by other officials. 
(a)  When applicable, the conservation commission may transmit copies of any application described in section 12-16(a) to other city officials and boards as follows for review and comment: 
(1)  Board of health; 
(2)  City engineer; 
(3)  City council; 
(4)  Harbormaster; 
(5)  Planning board; 
(6)  Shellfish advisory commission; 
(7)  Tree warden; 
(8)  Zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  If a project applicant is required by the executive officer of environmental affairs to prepare an environmental impact report, (EIR) and if that EIR scope includes impacts on any resource area, the commission may consider the EIR in any decision pursuant to this article. The commission shall have the authority to continue its hearing under this article until the final EIR is certified by the secretary of environmental affairs as complying with the Massachusetts Environmental Policy Act. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-20. - Permit—Issuance; denial; expiration and modification. 
(a)  Issuance of permit. If, after a public hearing, the commission determines that the activities which are the subject of the application will or are likely to have a significant effect upon the interests protected by this article, the commission shall, within 21 days of the close of the hearing, issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit after making such a determination, the commission shall impose conditions which it deems necessary or desirable to protect those interests, and all work shall be performed in accordance with the conditions. If the commission determines that the area which is the subject of the application is not significant to the interests protected by this article, it shall issue a permit within 21 days of the close of the public hearing. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be signed by a majority of the commission and a copy thereof shall be sent forthwith to the applicant and to the commonwealth department of environmental protection. No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken before the permit issued by the commission with respect to such work has been recorded in the registry of deeds (or, if the work is proposed upon registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the district in which the land lies). 
(b)  Denial of permit. The commission is authorized to deny a permit for the following reasons: failure to submit necessary information and/or plans requested by the commission; failure to meet the design specifications, performance standards, and other requirements in the regulations of the commission; for failure to avoid or prevent significant or cumulative adverse effects upon the interests protected by this article; or when the commission determines that no conditions are adequate to protect those interests. The commission shall consider any demonstrated hardship to be suffered by the applicant because of denial, but demonstration of hardship shall not limit the commission's authority to deny a permit or impose conditions. No person shall submit an application which is substantially similar to one which has been denied until a period of two years, commencing with the date the denial was issued, has lapsed. The commission shall have the sole authority to determine if there are sufficient changes to an application to allow its resubmittal within two years. 
(c)  Expiration and modification of a permit; issuance of certificates of compliance. A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance; all work under a permit must be completed within that time period. Any permit may be renewed, in the discretion of the commission, for an additional one-year period, provided that a written request for renewal is received by the commission at least 30 days prior to expiration. 
(1)  The commission may revoke or modify any permit issued under this article for cause, after notice to the permit holder and after a public hearing. The permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity to participate in the hearing. 
(2)  The commission, in its discretion, may combine the permit or other disposition of an application issued under this article with its action under the Wetlands Protection Act. 
(3)  Upon completion of work permitted under the wetlands permit, the applicant must apply to the conservation commission for a certificate of compliance. If the commission determines that the work has been completed in accordance with the wetlands permit, it shall issue a certificate of compliance. 
(d)  Variances. No variances shall be allowed for any proposed work within a designated flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-21. - Same—Security. 
As part of a permit issued under this article, in addition to any security required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the commission may require that the performance and observance of the conditions imposed by the permit be secured wholly or in part by one or more of the methods described as follows: 
(1)  By proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities or other undertaking of financial responsibility determined by the commission to be sufficient and payable to the city upon default; 
(2)  By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of the city, whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot may be conveyed. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-22. - Remedies to commission's action on permit. 
A person aggrieved by the conservation commission's denial or issuance of a permit, with or without conditions, may pursue his remedies under M.G.L. c. 249 § 4. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-23. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  The commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of ensuring that conditions contained within permits are met and to inspect for reported violations of this article, provided that such persons have not been denied access by the property owner or his representative. 
(b)  The commission shall have the authority to enforce this article, its regulations, and permits issued thereunder by violation notices, administrative orders and penalties, and civil and criminal actions. Upon request of the commission, the city general counsel may take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the commission, the chief of police may take legal action for enforcement under criminal law. City boards and officers, including any police officer or other office having police powers, shall have authority to assist the commission in enforcement. 
(c)  Any persons who violate any provision of this article, any regulations promulgated by the commission or any permits issued pursuant to this article, may be subject to an administrative penalty. 
(d)  The commission shall have the authority to impose an administrative penalty, after holding a public hearing and after having given written notice to the party, under the conditions as follows: 
(1)  Anyone who, alone or acting together with other persons, builds upon, fills, removes, discharges into, dredges or alters land in a buffer zone or resource area without a city wetlands permit but who obtains a permit after being so notified, or complies with conditions set by the conservation commission in the enforcement order, may be fined up to $200.00 for each separate violation. 
(2)  Anyone who, alone or acting together with other persons, builds upon, fills, removes, discharges into, dredges or alters land in a buffer zone or resource area without a city wetlands permit and who after receiving written notice, fails to apply for a permit or comply with the conditions, set by the commission, in the enforcement order, may be assessed an administrative penalty of up to $2,000.00 for each separate violation. 
(3)  Anyone who, alone or acting together with other persons, builds upon, fills, discharges into, removes, dredges or alters land in a buffer zone or resource area in a manner contrary to the conditions contained within a permit may be assessed an administrative penalty of up to $3,000.00 for each separate violation. 
(4)  Anyone who, alone or acting together with other persons builds upon, fills, discharges into, removes, dredges or alters a resource area in which significant damage has occurred to the wetland or where the damage can only be partly corrected may be assessed an administrative penalty of up to $4,000.00 for each separate violation. An example of significant damage may include, but not be limited, to instances where the available remedies require an involved procedure such as restoration or replication of a wetland or the removal of a structure. 
The term "separate violations" means the same action done more than once which violates this article or taking several actions at the same time each of which violate this article in a different way. An example of the first instance would be to bring fill into a wetland on more than one occasion. An example of the second instance would be to dredge a pond, install a culvert across a brook and fill a wetland all without a permit. This would be three separate violations even if they occurred on the same day. The term "separate violations" may include, but is not limited to, these examples. 
(e)  In addition to other authorities provided herein for the conservation commission to take enforcement action or impose administrative penalties, the commission may through majority vote or ratification of the recommendation of its conservation agent enforce noncriminally the provisions of this chapter by way of the ticketing procedures set forth in M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D and section 1-15 of [this Code] the conservation agent shall be deemed to be enforcing officer for this section. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 2017-102, 5-23-2017; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 12-24. - Preacquisition violations. 
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate upon which work has been done in violation of the provisions of this article or in violation of any order issued under this article shall forthwith comply with any such order to restore such real estate to its condition prior to any such violation; provided, however, that no action, civil or criminal, shall be brought against such person unless such action is commenced within three years following the recording of the deed or the date of the death by which such real estate was acquired by such person. The city shall, if necessary, petition for relief in a court having equity jurisdiction to restrain a violation of this article and to enter such orders as it deems necessary to remedy such violation. An owner or occupant of property which may be affected by the removal, filling, dredging or altering pursuant to this article may likewise petition for such relief in a court having equity jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 12-25. - Conservation commission to promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate chapter. 
(a)  After due notice and public hearing, the conservation commission may promulgate procedural rules and regulations to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. Failure by the commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this article. 
(b)  The commission may adopt additional definitions not inconsistent with section 12-14(a) pursuant to its regulations. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-26. - Adoption of wetlands maps. 
Wetlands maps prepared by the city planning division from 1977 to 1978 on the 40,000 series city base maps showing all wetlands, the area of critical environmental concern, and the 100-foot buffer zone, are on file at the planning office. These maps are to be used as a guideline for the commission and the public and are not jurisdictional. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Sec. 12-27. - Floodplain area boundaries and base flood elevation data. 
The floodplain areas are herein established which include all special flood hazard areas within the City of Gloucester designated as Zone A, AE, or VE on the Essex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Essex County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the City of Gloucester are panel numbers 25009C294G, 25009C0309G, 25009C0311G, 25009C0312G, 25009C0313G, 25009C0314G, 25009C0316G, 25009C0317G, 25009C0318G, 25009C0319G, 25009C0338G, 25009C0432G, 25009C0451G, 25009C0452G, 25009C0453G, 25009C0454G, 25009C0456G, 25009C0457G, 25009C0458G, 25009C0459G and 25009C0476G dated July 16, 2014. The exact boundaries of the Floodplain Areas may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Essex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2014. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the building inspector, city engineer and city planning offices. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990; Ord. of 5-22-2012(01); Ord. No. 2014-154, 5-13-2014)  
Sec. 12-28. - Severability. 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or determination which previously has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 21-1990, 9-25-1990)  
Chapter 13 - NOISE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 45-1995, adopted December 15, 1995, amended former ch. 13, §§ 13-1—13-15, in its entirety. Former ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 12-20-1983, arts. 1—9, and Ord. No. 24-1994, § I, 11-29-1994. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to control and abate noise from whatever source, M.G.L., c. 40, § 21(22); motor vehicle noise, M.G.L., c. 90, § 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary and excessive noises. Above certain levels, noise is detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry, and in the public interest, shall be systematically proscribed. It is the express intent of this city council to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce, the use, value and enjoyment of property, sleep and repose and the quality of the environment. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-2. - Definitions. 
All technical terminology used in this chapter and not defined herein shall be interpreted in conformance with American National Standards Institute Specifications (ANSI), section 1.1-1960, and section 1.4-1971. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
Administrator shall mean the building inspector or his authorized representative as enforcing agent. 
Ambient sound level shall mean passing sound associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from many sources, near and far. For the purpose of this chapter, ambient noise level is that sound level which is exceeded 90 percent of the time during a sound level survey, with sound level measurements taken every ten seconds during a period of time not less than 15 minutes. The ambient noise level will be determined at the approximate location and time of day at which a comparison with the alleged noise source is to be made. The sound level measurements for computing the ambient sound level will not include sounds produced by the alleged noise source or source property. 
Construction shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, demolition, substantial repair, alteration or similar action for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
dB(A) shall mean the sound level measured in decibels, using the "A" weighting network. 
District shall mean the land use districts to which the provisions of this chapter are applied. For the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  Residential district includes zoning districts designated in the city's current zoning ordinance as R-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-10, R-20, R-30, R-40 and R-80. 
(2)  Commercial district includes zoning districts designated in the city's current zoning ordinance as S, CCD, CB, VB, NB, EB, B-1, B-2, and B-3. 
(3)  Industrial district includes zoning districts designated in the city's current zoning ordinance as MI, GI, BP, I-1 and I-2. 
Emergency work shall mean work required to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities for providing or restoring immediately necessary utility service. 
Equipment shall mean any stationary or portable device or any part thereof capable of generating sound. 
Impulsive sound shall mean sound having the following qualities: the peak of the sound level is less than one second and short compared to the occurrence rate, the onset is abrupt, the decay is rapid, and the peak value exceeds the ambient level by more than ten dB(A). 
Motor vehicles. 
(1)  The term "motor vehicles" shall mean all vehicles constructed and designed for propulsion by power other than muscular power including any such vehicles when pulled or towed by another motor vehicle. 
(2)  The term "motor vehicles" shall not include: 
a.  Railroad and railway cars; 
b.  Vehicles operated by the system known as trolley motor or trackless trolley; 
c.  Vehicles running only upon rails or tracks; 
d.  Vehicles used for other purposes than the transportation of property and incapable of being driven at a speed exceeding 12 mph and which are used exclusively for the building, repair and maintenance of highways or designed especially for use elsewhere than on the travelled part of ways; 
e.  Wheelchairs owned and operated by invalids; 
f.  Vehicles which are operated or guided by a person on foot; 
f.  Motorized bicycles; 
g.  Aircraft; or 
h.  Watercraft. 
Noise shall mean the intensity, duration and character of sounds from any and all sources. 
Periodic sound shall mean sound having the following qualities: the sound level varies repetitively, with a period of one minute or less and the peak value is more than five dB(A) above the minimum value. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any entity, public or private. 
Property boundary shall mean the line at ground surface, which separates the real property owned, rented, or leased by one or more persons, from that owned, rented or leased by one or more other persons, and its vertical extension. 
Public highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained by the city or the state or other ways generally open to public passage, when any part thereof is generally open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right. 
Public nuisance noise shall mean any sound which unreasonably either annoys, injures, interferes with or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of an entire community or neighborhood or section thereof, although the extent of damage may be unequal. 
Pure tone component shall mean any sound having the following qualities: 
(1)  Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch, such as a whine, hum, buzz, or squeal; and 
(2)  Where the sound pressure level of the octave band containing the alleged pure tone component exceeds the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous octave bands by three decibels. An octave band is a segment of frequencies where the center frequency of each octave ban is located at one of the following frequencies (hertz): 31.5, 63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, 8,000, 16,000, 32,000 hertz. 
Real property shall mean an interest or aggregate of rights in land which is guaranteed and protected by law; for purposes of this chapter the term "real property" includes a leasehold interest. 
Receiving property shall mean real property within which sound originating from sources outside the property is received. 
Sound level meter shall mean a sound level measuring device, either type I or type II, as defined by the American National Standards Institute Specifications, section 1.4, 1971. 
Sound pressure level shall mean the weighted sound pressure level measured by the use of a metering characteristic and weighted as specified in American National Standards Institute Specifications, section 1.4, 1971. The sound pressure level of a sound expressed in decibels is 20 times the logarithm (to the base 10) of the ratio of the sound pressure to the reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals (a unit of pressure equal to 20 × 10 -6 Newton/meter 2 ). In the absence of any specific modifier, the level is understood to be that of a root mean-square pressure. 
Special construction vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is: 
(1)  Designed and used primarily for grading, paving, earth removing, and other construction work; 
(2)  Which is not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property on a public highway; and 
(3)  Which is only incidentally operated or moved over the highway. 
Use shall mean the nature of the occupancy, the type of activity, or the character and form of improvements to which land is devoted or may be devoted. 
Warning device shall mean any device intended to provide public warning of potentially hazardous, emergency or illegal activities, including but not limited to a burglar alarm or vehicle backup signal, but not including any fire alarm. 
Watercraft shall mean any contrivance, excluding aircraft, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation or recreation on water. 
Weekday shall mean any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday. 
Weekend means Saturday and Sunday or any legal holiday. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definition of motor vehicle, M.G.L. c. 90, § 1.  
Sec. 13-3. - Enforcement; remedies. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the administrator. 
(b)  Action pursuant to section 1-14 shall not be a bar to enforcement of this article by injunction or other appropriate remedy. The administrator is authorized and empowered to institute and maintain, in the name of the city, any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge or impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injury to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-4. - Measurement of sound. 
Measurement of sound for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be measured in dB(A) with a sound level meter in good operating condition. The point of measurement may be at any point within the receiving property. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-5. - Prohibited sound. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause sound, or for any person in possession of property to permit sound originating from the property, to intrude into the real property of another person whenever the sound exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-6. - Maximum permissible sound levels—Enumerated. 
For sound sources located within the city, the maximum permissible sound levels (dB(A)) are as follows: 
District of Sound Source 	District of Receiving Property 
	Residential 	Commercial 	Industrial 
(1) 	Residential 	55 	57 	60 
(2) 	Commercial 	57 	60 	65 
(3) 	Industrial 	60 	65 	70 
 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-7. - Same—Modifications. 
The maximum permissible sound levels established by section 13-6 shall be reduced or increased by the sum of the following: 
(1)  Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on weekends, the sound levels established by section 13-6 are reduced by ten dB(A) where the receiving property lies within a residential district of the city. 
(2)  For any source of sound which is periodic, which has a pure tone component, or which is impulsive and is not measured with an impulse sound meter, the levels established by section 13-6 shall be reduced by five dB(A); provided, however, that this five dB(A) penalty for the emission of sound having a pure tone component shall not be imposed on any electrical substation transformer. This does not apply to any re-replacement or new substation. 
(3)  For any source of sound which is of short duration, the levels established by section 13-6 are increased by: 
a.  Five dB(A) for a total of 15 minutes in any one-hour period; 
b.  Ten dB(A) for a total of five minutes in any one-hour period; or 
c.  15 dB(A) for a total of 1.5 minutes in any one-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-8. - Property that is zoned for more than one district. 
(a)  When a receiving property has been zoned for more than one district, the maximum permissible sound level shall be determined by the district of the sampling site where the sound level measurement was actually taken. In instances where the actual sampling site has been multizoned, the more sensitive district classification shall prevail for the purposes of this chapter, i.e., residential for residential/commercial, commercial for commercial/industrial, etc. 
(b)  Source properties that have been multizoned will be treated by the method of utilizing the more intensive classification; i.e., residential for residential/commercial and commercial for the commercial/industrial, etc. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-9. - Public nuisance noises. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound which has been determined a public nuisance noise. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-10. - Sounds exempt—During daytime hours. 
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of section 13-6 between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekends: 
(1)  Sounds originating from residential property relating to temporary projects for the maintenance or repair of homes, grounds, and appurtenances; 
(2)  Sounds created by discharge of firearms on authorized shooting ranges; 
(3)  Sounds created by lawfully conducted blasting; 
(4)  Sounds created by installation or repair of essential utility services; 
(5)  Sounds created by bells, chimes, or carillons, not operating for more than five minutes in any one hour; 
(6)  Sounds originating from officially sanctioned parades and other public events; 
(7)  Sounds created by construction equipment, including special construction vehicles, and emanating from temporary construction sites, if the receiving property is located in a residential district of the city. This exception is created with the stipulation that any equipment powered by internal combustion engines shall be equipped with a muffler in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-11. - Same—From nighttime reduction. 
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of section 13-7(1): 
(1)  A noise from existing electrical substation transformers; however, this does not apply to replacement or new substations; 
(2)  Noise from existing stationary equipment used in conveyance of water by a utility; however, this does not apply to new or replacement equipment which shall conform to this chapter; 
(3)  Sounds created by sources in industrial districts which, from December 20, 1980, have consistently operated in excess of 15 hours per day as a demonstrated routine or as a consequence of process necessity; provided, that the exemption shall only extend to five years after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Changes in working hours, which would increase the noise emitted under this exemption require the approval of the administrator in accordance with the rules adopted in section 13-13. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-12. - Same—At all times. 
The following sounds are exempt from the provisions of this article at all times: 
(1)  Sounds originating from aircraft in flight and sounds which originate at airports and are directly related to flight operations; 
(2)  Sounds created by safety and protective devices, such as relief valves, where noise suppression would defeat the safety release intent of the device; 
(3)  Sounds created by warning devices not operated continuously for more than 30 minutes per incident; 
(4)  Sounds created by fire alarms, emergency equipment, and emergency work necessary in the interests of law enforcement or of the health, safety or welfare of the community; 
(5)  Sounds created by auxiliary equipment on motor vehicles used for highway maintenance; 
(6)  Sounds created by the discharge of firearms in the course of lawful hunting activities; 
(7)  Sounds created by natural phenomena and unamplified human voices provided that this section shall not preclude any law enforcement officials in regard to appropriate response in the line of duty; 
(8)  Sounds created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; 
(9)  Sounds created by watercraft; 
(10)  Sounds created by motor vehicles are exempt from the maximum permissible sound levels of section 13-6 except those sounds prohibited by article II of this chapter and created by any motor vehicle located off ways open to public use shall be subject to the maximum permissible sound levels of section 13-6, when the sounds are received in a residential district of the city; 
(11)  Sounds created by construction equipment, including special construction vehicles, emanating from temporary construction sites, if the receiving property is located in a commercial or industrial district of the city. Any equipment powered by internal combustion engines shall be equipped with a muffler in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-13. - Special exception procedure. 
(a)  Any person who owns or is in possession of any property or use, or any process or equipment, may apply to the administrator for relief from the requirements of this article or rules or regulations promulgated hereunder governing the quality, nature, duration or extent of discharge of noise. In a proper case, the special exception may apply to all sources of a particular class or type. The application shall be accompanied by such information and data as required by the administrator. The administrator shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the application for and granting of such special exceptions including hearings and notice. Any special exception or renewal thereof shall be granted only for the minimum time period found to be necessary under the facts and circumstances. 
(b)  A special exception or its renewal shall not be a right of the applicant or holder thereof, but shall be at the reasonable discretion of the administrator. 
(c)  No special exception shall be declared pursuant to this section until the administrator has considered the relative interests of the applicant, other owners or possessors of property likely to be affected by the noise, and the general public. A technical or economic special exception may be declared only after a public hearing on due notice. The administrator may declare a special exception, if he finds that: 
(1)  The noise occurring or proposed to occur does not endanger public health or safety; and 
(2)  The applicant demonstrates that the criteria required for a temporary, technical or economic special exception under section 13-14 are met. 
(d)  Special exceptions, except temporary special exceptions, declared pursuant to this article may be renewed on terms and conditions and for periods which would be appropriate on the initial declaration of a special exception. No renewal shall be granted except on application made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the special exception. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by the denial, declaration, or the terms and conditions on the declaration of an application for a special exception or renewal of a special exception by the administrator may appeal such decision to the board of health under procedures contained in this article. 
(f)  Any person or source granted a special exception pursuant to the procedures of this section or on appeal shall be exempt from the maximum permissible sound levels established by this article, to the extent provided in the special exception. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-14. - Types of special exceptions. 
(a)  Temporary. The administrator may declare a temporary special exception, not to exceed 14 days, for any activity, use, process or equipment which the administrator determines, in accordance with rules and regulations, does not constitute a public nuisance noise and does not endanger public health or safety. 
(b)  Technical. A technical special exception may be declared by the administrator on the grounds that there is no practical means known or available for the adequate prevention, abatement or control of the noise involved. Any technical special exception shall be subject to the holder's taking of any alternative measures that the administrator may prescribe. The duration of each technical special exception shall be until such practical means for prevention, abatement or control become known or available. The holder of a technical special exception, as required by the administrator, shall make reports to the administrator detailing actions taken to develop a means of noise control or to reduce the noise involved and must relate these actions to pertinent current technology. 
(c)  Economic. An economic special exception may be granted by the administrator on the grounds that compliance with the particular requirement from which the special exception is sought will require the taking of measures which, because of their extent or cost, must be spread over a period of time. The duration of an economic special exception shall be for a period not to exceed such reasonable time as is required in the view of the administrator for the taking of the necessary measures. An economic special exception shall contain a timetable for the taking of action in an expeditious manner and shall be conditioned on adherence to the timetable. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-15. - Notice of violation; hearing; appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the administrator has determined that a provision of this article has been violated, he shall cause written notice to be served upon the alleged violator either personally, or by his designated agent, or by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall specify the provisions of this article alleged to have been violated and facts alleged to constitute a violation, including dB(A) readings noted and the time and place of their detection. The same notice shall include an order that corrective action is taken within such time as specified in the order. No later than ten days after the order is served, the person named therein may request, in writing, a hearing. Such written requests shall be filed in the office of the board of health. Upon the timely filing of a request for hearing on an order, the board of health shall hold a public hearing. 
(b)  If after a hearing held pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the presiding body finds that a violation has occurred, it shall affirm or modify the order previously issued or take other appropriate corrective action. Each day's failure to comply with the order as issued or modified shall constitute an additional offense. If, after the hearing, the presiding body finds that no violation has occurred, it shall rescind the order. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of health may seek relief therefrom within 30 days in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Secs. 13-16—13-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOUND DEVICES IN MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The editor has renumbered the provisions of article II, originally designated as sections 13-16, 13-17 by Ord. No. 45-95, § I, adopted Dec. 15, 1995, in order to reserve sections for future use. 
 
Sec. 13-31. - General prohibitions; penalties for violations. 
No person shall play any radio, music player such as a boombox or an audio system in a motor vehicle at such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons or at a volume which is plainly audible to persons other than occupants of said vehicle. The following penalties shall apply: 
(1)  First offense: a mandatory warning citation. 
(2)  Second offense: a mandatory fine of $50.00. 
(3)  Third offense: a mandatory fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Sec. 13-32. - Enforcement and police authority to seize motor vehicles causing excessive noise. 
(a)  The city police department shall enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The police department shall have authority to notify the registrar of motor vehicles when there has been failure to pay a fine by a person using a "boom box" or other amplification device attached to or in a motor vehicle. Upon receipt of two or more such notices, the registrar of motor vehicles shall not renew the driving license of the person or persons violating the noise ordinances and shall not renew the registration of the vehicle used to transport the noise-making equipment, until all fines have been paid. 
(c)  Police shall have the authority to impound the vehicle with all its contents, major items of which shall be inventoried on a list kept by police, a copy of which is to be supplied to the owner. 
(d)  In the event the motor vehicle seized is owned by a different person or business entity, police shall send notice of seizure and receipt identifying the vehicle confiscated and its contents to said owner. 
(e)  The vehicle seized and impounded shall be kept in custody until fines are paid or judicial process involving the case has been completed. 
(f)  In instances of repeat offenses or a flagrant violation of this article, the police may seek permission in the court for disposition of the vehicle. 
(g)  Refusal of an offender to give his true name and address when requested by a police officer shall be grounds for taking the person into custody until his identity has been established. 
(h)  In the event of subsequent noise violations, reports concerning the same individuals, the city police prosecutor shall be empowered to seek a criminal complaint based on documents files. 
(Ord. No. 45-1995, § I, 12-15-1995)  
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Crimes and punishments, M.G.L. c. 263—274. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
No person shall behave himself in a disorderly manner, or use any loud or disruptive language in any street, public place or common area to the annoyance or disturbance of any reasonable person. 
(Code 1970, § 12-1) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public meetings, M.G.L. c. 272, §§ 38, 40; disorderly conduct, M.G.L. c. 272, §§ 53, 54, 61.  
Sec. 14-2. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  No person shall discharge a firearm, as defined by M.G.L. c. 140, § 121, a rifle or shotgun within 500 feet of a city-owned park, beach or playing field or within 500 feet of the boundary of a dwelling or other building, except with the consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The lawful defense of life and property; 
(2)  Any law enforcement officer acting in the discharge of his duties; 
(3)  Persons using underground or indoor target or test ranges with the consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof; 
(4)  Persons using outdoor skeet, trap, target or test ranges with the consent of the owner or legal occupant of the land on which the range is established; 
(5)  Persons using shooting galleries, licensed and defined under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 140, § 56A; 
(6)  The discharge of blank cartridges for theatrical, athletic, ceremonial, firing squad, or other purposes in accordance with M.G.L. c. 148, § 39. 
(c)  No person shall discharge a firearm, rifle, shotgun, or other weapon on the following lands owned or leased by the city: 
(1)  All of the Good Harbor Beach, including beach, dunes, parking lot, and marshland lying easterly of Thatcher Road, northeasterly of Bass Avenue where it intersects with Thatcher Road, and northeasterly of that part of Nautilus Road where it intersects with Bass Avenue, as specifically shown as land owned or leased by the city on maps drawn by the city engineer known as the Good Harbor Beach area map which is on file with the city clerk and is incorporated herein by reference; 
(2)  All of the Wingaersheek Beach area including the beach, dunes, and parking lots which is either owned or leased by the city and runs northeasterly from Atlantic Street to the high-water mark easterly on a line of sight from the edge of Wingaersheek Beach to a point of land on the easterly bank of the Annisquam River known as the Bent Estate and more particularly as shown on a map drawn by the city engineer dated 2-17-1989. This map, known as the Wingaersheek Beach area map, is on file with the city clerk and is incorporated herein. 
(d)  Hunting, the use of hunting weapons, and the discharge of any firearms is prohibited in the following areas: All land south and east of MBTA tracks at Babson Reservoir to Pond Road and the Rockport line. This includes all land bordering Blackburn Drive, Dory Road, Old Rockport Road, including land now or formerly of the Gloucester Economic Development and Industrial Corporation. 
(e)  The city land covered by subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall be clearly posted, signed or marked in order to provide notice to persons of this prohibition. 
(Code 1970, § 12-2; Ord. of 6-12-1975, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-4-1989, § I; Ord. No. 8-1995, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 93-1998, § I, 7-7-1998; Ord. of 7-10-2001(02), § I) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21, M.G.L. c. 131, §§ 58, 59, M.G.L. c. 140, § 121, M.G.L. c. 269, § 12E.  
Sec. 14-3. - Drinking alcoholic beverages and using marijuana or marijuana products upon public ways, etc. 
(a)  No person shall drink from, or possess, an open container containing alcoholic beverages as defined in M.G.L. c. 138, § 1, while in, or upon, any public way or any way to which the public has a right of access, or any place to which members of the public have legal access such a park or playground, or private land, building, structure or place without consent of the owner. 
(1)  Possession of an open alcohol container with beverage therein shall be prima facie evidence that said container contains an alcohol beverage as defined in M.G.L. c. 138, § 1. 
(2)  Any person found in violation of this section may be arrested without a warrant, or summoned before the court. 
(3)  All containers, and alcohol, shall be seized and held until final adjudication of the charge against the person arrested, or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be returned to the person lawfully entitled to possess. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be subject, in all instances, to the approval of the licensing board. 
(c)  No person shall use marijuana or marijuana products while in, or upon, any public way or any way to which the public has a right of access, or any place to which members of the public have legal access such a park or playground, or private land, building, structure or place without consent of the owner. 
(1)  Any person found in violation of this section may be arrested without a warrant, or summoned before the court. 
(2)  All marijuana and marijuana products shall be seized and held until final adjudication of the charge against the person arrested, or summoned before the court. 
(Code 1970, § 12-9; Ord. of 4-5-1983, § I; Ord. No. 8-1992, § I, 2-18-1992; Ord. No. 147-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-077, adopted May 22, 2018, amended § 14-3 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Drinking alcoholic beverages upon public ways, etc." to "Drinking alcoholic beverages and using marijuana or marijuana products upon public ways, etc.," as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic liquors generally, M.G.L. c. 138; consumption of alcoholic beverages in streets, reservations, parkways or boulevards in violation of municipal ordinance or by-law, M.G.L. c. 272, § 59.  
Sec. 14-4. - Loitering. 
A person commits the offense of loitering if he obstructs or encumbers the passage of persons or vehicles upon, through or into any street, street corner, depot, building entrance or other public place and then refuses to move on when requested to do so by any police officer of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-10(c))  
Sec. 14-5. - Injuring or destruction of public property. 
(a)  No person shall injure, deface or destroy any street sign, guideboard, lamppost, lamp or lantern thereon, nor any tree, building, fence, post or other thing set, erected or made for the use or ornament of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to take cognizance of any injury to any of the property herein mentioned, and report the same immediately to the mayor or chief of police. 
(Code 1970, § 12-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 266, § 94.  
Sec. 14-6. - Trespass. 
(a)  No person shall without right enter or remain in or upon the dwelling house, building, boat or improved or enclosed land, wharf or pier of another, after having been forbidden so to do by the person who has lawful control thereof, whether directly or by notice posted thereon, or in violation of a court order pursuant to M.G.L. c. 208, § 34B or M.G.L. c. 209A, §§ 3, 4. Proof that a court has given notice of such a court order to the alleged offender shall be prima facie evidence that the notice requirement of this section has been met. A person who is found committing any such trespass shall be arrested and kept in custody in a convenient place, not more than 24 hours, Sunday excepted, until a complaint can be made against him for the offense, and he be taken upon a warrant issued upon the complaint. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to tenants or occupants of residential premises who, having rightfully entered such premises at the commencement of the tenancy or occupancy, remain therein after such tenancy or occupancy has been or is alleged to have been terminated. The owner or landlord of any such premises may recover possession thereof only through appropriate civil proceedings. 
(Code 1970, § 12-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 266, § 120.  
Sec. 14-7. - Peeping toms. 
No person shall enter upon the premises of another for the purpose of or with the intention of invading the privacy of another, by peeping into the windows of a house or spying on any person residing therein. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abridge nor in any way limit the right of a police officer to enter upon private property or to perform any act necessary in the performance of his official duties. 
(Code 1970, § 12-4)  
Sec. 14-8. - Posting notices on utility poles, trees or public buildings. 
No person shall knowingly post or affix any notice, poster, or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Code 1970, § 10-22) 
Cross reference— Poles and wires, § 23-75 et seq.; trees and shrubs, § 24-15 et seq. 
State Law reference— Posting notices, signs, advertisements or other things on trees prohibited, M.G.L. c. 87, § 9.  
Sec. 14-9. - Reward for information resulting in arrest and conviction of arsonists. 
(a)  The city treasurer, upon recommendation and approval of the mayor shall pay a single reward in the amount of $500.00 to any persons who furnish to the city information which results in the arrest and conviction of any person of the crime of arson within the city and which results in the destruction of any property to the extent of $5,000.00 or more in value. 
(b)  Only one such reward shall be paid by the city for the convictions relating to any one fire; and only one reward shall be paid, if the same person is convicted because of such information, of igniting two or more fires. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized to publish and advertise this section in such form and by such means as he deems advisable. 
(d)  Any reward offered by the terms of this section shall be subject to prior appropriation therefor. 
(Code 1970, § 12-5) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Arson generally, M.G.L. c. 266, § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 14-10. - Curfew during times of civil disorder. 
(a)  The mayor may, if satisfied that a riot or other form of civil disorder is occurring or there is a danger that it may occur, and that a curfew is necessary for the public safety in the city, impose a curfew in all or part or parts of the city. A curfew shall be imposed by a formal proclamation of the existence or threat of riot or other form of civil disturbance in the city and the need of a curfew to protect the public safety. Any such proclamation shall be in writing and shall set forth all the conditions of the curfew. No curfew shall take effect until two hours after the issuance of the proclamation declaring the imposition thereof. 
(b)  A curfew imposed under this section may restrict or prohibit the movement or presence of persons, vehicles and animals in or on the public ways and places of the city, including areas to which the public has a right of access, and also places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots and other open areas, provided that an exception is hereby made for all persons having business of an emergency nature which requires the use of public ways. When a curfew is imposed, the mayor shall immediately use all reasonable and practicable means to inform all persons in the city of the curfew and its conditions, such as by the conspicuous posting of notices in public places, announcement by sound-powered voice or other such device, publication in newspapers of general circulation in the city and announcement over radio and television stations serving the city. While the curfew is in effect, its terms may be modified in any manner not inconsistent with this section by proclamation of the mayor; provided, that two hours' advance notice shall be given and that any such modifications are publicized in the manner required in this section. 
(c)  The city council shall have the authority to revoke or modify a curfew imposed under this section. Any such curfew shall, unless sooner terminated by proclamation of the mayor or by action of the city council or by the governor as provided in M.G.L. c. 40, § 37A, terminate 72 hours from the hour it takes effect. Upon the termination of the curfew, additional curfews may be imposed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Any person knowing or having reason to know of a curfew imposed under this section who violates any conditions thereof may be arrested without a warrant and kept in custody for not more than 24 hours, Sundays and holidays excepted, at or before the expiration of which time he shall be taken before a proper court or magistrate and proceeded against, according to law. 
(Ord. of 9-13-1977, § I(12.10)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40, § 37A.  
Sec. 14-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-1991, adopted June 25, 1991 repealed former section 14-11 in its entirety which pertained to a "brown bagging" restriction on the consumption of alcoholic beverages in restaurants and derived from Ord. of February 28, 1989, § I.  
Sec. 14-12. - Sale, distribution or use of "silly string" or "poppers/snappers" prohibited; deemed litter. 
(a)  No person shall possess, sell, distribute or use a product known as "Silly String" as defined in section 1-2. Each individual sale or possession of the product shall be subject to penalty and seizure by police as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  The product known as "Silly String," outside its container, shall be considered litter as defined in section 9-1 and its use shall be regulated according to sections 9-1 through 9-10 and section 1-15. 
(c)  No person shall sell, distribute or use a product known as "Poppers/Snappers." Each individual sale of the product shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 1-14. 
(d)  The product known as "Poppers/Snappers" shall constitute a public nuisance, and further shall be considered litter as defined in section 9-11 through 9-10 and section 1-15. 
(Ord. of 11-29-1988, § I(II, III); Ord. No. 4-1990, § I, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 29-1992, § I, 11-10-1992) 
Editor's note— Section I(II, III) of an ordinance adopted November 29, 1988, added provisions which have been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 14-12.  
Sec. 14-13. - Cigarette, marijuana or marijuana product machines. 
(a)  Cigarette machines and machines that dispense marijuana or marijuana products are hereby banned within the city. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), cigarette machines with lockout devices may be located in private clubs, barrooms and taverns holding a liquor license in the city and who do not allow minors under the age of 21 years of age to enter their establishment. 
(1)  This section will be enforced by the health agent and the health agent is to coordinate educational efforts with the educations efforts of the prevention network. 
(2)  Machines are to be moved to a position in the line of sight of the bartender and away from entryways. 
(Ord. No. 11-1993, § I, 9-7-1993; Ord. No. 15-1993, § I, 12-14-1993; Ord. No. 26-1994, § I, 12-13-1994; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-077, adopted May 22, 2018, amended § 14-13 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Cigarette machines" to "Cigarette, marijuana or marijuana product machines," as set out herein.  
Sec. 14-14. - Smoking on school grounds. 
Smoking is not permitted by anyone within the area bounded by Gloucester High School, and a buffer zone of 300 feet in all directions from the property of the city on which the high school is located, on school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 10-22-2002(01), § I)  
Sec. 14-15. - Leaving premises without paying for goods or services. 
(a)  No person shall leave the premises of any restaurant, cafe or other food or drink establishment open to the public, after having ordered and consumed food and/or drink, without paying in full for said food and/or drink. 
(b)  No person shall leave any premises providing fuel and/or other services to motor vehicles, after having received fuel or other motor vehicle services without paying in full for said fuel or services. 
(c)  Enforcement shall be by the city police department by arrest or complaint brought in district court and penalties upon conviction shall be as proscribed in section 1-14. 
(Ord. of 2-20-2007(01))  
Sec. 14-16. - Public consumption of marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol prohibited. 
(a)  Notwithstanding M.G.L. c. 94G, §§ 2 or 7, no person shall smoke or consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, § 1, as amended, while in or upon any public way, park, playground, public building or land owned or under control of the city or in any bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier or in place accessible to the public. 
(b)  This section may be enforced by any police officer through any lawful means including noncriminal disposition pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. The fine for a violation shall be as follows: 
(1)  $100.00 for the first offense; 
(2)  $200.00 for the second; and 
(3)  $300.00 for each offense thereafter. 
Any penalty under this section shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under M.G.L. c. 94C, § 32L. 
(Ord. of 4-7-2009(04); Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 14-17. - Synthetic drugs (synthetic marijuana, stimulants and hallucinogens). 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the availability of synthetic marijuana/cannabinoids, stimulants and psychedelic/hallucinogens that have been linked to serious physical effects resulting in hospitalization and death when ingested, inhaled or otherwise introduced into the human body. These synthetic cannabinoids, stimulants and psychedelic hallucinogens pose health, safety, and welfare issues. This section is not intended to regulate or affect in any way the legal sale and distribution of medical marijuana pursuant to Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
Synthetic drugs mean any synthetic marijuana, cannabinoids, stimulants and/or psychedelic/hallucinogens which contain (i) any substance contained in 21 U.S.C. §812 (c) Schedule 1, subparts (c); or (ii) any substance listed as a Class C substance in M.G.L. c.94C, § 31(e); or (iii) any vegetable material that has been chemically treated and is possessed, sold or purchased with the intent that it will, despite any labeling to the contrary, be consumed by humans for the purpose of voluntary intoxication, which if consumed, may induce effects of intoxication similar to a controlled substance or imitation controlled substance such as elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration, paralysis, stupefaction, dulling of the senses or nervous system, or distortion of audio, visual or mental processes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-259, 8-12-2014)  
Secs. 14-18—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— City electrician designated superintendent of fire alarm and police signal systems, § 2-136; fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; police, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Fire alarms and sprinkler systems, M.G.L. c. 148, § 26 et seq.; police signal systems, M.G.L. c. 268, § 32. 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Alarm device shall mean any device which when activated: 
(1)  Transmits a signal to the police facility or fire station; 
(2)  Transmits a signal to a person or company who relays information to the police facility or fire station; or 
(3)  Produces an audible or visible signal from an exterior mounted alarm device to which the police, firefighters or ambulance service personnel are expected to respond. 
Alarm system shall mean a group of alarm devices which are a separate and distinct system. The alarm user must, in writing, specify the number of separate and distinct alarm systems in their buildings to the satisfaction of the police chief or fire chief as appropriate. Separate security systems may include burglary alarm (i.e., manually-pulled alarms), intrusion alarms or vault alarms. Separate fire alarm systems may include sprinkler systems, automatic fire detection systems (i.e., heat and/or smoke detectors) and manual fire alarm systems (i.e., pull stations). Unless notified in writing, each alarm user will be considered to have one alarm system. 
Alarm user shall mean any person who is the owner or person in charge of premises where an alarm system is maintained within the city. 
False alarm shall mean activation of an alarm through negligence of an alarm user, or employee, improper installation, mechanical failure, malfunction, or any other cause, except for alarms caused by low-battery power during a long-term power failure which results in the police or firefighters responding, where it is determined after investigation by the police or fire department that no criminal activity, attempted criminal activity, fire or medical emergency has occurred. For the purposes of this section, smoke conditions caused by burnt toast, stove backdrafts, and similar situations, where no fire occurs, shall be considered false alarms. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-139); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I)  
Sec. 14-27. - Alarm user responsibility. 
(a)  Every burglar alarm user shall submit to the chief of police, and every fire alarm or medical alert user shall submit to the fire chief his name, address, telephone number, and those of at least two other people (keyholders) who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can open the premises in which the alarm system is located. As an alternative the alarm user may install a security key box for rapid access of emergency personnel into the property in conformance with rules established under section 14-32. Facilities with this security key box must provide the keyholder information for inclusion in the security lock box and by doing so are exempt from the keyholder penalty stated in section 14-30(a). 
(b)  Each alarm company, as the term "alarm device" is defined under section 14-26, shall maintain a list of at least three keyholders for each alarm user serviced and shall immediately activate that list after notifying the appropriate response agency of an alarm. The alarm companies shall supply the keyholder information to the fire and police departments for their customer, and this will be deemed to meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  All alarm users must notify the police or fire department in advance of any testing of equipment. Failure to notify the police or fire department in advance of a testing of equipment shall be subject to the assessment schedule contained herein if a false alarm results. 
(d)  All burglar alarm systems which use an exterior audible bell, horn or siren shall be equipped with an automatic shutoff device, which will deactivate the alarm system within 15 minutes. All alarm users with an exterior audible bell, horn, or siren must comply with this section within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Fire alarms are not required to automatically deactivate within any specified time. 
(e)  Exterior audible or visual alarm devices for burglar alarms shall be clearly differentiated from fire alarms so that it is obvious to the average citizen by visual examination which type of alarm system has been activated. A red light may be used to indicate a fire alarm, and a blue light may be used to indicate a burglar alarm. If any bell, horn or siren is used it may also contain a color-coded light on the exterior audible device. When no light is present; bells, horns or sirens for fire and burglar alarms shall be spaced widely apart and shall have a permanent sign with at least two-inch letters on a painted contrasting background posted next to the exterior audible device. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-140.1); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I) 
Cross reference— City electrician designated superintendent of fire alarm and police signal systems, § 2-136; fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; police, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Fire alarms and sprinkler systems, M.G.L. c. 148, § 26 et seq.; police signal systems, M.G.L. c. 268, § 32.  
Sec. 14-28. - Fire department right of entry. 
If a fire alarm has remained active and neither the fire alarm user or one of the two keyholders opens the premises after a reasonable time, fire officials shall have a limited right to enter the premises to inspect for a fire and to deactivate the alarm. If a medical alert alarm is received, immediate entry will be required for responding personnel, and the most expedient entry route shall be used with consideration given to minimizing damage. By using a fire alarm or medical alert system, the user impliedly consents to such a right of entry. The fire or medical alarm's activation is prima facie evidence that a fire or medical emergency exists in the premises, even though neither smoke, flames or a disabled person are immediately discernible upon an examination of the exterior of the premises. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-140.2); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I)  
Sec. 14-29. - Tape dialers prohibited. 
So-called "tape dialers" and similar automatic telephonic systems shall not be connected to any police facility or fire station. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-140.3); Ord. of 2-14-1989)  
Sec. 14-30. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violations of article. Failure to comply with section 14-29 or 14-27(a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. Section 14-27(b) violations shall be assessed to the alarm monitoring company, as the term "alarm device" is defined under section 14-26. All other penalties shall be assessed to the alarm user as defined under section 14-26. 
(b)  False alarms. After the police or fire department has recorded three separate false alarms, per system, as defined under section 14-26 and counted in the aggregate (example: three alarm systems certified in writing would require ten alarms to be false prior to fines being imposed) from an alarm user within the current calendar year beginning January 1, the chief of police or fire chief or his designee shall notify the alarm user, in writing, of such facts, including the dates and time of each alleged false alarm. For the fourth false alarm for a single system or three false alarms times the number of alarm systems plus one, a $25.00 fine shall be assessed, and a $50.00 fine for each subsequent false alarm within the current calendar year beginning January 1. After a period of 30 days from the date of the fine when payment has not been received, then a further penalty of $10.00 per day shall be assessed. 
(c)  Enforcement of fines. These fines may be enforced under section 1-15, commonly referred to as the "ticketing procedure." 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-141); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I; Ord. of 11-28-2006(01))  
Sec. 14-31. - Limitation of liability. 
Neither the city nor any of its officers shall be under any obligation or special duty to an alarm user, or to any person hereunder, by reason of this article. The city specifically disclaims liability for any damages which may be caused by failure to respond to an alarm, failure of an alarm device to transmit to the police or fire departments or necessary damages to premises in entering to inspect for fire. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-142); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I)  
Sec. 14-32. - Administrative rules. 
The chief of police and fire chief may promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the implementation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-143); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I)  
Sec. 14-33. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the alarm devices owned or controlled by the city, nor to alarm devices installed in a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. of 8-18-1987, § I(2-144); Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I)  
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Power of department of public works pertaining to parks and recreation, § 2-283; amusements, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Public parks, M.G.L. c. 45, § 2 et seq.; playgrounds, M.G.L. c. 45, § 14 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STAGE FORT PARK ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-232, adopted June 24, 2014, amended Ch. 15 be repealing §§ 15-15 and 15-16, which pertained to the Recreation Committee and which derived from Ord. of 7-10-2001(03), §§ I(15-15), (15-16). Said ordinance added new §§ 15-1—15-3; however, for purposes of maintaining Code format and for allowing future expansion of the Code, the provisions of Ord. No. 2014-232 have been added as §§ 15-15—15-17, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 15-15. - Stage Fort Park Advisory Committee—Purpose. 
(a)  In recognition of the continuing need for oversight in the city's ownership, operation and maintenance of Stage Fort Park so its full recreational utilization can be sustainably realized and its integrity as a natural resource for the entire community can be fully protected, the Stage Fort Park Advisory Committee is established. 
(b)  The committee shall undertake but not be limited to the following activities: 
(1)  Recommend an overall and coordinated program for the use of the recreational and other facilities at Stage Fort Park that balances the needs of all parties seeking to use the park. 
(2)  Review and make recommendations upon plans for the proposed maintenance or capital improvements to any of the facilities or property contained within the park and to provide advisory oversight to the execution of such plans. 
(3)  Recommend programs and activities which can generate revenue streams that can be dedicated to the maintenance or improvement of the property or facilities within the park. 
(Ord. No. 2014-232, § 15-1, 6-24-2014)  
Sec. 15-16. - Composition; requirements; tenure. 
(a)  The Stage Fort Park Advisory Committee shall consist of up to nine members appointed by the mayor and approved by the council to a term of up to three years. Voting members shall represent the organizations with direct interest of the park and to the extent possible including representatives of the Gloucester Rotary Club, Gloucester Dog Park, Gloucester Little League, Friends of Stage Fort Park, recreation and gardening, and landscaping. Additional voting members may be "at-large" residents of the city. Additionally, the DPW director, or his designee, as well as a city councilor appointed by the council president shall serve as non-voting ex officio members. 
(b)  At the first of each calendar year the Committee shall elect from among their members a chair, vice-chair and a secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-232, § 15-2, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2016-11, 1-12-2016)  
Sec. 15-17. - Assistance of city officials, boards and employees. 
The committee shall receive regular support from the department of public works, the open space and recreation committee, and the conservation commission staff, as well as other support as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2014-232, § 15-3, 6-24-2014)  
Secs. 15-18—15-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, BALL FIELDS, AND BEACHES 
 
Sec. 15-30. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article are applicable to all the following parks, playgrounds, ball fields, and beaches: 
Alto Park 	Kettle Cove Field 
Babson Playground 	Knowlton Park 
Ben Smith Playground 	Little River Park 
Boudreau Field 	Lobsta Cove Shore Road Basketball Court 
Brown's Field 	Magnolia Woods Park and Fields 
Burke Playground 	Mattos Field 
Burnham's Field 	Middleton Playground 
Ciaramitaro/Gemellaro Playground 	Newell Stadium 
Crab Beach 	Niles Beach 
Cressey Beach 	Palazola Playground 
East Gloucester School Field 	Parisi Field 
Eastern Avenue School Ball field 	Parsons Playground 
Earl Rice Ball field 	Pavilion Beach 
Fisherman's Park 	Plum Cove Beach 
Fitz Hugh Lane Park 	Rafe's Chasm Park 
Ganine H. Doucette Playground 	Seppala Field 
Good Harbor Beach 	Solomon Jacob Park 
Governor's Hill Park 	Stage Fort Park 
Gray's Beach 	Surf Park 
Green Street Field 	Swinson Field 
Gus Foote Park 	Veterans Memorial Playground 
Half Moon Beach 	Vieira Park 
Keith Trefry Park 	Wingaersheek Beach 
 
(Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. No. 12-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. of 7-10-2001(03), § I(15-30); Ord. of 9-24-2002(01), § I; Ord. of 2-3-2004, § I)  
Sec. 15-31. - Schedule of operations. 
All parks, playgrounds, ball fields and beaches shall be closed and may not be used between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily with the exception of Mattos Field and Stage Fort Park which may be kept open until 10:00 p.m., at the discretion of the public works director for seasonal league play. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. No. 12-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. of 7-10-2001(03), § I(15-31))  
Sec. 15-32. - Scheduling of facilities. 
(a)  Leagues, groups, companies and individuals desiring to use a facility for organized activities, sports, social, and other events must schedule, reserve, and be issued a permit for the use of the particular facility through the appropriate division of the department of public works. 
(b)  The parks and recreation division of the department of public works shall be responsible for scheduling and permitting all organized activities and events at all facilities. 
(c)  All organized activities that are permitted and scheduled for all facilities will be so arranged as to begin after 8:00 a.m. and terminate before 9:00 p.m. except sleeping, camping and seasonal league play, as permitted by the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. of 7-10-2001(03), § I(15-32))  
Sec. 15-33. - Fee schedule. 
All costs involved in the use of the city's parks, playgrounds, ball fields and beaches such as for police enforcement and maintenance requirements shall be paid by the permit holder. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. of 7-10-2001(03), § I(15-33))  
Sec. 15-34. - Use and activities restrictions. 
(a)  No unauthorized vehicles, including, but not limited to, off-road vehicles, motorcycles, motorbikes and mopeds, shall be allowed to enter upon the recreational grounds of any park, playground, ball field or beach. 
(b)  Dogs and other pets shall be prohibited from being on the grounds of any park, playground or beach unless under control the owner or keeper in accordance with the city dog control ordinance (chapter 4, article II). 
(c)  The use or introduction of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or marijuana products on any playground, park, ball field or beach is prohibited, except when properly licensed to do so in accordance with state law and local ordinance, subject to the approval of the director of public works in accordance with section 15-32(b) as noted hereinabove. 
(d)  Rubbish, trash, and litter shall be deposited in barrels or other containers as may be provided. Leagues, groups, companies and individuals who schedule and reserve a facility are responsible for policing the grounds at the conclusion of the schedule activity. 
(e)  No fires of any type are allowed at any parks, playgrounds, ball fields, or beaches except barbecue fires conducted at designated locations within Stage Fort Park. All coals must be completely extinguished and deposited in designated containers. 
(f)  Sleeping or camping in a park, playground, ball field or beach is prohibited during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. except as scheduled and permitted by the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. of 7-10-2001(03), § I(15-33); Ord. of 1-22-2002(02), § I; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018) 
Cross reference— Dog control, § 4-15 et seq.  
Sec. 15-35. - Parks and recreation commission. 
(a)  The parks and recreation commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor, with the addition of the director of beach and recreation serving as an ex officio member. The appointees shall be chosen, one member, from each of the five wards. The appointees shall be subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(b)  The commission's authority is as follows: 
(1)  The commission shall perform such duties as are consistent in an advisory capacity to the director of public works, the mayor and the city council, and shall be responsible for such duties pertaining to administration and management of recreation areas as outlined in this section or those duties as required in the future with the approval by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  The commission may assist in layout and improvement of public parks, recommend rules for their use and government, assist in determination of requirements for engineers, surveyors, clerks and other officers, including police presence when necessary. The commission shall have only such authority as herein given, or later bestowed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. 
(c)  The commission's duties are as follows: 
(1)  Attendance at meetings: regular, special, etc. 
(2)  Develop and recommend policy for the operation of the department. 
(3)  Assist with department and/or city council studies. 
(4)  Recommend staffing requirements for the operation of the department. 
(5)  Prepare RFPs and assist in preliminary bid selection for major purchases or projects. 
(6)  Serve as ombudsmen for concerned citizens of the city. 
(7)  Assist and recommend during annual budget preparation and justification. 
(8)  Seek out financial and/or legislative assistance for the department. 
(9)  Assist in the hiring of consultants/experts, when necessary. 
(10)  Develop a personal working relationship between the board and staff that will promote the achievement of department goals. 
(d)  The commission's qualifications are as follows: 
(1)  They must be U.S. citizens and residents of the city. 
(2)  They must be registered voters, one from each of the five wards. 
(3)  They must be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(4)  The appointment shall be for a period of three years. 
(Ord. No. 26-1999, § I, 9-14-1999)  
Sec. 15-36. - Revolving account. 
A revolving account is established in accordance with M.G.L., c. 44, § 53D, recreation and park self-supporting service revolving funds, creation, authorization of funds, annual report and revocation of provisions, for the use of recreation program fees which will be subject to annual authorization by vote of the city council. 
(Ord. of 7-9-2002(01), § I; Ord. of 2-20-2003, § I)  
Sec. 15-37. - Beach and Stage Fort Park regulations penalty. 
(a)  The penalty for violating the regulations at the beach and Stage Fort Park is $25.00 per violation. 
(b)  The enforcing persons for this section are police officers; and public properties operations manager, beach and park constable, and parking lot supervisors of the department of public works, treasurer/collector. 
(Ord. of 10-28-2008)  
Chapter 16 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Council commission on planning and development, section 2-9; planning and community development, section 5-1 et seq.; community development department, section 5-3; designer selection committee, section 5-4; city building committee, section 5-5. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Planning generally, M.G.L. c. 41, § 81A et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Grant applications. 
(a)  Prior to a city agency or employee filing any grant application that requires an in-kind or monetary match, on behalf of the city, in excess of $100,000.00 or multiple year commitment the total of which is anticipated to exceed $100,000.00, such application shall be submitted to the city council for approval and referred to its budget and finance committee for recommendation. If the application deadline is prior to the next regularly scheduled city council meeting; then the applicant may file the application and seek committee approval at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the deadline. 
(b)  Applications for grants with match requirements below the threshold set forth in (a) above may be submitted without prior approval of the council, provided that the department or employee applying for the grant must notify the council in writing of the intention to file such application. Such notification is for information only and no permission by the council is required to complete the application. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1993, § I; Ord. of 1-13-2009(01); Ord. No. 2014-111, 3-25-2014)  
Secs. 16-2—16-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Planning board, § 5-2. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees generally, § 2-400 et seq. 
State Law reference— Planning boards, M.G.L. c. 41, §§ 70—72, 81A—81GG. 
 
Sec. 16-15. - Composition; appointment; and terms of members. 
There shall be a planning board to consist of seven members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council to staggered terms of five years. Members of the planning board shall be residents of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 15-13)  
Sec. 16-16. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies occurring in the board shall be filled by appointment by the mayor. Appointees to fill vacancies shall hold office for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1970, § 15-14)  
Sec. 16-17. - Officers. 
The planning board shall annually elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from its members and give notice to the city clerk of such election. 
(Code 1970, § 15-15) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq.  
Sec. 16-18. - Powers and duties. 
The planning board shall exercise such duties and have such powers as are given to planning boards by law. 
(Code 1970, § 15-16)  
Sec. 16-19. - Study of conditions and recommendations to city council. 
It shall be the duty of the board to make a careful study of the city as provided by M.G.L. c. 41, relating to planning boards, and to report its findings to the city council with such recommendations and suggestions as in its judgment it believes best adapted to the present conditions and the future needs of the city; provided, however, that no expenditures shall be made or contracts awarded until first there shall have been obtained an appropriation fully sufficient to cover the same from the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 15-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 41, § 70.  
Sec. 16-20. - Annual report. 
The planning board shall annually make a written report of its activities to the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 15-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 41, § 71.  
Secs. 16-21—16-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSERVATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees, § 2-400 et seq.; conservation commission to promulgate rules and regulations relating to marshlands, § 12-19. 
 
Sec. 16-30. - Created. 
There is hereby created a conservation commission under the authority of M.G.L. c. 40, § 8C. 
(Code 1970, § 2-328)  
Sec. 16-31. - Composition; appointment; terms of members. 
The conservation commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the city and all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city council, to staggered terms of three years. 
(Code 1970, § 2-329) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8C.  
Sec. 16-32. - Powers and duties. 
The conservation commission shall have all the duties and powers given to conservation commissions by M.G.L. c. 40, § 8C. 
(Code 1970, § 2-330)  
Sec. 16-33. - Condemnation of land or water upon commission's request. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the city may, upon the written request of the conservation commission, take, by eminent domain under M.G.L. c. 79, the fee or any lesser interest in any land or waters located in the city, provided the taking has first been approved by two-thirds vote of the city council, which land and water shall thereupon be under the jurisdiction and control of the conservation commission. 
(b)  No action taken under this section shall affect the powers and duties of the state reclamation board or any mosquito control or other project operating under or authorized by M.G.L. c. 252, or restrict any established public access. 
(c)  Lands used for farming or agriculture, as defined in M.G.L. c. 128, § 1A shall not be taken by eminent domain under the authority of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 2-331) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8C.  
Sec. 16-34. - Rules and regulations; penalty for violations. 
The conservation commission may adopt rules and regulations governing the use of land and waters under its control, and prescribe penalties, not exceeding a fine of $100.00, for any violation thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 2-332) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40, § 8C.  
Secs. 16-35—16-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - [RESERVED][4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 27, 1986, § I, repealed art. IV, §§ 16-45—16-48, pertaining to the downtown development commission, as derived from Code 1970, §§ 2-414—2-417. 
 
Secs. 16-45—16-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HISTORIC DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Historic districts, M.G.L. c. 40C. 
 
Sec. 16-60. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history or architecture of the city, and through the maintenance and improvement of settings for such buildings and places and the encouragement of designs compatible therewith. 
(Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40C, § 2.  
Sec. 16-61. - Created. 
There is hereby established under the provisions of M.G.L. a historic district to be known as the "Gloucester Historic District," which district shall include the area as shown on the plan on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 3) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish historic districts, M.G.L. c. 40C, § 3.  
Sec. 16-62. - Historic district commission—Established; membership; term of office; office. 
(a)  There is hereby established, under M.G.L. c. 40C, a historic district commission with all the powers and duties of a historic district commission specified in M.G.L. c. 40C. 
(b)  The historic district commission shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members, appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council who shall serve staggered terms of three years. The commission shall include one regular member appointed from two nominees submitted by the Cape Ann Historical Association, one regular member appointed from two nominees submitted by the Boston chapter of the American Institute of Architects and one regular member appointed from two nominees submitted by the Cape Ann Board of Realtors. Two regular members of the commission shall be owners of property within a historic district in the city. All members of the commission, with the exception of that member nominated by the Boston chapter of the American Institute of Architects, shall be residents of the city. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. In case of the absence, inability to act or unwillingness to act because of self-interest on the part of a member of the commission, his place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by the chairperson. Each member and alternate shall continue in office after the expiration of his term until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The historic district commission shall elect annually a chairperson and vice-chairperson from its own number and a secretary from within or without its number. 
(Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 4) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees, § 2-400 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish historic district commission, M.G.L. c. 40C, § 4.  
Sec. 16-63. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  In passing upon matters before it, the historic district commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure, the general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the features involved, and the relation of such features to similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or structures, the commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the building or structure both in relation to the land area upon which the building or structure is situated and to buildings and structures in the vicinity, and the commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to those required by the applicable Code section, ordinance or bylaw. The commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view. 
(b)  The historic district commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the historic district. 
(Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40C, § 7.  
Sec. 16-64. - Same—Limitations on authority. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this article, the authority of the historic district commission shall not extend to control of the following categories of buildings, structures, or exterior architectural features: 
(1)  Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks, and other similar structures, provided the structure is at grade level; 
(2)  Storm doors and windows, screen doors and windows, window air conditioners, lighting fixtures, antennas, and similar appurtenances; 
(3)  The color of paint; 
(4)  Temporary signs and structures; provided, however, that the commission shall have authority to define temporary signs and temporary structures; 
(5)  The repair or reconstruction of a building, structure, or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm, or other disaster, provided, the exterior design is found by the commission to be substantially similar to the original and the repair or reconstruction is begun within one year after the damage occurred and is carried on with due diligence. 
(b)  The authority of the historic district commission shall, however, extend to parking areas used by three or more vehicles, provided any such area is visible from any public or private way within the district. 
(Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 7; Ord. of 1-22-1980, § I; Ord. of 2-21-1984, § I) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40C, § 8.  
Sec. 16-65. - Appeals from determinations of historic district commission. 
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the historic district commission may, within 20 days after the filing of the notice of the determination contested with the city clerk, file a written request with the commission for a review by a person of competence and experience in such matters, designated by the metropolitan area planning council. The finding of the person or persons making such review shall be filed with the city clerk within 45 days after the filing of the request and shall be binding on the applicant and on the commission, unless an appeal is sought in court as provided in M.G.L. c. 40C, § 12A. 
(Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 40, § 12.  
Chapter 17 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses generally, § 14-1 et seq.; alarm systems, § 14-26 et seq.; ch. 14; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Police generally, M.G.L. c. 147. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Administration of waterways. 
(a)  Police department. The following duties shall be the responsibility of the police department in the administration of waterways: 
(1)  Enforce all commonwealth laws while patrolling the city waterways. 
(2)  Operate, maintain and manage equipment and vessels assigned (police boat/fire boat). 
(3)  Investigate, prosecute criminal activity on waterways and waterfront in cooperation with other members of the city police department and other law enforcement agencies, U.S. Coast Guard, etc. 
(4)  Make arrests on water. 
(5)  Report to the chief of police. 
(6)  Assist the fire department, U.S. Coast Guard with fire prevention and suppression, law enforcement, hazardous materials investigations and emergency medical services. 
(7)  Check on lobster violations under the city ordinance and state laws. Enforce M.G.L. c. 130, §§ 18, 31, 39, 41, 41a, 43, 44, marine fisheries laws: 
a.  Destruction of weir-fish trap; 
b.  Lobster and crab licenses; 
c.  Markings on buoys: exhibition of license; 
d.  Display of license numbers and buoy colors; 
e.  Hours of tending traps; 
f.  Taking of female lobsters with eggs; 
g.  Possession of short lobsters. 
(8)  Check properties on islands not accessible from land. 
(b)  Joint duties. The following duties shall be the joint responsibility of the police department and the harbormaster in the administration of waterways: 
(1)  Enforce waterways laws, ordinances and rules and regulations (M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D, fines and ticketing and section 1-15 and M.G.L. c. 90B, §§ 1—19, motorboats and other vessels and other enforcement pursuant to M.G.L. c. 102, §§ 17—28, shipping and seaman, harbor and harbormasters. Police: plus all other applicable city and state laws. 
(2)  Patrol city waterways. Police: enforce all state laws. 
(3)  Respond to emergencies within scope, training and resources. 
(4)  Operate, maintain and manage equipment and vessels assigned (police boat/fire boat, police; harbormaster boat: harbormaster). 
(5)  Coordinate with other agencies and assist within scope, training and resources. 
(6)  Observe water quality, assist appropriate agencies. 
(7)  Assist in keeping navigation channels clear, keep harbor free of debris. Harbormaster: primary responsibility. 
(8)  Patrol major events to promote and protect public safety: Fiesta, 4th of July, schooner races, etc. Police: other occasions as directed by chief of police. 
(9)  Issue citations on water. 
(10)  Enforce the BWI, make arrests and bring complaints to court. 
(Ord. No. 19-1995, § I, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 19-1995, § I, adopted March 7, 1995, has been included herein as section 17-1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Relationship to the harbormaster and city staff, § 10-5.  
Secs. 17-2—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 28, 2010, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said article to read as herein set out. The former Art. II, §§ 17-15—17-29, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 16-1—16-8, 16-10—16-13, 16-17, and 16-18 of the 1970 Code; Ord. No. 5-1992, § I, adopted Feb. 18, 1992; Ord. No. 14-1993, § I, adopted Nov. 16, 1993; Ord. No. 46-1995, § I, adopted Nov. 14, 1995; § I of an ordinance adopted May 13, 2003. 
Cross reference— Departments generally, § 2-260 et seq.; enforcement of traffic and motor vehicles chapter by police officers, § 22-20; authority of police officers to direct traffic, § 22-21; right of way of police patrol vehicles, § 22-95; authority of police to request a vehicle to move, § 22-147; authority of police to tow vehicles, § 22-241; police to keep records of towed vehicles, § 22-246. 
State Law reference— Civil service regulations pertaining to police officers, M.G.L. c. 31, §§ 58—65; police officers generally, M.G.L. c. 41, § 96 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Police chief. 
(a)  The mayor shall appoint the police chief who shall hold the office for a term of at least three years but no more than five years. The appointment of the police chief shall be subject to confirmation by the city council. The police chief is exempt from the provisions of M.G.L. c. 31. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the position of the chief of police being declared vacant, the mayor shall appoint a temporary police chief who shall serve until a permanent chief is selected in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01); Ord. of 9-10-2013(216))  
Sec. 17-17. - Selection of police chief; qualifications. 
The chief of police shall be selected by the mayor and have the following qualifications or equivalent qualifications as the mayor deems appropriate: 
(1)  The chief of police shall be a law enforcement professional with 15 years or its equivalent experience in federal, state, county, municipal or military policing, at least five years or its equivalent in a progressively responsible law enforcement management position. 
(2)  The chief of police shall have a Master's Degree or related experience in the law enforcement area. Other educational background may be substituted for a graduate degree. 
(3)  Preference may be given to candidates who have experience with the following: 
a.  A multi-lingual and multi-cultural law enforcement environment in municipalities with a population of 30,000 or more residents and possess managerial experience, in the command structure similar to the city police department; 
b.  With the second language reflecting the linguistic diversity of the citizens of the city; 
c.  Possess a minimum rank of lieutenant or higher for a minimum of three years in a policing environment or equivalent experience or demonstrated expertise; 
d.  A nationally recognized police leadership programs, such as the Senior Management Institute for Police, and the FBI National Academy, or a nationally recognized college based graduate program; 
e.  Financial management, innovations in police operations, and information technology as it pertains to law enforcement; 
f.  Labor relations, community relations, mediation and facilitation skills; and including staff development, training, community policing and use of crime data for deployment and decision-making; 
g.  Equivalent education, skills, and experience may be substituted for any of the above. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01); Ord. of 9-10-2013(216))  
Sec. 17-18. - Selection of police chief; manner of appointment. 
(a)  Upon such time as the mayor shall become aware of a vacancy in the office of police chief, the mayor shall commence the process to fill the vacancy in the manner prescribed in this section. The mayor may select an interim police chief to serve until a permanent police chief is hired. 
(b)  The mayor shall select a qualified recruitment and assessment consultant. The consultant shall establish an assessment process that shall include a screening committee appointed by the mayor. The consultant and the screening committee shall hold at least one public meeting to discuss the process and the candidates. At the conclusion of the assessment process, the screening committee, with guidance and input from the consultant, shall select three candidates to forward to the mayor for consideration. 
(c)  The mayor shall make a selection from the three candidates and negotiate a contract with the successful candidate; the term of said contract shall be for at least three years but no longer than five years. The mayor shall appoint a candidate from the list subject to a comprehensive background investigation conducted by the consultant as well as the funding of the contract and confirmation of the candidate by the city council. 
(d)  The mayor may reappoint the police chief for subsequent contractual terms of at least three years but no longer than five years subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01); Ord. of 3-27-2012(03); Ord. of 9-10-2013(216); Ord. No. 2018-038, 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 17-19. - Powers and duties of police chief. 
The police chief shall manage the police department. He/she shall be responsible for the discipline and efficiency of the department. He/she shall have control of the department, its officers and members, the care of the police station, the care and custody of all the property of the department and shall keep a record of its business. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01); Ord. of 9-10-2013(216))  
Sec. 17-20. - Appointment and removal of officers. 
The mayor shall have the power to appoint all police officers and patrolmen who shall hold their office at the discretion of the mayor and with the exception of the chief of police are subject to the laws pertaining to civil service and to the collective bargaining agreement. The chief of police is exempt from civil laws and the terms of the collective bargaining agreement. All police officers are required to be citizens of the United States and within nine months of his/her appointment, to reside within 15 miles of the limits of the city as required by M.G.L. c. 41, § 99A. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01); Ord. of 3-22-2011(01); Ord. of 9-10-2013(216))  
Sec. 17-21. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of the police chief, and as many lieutenants, sergeants and patrolmen as may be deemed necessary. The department shall also include supporting administrative staff. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01); Ord. of 9-10-2013(216))  
Sec. 17-22. - Unlawful use of insignia, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, including a constable: 
(1)  To wear, display, possess or make use of in any manner whatsoever, a similarity of or replica of an official police uniform, badge, insignia or any other sign on which appears the word "police"; 
(2)  To wear, display or possess a badge, insignia, hat shield or buttons or other sign imitating in any manner the official police badge, hat shield or buttons worn by police officers; 
(3)  In any other manner, by the wearing of any uniform, badge, insignia, hat shield or buttons or other sign, attempt to create or allow to be created by so wearing, the impression in the minds of the public that he is a police officer of the city, unless such person is in fact a regular or reserve officer of the police department. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01)) 
State Law reference— Identification cards for municipal police officers, M.G.L. c. 41, § 98D.  
Sec. 17-23. - Firefighters appointed as police officers. 
A firefighter may be appointed as a police officer but shall not work as a police officer until he is permanently appointed as a police officer and has transferred from the fire department. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01)) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-15 et seq.  
Sec. 17-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of Sept. 10, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 17-24 pertaining to chief of police acting as dog constable and derived from Ord. of Sept. 28, 2010(01).  
Sec. 17-25. - Chief to receive complaints and prosecute. 
The chief of police shall receive all complaints from the citizens and from the officers of the police department against any breach of the criminal laws, this Code or the other ordinances of the city and shall prosecute all cases, where, in his judgment, there may have been a willful violation of either. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01))  
Sec. 17-26. - Records of persons arrested and disposal of cases.
The chief of police shall keep a record with a full and complete index, of all persons arrested, birth, age, height, race, residence and the nature of the offense with such other description as may be useful for the identification of such person. When cases are brought before the court, he shall inform himself of the disposal of each case and make a record of the same. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01))  
Sec. 17-27. - Powers and duties of police officers.
(a)  Each officer of the police department shall acquaint himself with the business of the department, shall hold himself ready at all times, whenever his services may be required, shall answer the calls and obey the orders of his superior officer and shall make daily reports of his activities and of important facts coming to his knowledge to the chief of police. 
(b)  Each officer of the police department shall see that not only the laws of the commonwealth, but also that the provisions of this Code and the other ordinances of the city, are observed and enforced. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01)) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of municipal police officers, M.G.L. c. 41, § 98.  
Sec. 17-28. - Acceptance of gifts, etc., by officers. 
No police officer shall, directly or indirectly, accept from any person, either liable to arrest or complaint, or in custody, or after discharge from custody, nor from any friend of such person, any gratuity, gift or reward whatsoever, or accept, from any person, money or other compensation for services rendered while on duty. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01)) 
State Law reference— Bribery and corruption of municipal employees, M.G.L. c. 268A, §§ 2—4.  
Sec. 17-29. - Officers acting as bail or surety. 
No police officer, regular or reserve, other than the chief of police, shall, except at the express request of the trial judge, become bail or surety in any criminal proceeding in the District Court of Eastern Essex or in any criminal proceeding in any other court relating to an offense alleged to have been committed within the territory of which the district court has jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01))  
Sec. 17-30. - Return of city property when member leaves office. 
When any police officer resigns or is discharged or in any way vacates his office, he shall deliver all city property in his possession to the chief of police or officer in charge. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01))  
Sec. 17-31. - Suspension of police officers. 
The chief of police shall have the power to suspend any police officer for cause, and shall immediately notify the mayor of any action taken. Any suspension under this section made by the chief of police shall be in accordance with the rules governing civil service. 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01))  
Sec. 17-32. - Mutual aid program. 
A city or town which accepts this section may enter into an agreement with another city or town, or other cities and towns, to provide mutual aid programs for police departments to increase the capability of such departments to protect the lives, safety, and property of the people in the area designated in the agreement. Said agreement may include the furnishing of personal services, supplies, materials, contractual services, and equipment when the resources normally available to any municipality in the agreement are not sufficient to cope with a situation which requires police action. (Reference: M.G.L. c. 40 § 8G.) 
(Ord. of 9-28-2010(01))  
Chapter 18 - SCHOOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Use of automatic amusement devices by schoolchildren, § 3-32. 
State Law reference— Public schools, M.G.L. c. 71. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Compulsory attendance. 
All children residing in the city shall attend school in accordance with M.G.L. c. 76. 
(Code 1970, § 17-1)  
Sec. 18-2. - General duties of supervisor of attendance. 
The duties of the supervisor of attendance shall be as prescribed in M.G.L. c. 76, § 20. 
(Code 1970, § 17-2) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment of supervisor of attendance, M.G.L. c. 76, § 19.  
Sec. 18-3. - Record and report of supervisor of attendance. 
It shall be the duty of the supervisor of attendance to keep a full record of his official acts and activities, and make an annual report thereof to the school committee, which may publish the same with its report. 
(Code 1970, § 17-3)  
Sec. 18-4. - Vaccination of pupils. 
(a)  The school physician of the city shall vaccinate such pupils of the public schools or applicants for admission as the school committee may direct, provided, that such persons have not been successfully vaccinated within three years. He shall give certificates of vaccination when same are required for admission to the public schools. 
(b)  The school physician shall perform the services required by this section without charge, except that his actual expenses may be allowed. 
(Code 1970, § 17-4) 
State Law reference— Vaccination required for admission to public school, M.G.L. c. 76, § 15.  
Sec. 18-5. - Protection of school grounds and buildings. 
Whosoever enters upon the school grounds or buildings in the city without authority, after the hours of darkness, and at such time as no public activity is scheduled, or no permission has been granted for an activity, or during daylight hours when school is not in session or occupies the steps or covered entry ways, shall be deemed a trespasser. 
(Code 1970, § 17-5)  
Sec. 18-6. - Dogs in school grounds or buildings; fines. 
(a)  No person owning, harboring or having custody of a dog shall allow any such dog on school grounds or in school buildings from one hour before the opening of school until the closing of school on days when schools are in session. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), any blind person, or deaf or hearing handicapped person, or other physically handicapped person accompanied by a guide dog, shall be entitled to any and all accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of all public conveyances, public amusements and places of public accommodation pursuant to M.G.L. c. 272, § 98A. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be fined in accordance with M.G.L. c. 140, § 173A. 
(Ord. of 2-20-1975, § 1; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Dogs generally, § 4-15 et seq.  
Secs. 18-7—18-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SCHOOL COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to school committee, § 4-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees generally, § 2-400 et seq. 
State Law reference— School committee, M.G.L. c. 43, § 31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-139, adopted Aug. 14, 2018, repealed § 18-20, which pertained to elections and terms and derived from Code 1970, § 17-15.  
Sec. 18-21. - Annual estimate of financial requirements. 
The school committee shall present to the mayor annually, an estimate in writing of the financial requirements of the public schools for the following year, in accordance with M.G.L. c. 44. 
(Code 1970, § 17-16) 
State Law reference— Report of estimated expenses, M.G.L. c. 44, § 31A.  
Sec. 18-22. - Record and report of receipts and expenditures. 
The school committee shall keep an accurate record of all receipts and expenditures and shall make a full report annually to the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 17-17)  
Sec. 18-23. - Certification of accounts and claims. 
All accounts and claims approved by the school committee shall be certified by the secretary of the committee. 
(Code 1970, § 17-18)  
Sec. 18-24. - Function as to improved or additional accommodations. 
The school committee shall be the original judge of the expediency and necessity of having additional or improved accommodations for any of the public schools within the corporate limits of the city, and whenever, in its opinion, a school building is required, or material alterations needed, it shall forward a communication to the city council, stating the locality and the nature of the provisions desired. 
(Code 1970, § 17-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 43, § 34.  
Secs. 18-25—18-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VOCATIONAL SCHOOL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Vocational schools, M.G.L. c. 74, § 1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-35. - Established. 
The Gloucester Vocational School, comprising day and evening vocational classes, is hereby established in compliance with and under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 69 and 74. 
(Code 1970, § 17-30)  
Sec. 18-36. - Management and control. 
The entire management and control of the vocational school and of all property pertaining to the same shall be vested in the school committee. 
(Code 1970, § 17-31)  
Sec. 18-37. - Officers and teachers. 
The school committee shall provide all necessary officers and teachers for the vocational school. 
(Code 1970, § 17-32) 
State Law reference— Employment of teachers for vocational education, M.G.L. c. 74, § 22E.  
Sec. 18-38. - To be operated in such manner as to entitle city to reimbursement by commonwealth. 
The school committee shall so conduct the affairs of the vocational school and shall do all things in connection therewith in such manner as to entitle the city to be reimbursed by the commonwealth as provided by law. 
(Code 1970, § 17-33)  
Sec. 18-39. - Cooperation with industry. 
The school committee shall enter into such arrangements of cooperation with proprietors of the various industries of the city as the school committee shall deem expedient in the operation of the vocational school. 
(Code 1970, § 17-34)  
Sec. 18-40. - Appropriations; records and accounts to be kept. 
All appropriations necessary for the maintenance of the vocational school shall be included in the annual budget for the care and maintenance of city schools. The school committee shall cause to be kept an accurate record of its acts in relation to the school, and shall keep a full itemized account of the receipts and expenditures which relate to the maintenance of the school. 
(Code 1970, § 17-35)  
Chapter 19 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Hawkers and peddlers, ch. 11. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - License fees. 
The following license fees shall be assessed by the city, collected by the city clerk's office and shall expire on May 1 of each year, for dealers in the following items: 
(1)  Secondhand furniture and articles: $100.00. 
(2)  Junk and/or old gold: $100.00. 
(3)  Antiques: $100.00. 
(4)  Auctioneer permits: 
a.  Annual permits: $200.00. 
b.  Special permit, per day (to include rain date) for a one-day, site specific auction (not to exceed ten dates in a calendar year): $25.00. 
(Code 1970, § 2-16(c); Ord. No. 22-1996, § I, 7-9-1996; Ord. No. 2015-255, 12-15-2015)  
Secs. 19-2—19-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNK DEALERS, ANTIQUE DEALERS AND DEALERS IN USED GOODS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Dismantled, wrecked, etc., motor vehicles, § 9-9. 
State Law reference— Junk dealers generally, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 54, 56, 202—205; control of certain junkyards, M.G.L. c. 140B. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-15. - Sign to be displayed. 
Every keeper of a shop licensed under this article shall place, in some suitable and conspicuous place on his shop, a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters. 
(Code 1970, § 11-1; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-16. - Identification of vehicles used in business. 
Every vehicle, including boats, used in the exercise of the business of any person licensed under this article shall have placed, upon the outside and upon each side, the number of the license and name of the owner thereof, in plain, legible figures and letters, of not less than three inches in size, and so that the same may be distinctly seen and read. 
(Code 1970, § 11-2; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-17. - Examination of shop, inventory, vehicles, etc. 
Every shop licensed under this article and all articles of merchandise therein, and any place, vehicle or receptacle used for the collection or keeping of junk, old metals, antiques, secondhand articles, may be examined at any time by the mayor and members of the police department. 
(Code 1970, § 11-3; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-18. - Record of purchases. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this article shall keep a book in which shall be written, in the English language, at the time of every receipt or purchase, a description of the article purchased, the name, age and residence of the person from whom and the day and hour when such purchase was made. Such book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the mayor and members of the police department. 
(b)  The person licensed to sell goods under this article shall be required to present proper identification and further required to sign a form, under penalty of perjury, containing a statement that the goods being sold together with their description are the legal property of the seller. 
(c)  A copy of the form required by subsection (b) of this section shall be forwarded by the purchaser to the police department and the mayor for their files. 
(Code 1970, § 11-4; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-19. - Articles not to be sold until 30 days after purchase or receipt thereof. 
No item purchased or received by a person licensed under this article shall be sold until a period of at least 30 days from the date of the purchase or receipt of same shall have elapsed. 
(Code 1970, § 11-5; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-20. - Receipt of articles from minors. 
No person licensed as required by this article shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange, any of the articles mentioned herein from any minor. 
(Code 1970, § 11-6; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-21. - Responsibility of dealer for violations. 
Every person licensed under this article shall be responsible for all persons employed by him in the business. Any violation of this article or of the terms of the license by any employee of such dealer, or by any person upon the licensed premises, shall be construed to be a violation of the terms of this article or of the license by the dealer. 
(Code 1970, § 11-7; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Secs. 19-22—19-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 19-30. - Required. 
(a)  Every person keeping a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, antiques, old metals or secondhand articles, and every person collecting, by purchase or otherwise, junk, antiques, old metals or secondhand articles, from place to place, shall be licensed by the licensing commission whether any such collector is engaged in business in his own behalf or employed by another. 
(b)  Every person maintaining a junkyard shall be subject to this division and shall obtain a license in accord herewith. Junk yard or recycling center shall mean a site or facility used for the collection, storage, salvage, disposal, dismantling, processing, recycling, sale, or resale, of waste materials including paper, rags, cloth, metal, glass, batteries, rubber, parts from old or damaged motor vehicles and equipment, and other discarded goods and materials. These materials are generally but not necessarily stored in the open air or under a roofed structure rather than within a fully enclosed building. An accumulation of such items on private property constitutes the maintenance of a junkyard and requires a license under this division. 
(Code 1970, § 11-19(a), (b); Ord. No. 2015-255, 12-15-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to license junk dealers, M.G.L. c. 140, § 54.  
Sec. 19-31. - Applicant to present receipt from sealer of weights and measures. 
No license shall be issued under this division, unless the applicant presents a receipt from the sealer of weights and measures showing that the weights and measures used by him have been properly inspected, tested and sealed immediately preceding the issuance of his license. 
(Code 1970, § 11-21; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1) 
Cross reference— Weights and measures, ch. 26.  
Sec. 19-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-255, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, repealed § 19-32, which pertained to fees and derived from Code 1970, § 11-22; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1; and Ord. No. 123-1998, § I, adopted Sept. 29, 1998.  
Sec. 19-33. - Form. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall set forth the name of the licensee, the nature of the business and shall designate the place where the licensee may carry on his business. The licensee shall not carry on the business at any other place within the city. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article shall be incorporated into each license granted under this division. 
(c)  All licenses issued under this division shall contain a clause stipulating that the licensee agrees to abide by and be subject to all the provisions of this article or any section of this Code or other ordinance which may be adopted by the city council relating to the sale of junk, antiques, old metal and secondhand articles. 
(Code 1970, §§ 11-24—11-26; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 202.  
Sec. 19-34. - Issuance; signing; recordation. 
The city clerk, as clerk of the licensing commission, shall issue and sign the licenses required by this division. The clerk shall keep a record of all licenses so issued. 
(Code 1970, § 11-23) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 202.  
Sec. 19-35. - Expiration. 
All licenses issued under this division shall expire on May 1, annually, unless otherwise provided for by law. 
(Code 1970, § 11-27; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 202.  
Sec. 19-36. - Suspension. 
(a)  Violation of any section of this article shall cause suspension of the license for 60 days for the first offense, one year for the second offense and a permanent suspension for the third offense. 
(b)  More than one violation at any one time shall cause suspension of the license permanently. 
(Code 1970, § 11-19(c), (d); Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Sec. 19-37. - Revocation—Generally. 
Any license granted under this division may be revoked and annulled at any time by the licensing commission. No such license, or anything done, or right acquired by virtue of the same, shall entitle any person to a continuance of such license, permission or thing done, or right acquired. 
(Code 1970, § 11-28; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1) 
State Law reference— Revocation of such licenses, M.G.L. c. 140, § 54; recordation of revocation and notice thereof to licensee, M.G.L. c. 140, § 205.  
Sec. 19-38. - Same—For keeping intoxicating liquor, marijuana or marijuana products. 
If any intoxicating liquors, marijuana or marijuana products are found upon any premises licensed under this division the licensing commission shall immediately revoke the license therefor, and no license shall be granted to any person whose license is revoked under this section until at least two years from the date of revocation. 
(Code 1970, § 11-29; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-077, adopted May 22, 2018, amended § 19-38 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Same—For keeping intoxicating liquor" to "Same—For keeping intoxicating liquor, marijuana or marijuana products," as set out herein.  
Sec. 19-39. - Doing business without license; violating terms of license; etc. 
Any person who, not being licensed as required by this division, keeps a shop or conducts a business as if he were licensed under this division, or, being licensed, keeps such shop or conducts such business in any other place or manner than that designated in his license, or after notice to him that his license has been revoked, and any person who violates any rule, regulation or restriction contained in his license, shall be punished as provided in M.G.L. c. 140, § 55. 
(Code 1970, § 11-30; Ord. of 5-27-1976, § 1)  
Secs. 19-40—19-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 79, 85, 202—205. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-50. - Bond. 
Every person licensed as a pawnbroker shall execute a bond to the city in the sum of $300.00, with two sureties approved by the city council, and conditioned that the licensee will conform to the requirements of this chapter and the laws of the commonwealth, so far as the same relate to pawnbrokers. 
(Code 1970, § 14-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 77.  
Sec. 19-51. - Records to be kept; inspection. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which, at the time of making a loan, shall be legibly written in the English language an account and description, including all distinguishing marks and numbers, of the articles pawned, the amount of money loaned thereon, the time of pawning them, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person pawning such articles. Such pawnbrokers shall furnish a correct record of all such transactions, containing all such information, once a week to the licensing commission or to any person designated by them. Every pawnbroker shall also photograph any person pawning articles and keep the photographs with his books as part of his records. 
(b)  The book and articles left for pawn shall at all times be open to the inspection of the mayor, the chief of police, police officers or any person authorized by the mayor in writing, upon exhibition of such written authority to such pawnbroker, to examine them. 
(Code 1970, § 14-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, §§ 79, 81.  
Sec. 19-52. - Receiving articles from minors. 
No pawnbroker shall, directly or indirectly, receive any article in pawn from any minor, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe him to be such, without the consent in writing of the parent or guardian of such minor. 
(Code 1970, § 14-3)  
Sec. 19-53. - Articles not to be sold until four months after purchase or receipt thereof. 
(a)  No nonperishable item purchased or received by a person licensed under this article shall be sold until a period of at least four months from the date of the purchase or receipts of same shall have elapsed. 
(b)  No perishable item purchased or received by a person licensed under this article shall be sold until a period of at least one month from the date of the purchase or receipts of same shall have elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 7-1996, § I, 3-19-1996; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019)  
Secs. 19-54—19-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 19-60. - Required. 
No person shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker in the city unless he is duly licensed by the licensing commission. 
(Code 1970, § 14-14) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to license pawnbrokers, M.G.L. c. 140, § 70.  
Sec. 19-61. - Fee. 
The fee for a pawnbroker's license under this article shall be $100.00, which sum shall be deposited with the city clerk at the time of application. Such fee shall be returned if the license is not granted to the person signing the application. 
(Code 1970, § 14-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 77.  
Sec. 19-62. - Form. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall set forth the name of the licensee, the nature of the business and shall designate the place where the licensee may carry on his business. The licensee shall not carry on the business at any other place within the city. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article shall be incorporated into every license issued under this division. 
(c)  All licenses issued under this division shall contain a clause stipulating that the licensee agrees to abide by and be subject to all the provisions of this article or any section of this Code or other ordinance which may be adopted by the city council relating to pawnbrokers. 
(Code 1970, §§ 14-17, 14-18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 202.  
Sec. 19-63. - Issuance; signing; recordation. 
The city clerk shall issue and sign the license required by this division, as the clerk of the licensing commission. The clerk shall keep a record of all licenses so issued. 
(Code 1970, § 14-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 202.  
Sec. 19-64. - Expiration. 
All licenses issued under this division shall expire on May 1, annually, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1970, § 14-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 140, § 202.  
Sec. 19-65. - Revocation; confers no vested right. 
Any license granted under this division may be revoked and annulled at any time by the licensing commission. No such license or anything done, or right acquired by virtue of the same, shall entitle any person to a continuance of such license or thing done or right acquired. 
(Code 1970, § 14-20) 
State Law reference— Revocation of such licenses, M.G.L. c. 140, § 70; recordation of revocation and notice thereof to the licensee, M.G.L. c. 140, § 205.  
Chapter 20 - SHELLFISH, SEAWORMS AND EELS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 49-1995, § I, adopted Nov. 28, 1995, amended former ch. 20. §§ 20-1—20-10, 20-20—20-28, to read as herein set out. Former ch. 20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1970 and the following: 
Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Section 	Date 
— 	I 	10-28-1980 	— 	I 	6-5-1984 
— 	I 	2-2-1982 		I 	7-10-1984 
— 	I 	3-2-1982 		I 	1-22-1985 
— 	I 	4-13-1982 	16-1991 	I 	5-28-1991 
— 	I 	5-18-1982 	17-1991 	I 	5-28-1991 
— 	I 	11-9-1982 	18-1992 	I 	7-7-1992 
— 	I 	4-19-1983 			
 
Cross reference— Animals, ch, 4; harbors and related tidal waters, ch, 10. 
State Law reference— Marine fish and fisheries, M.G.L. c. 130; local control of shellfisheries, M.G.L. c. 130, §§ 52—56. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Shellfish constable; deputy shellfish constables. 
The mayor shall appoint a shellfish constable in accordance with M.G.L. c. 130, § 98, and may appoint two fulltime or parttime deputy shellfish constables. Each shellfish constable shall be paid such salary as is established by ordinance. The mayor also may appoint as many unpaid deputy shellfish constables as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-140 et seq. 
State Law reference— Shellfish constables, M.G.L. c. 130, § 98.  
Sec. 20-2. - Shellfish advisory commission. 
(a)  Created; membership; appointment; compensation. There is hereby created and established in the city a commission to be known as the shellfish advisory commission. The commission shall consist of five members of all whom shall be citizens of the city and shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, and shall be unpaid. 
(b)  Terms of members; chairperson. All members of the shellfish advisory commission shall be appointed for three-year terms. The commission shall choose one of their members to be chairperson. 
(c)  Compensation. The shellfish advisory commission shall consist of three persons from the shellfish industry, the chairperson of the conservation commission or his designee and a marine biologist, if available. 
(d)  Duties. The shellfish advisory commission shall advise the mayor and city council on all matters pertaining to shellfish, seaworms and eels. The commission may establish, subject to approval by the city council, a management plan with rules and regulations relating to the issuance of permits and taking of shellfish, seaworms and eels. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils, and committees, § 2-400 et seq.  
Sec. 20-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bushel means a unit of measure, equivalent to four pecks or 60 pounds. 
City means the City of Gloucester. 
Commonwealth means the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Fulltime student means a student submitting proof of fulltime student status, providing school transcript showing full course load, proof of age and parental consent if under age of 17. 
Private grant means a time limited lease of a specified shellfish growing area to one or more individuals. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is the city. 
Seaworm means invertebrate animals belonging to the Phylum Annelida, specifically, sea worms, sometimes called blood worms or clam worms. 
Seed clam means juvenile shellfish. 
Shellfish means invertebrate animals belonging to the Phylum Mollusca, specifically, soft shell clam, blue mussel, horse mussel, quahog, ocean quahog, oyster, razor clam, surf clam, bay scallop, sea scallop. 
Shellfish industry means activities involving the cultivation, harvest, processing, selling of shellfish. 
Temporary resident means a person who owns real estate in the city or possesses a yearround lease on real estate in the city and who occupies that real estate on at least a seasonal basis. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 11-96, § I, 4-2-1996)  
Sec. 20-4. - Area set aside for noncommercial taking of shellfish. 
The city council does hereby set aside the area of tidal flats located in the city, commencing from a point west of No. 10 nun buoy bordering Annisquam River, thence in a northerly direction to the sand bar opposite Annisquam Light. From this area, shellfish may be taken, for their own family use, by any resident of the commonwealth holding the permit mentioned in section 20-22, and from which area the commercial taking of shellfish is hereby prohibited in accordance M.C.L.A. c. 130, § 52. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-5. - Taking shellfish from contaminated areas. 
(a)  No person shall dig or take shellfish from prohibited areas as defined by the state division of marine fisheries. 
(b)  No person shall dig or take shellfish from restricted areas as defined by the state division of marine fisheries unless they hold a permit to do so issued under section 20-21. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995) 
State Law reference— Shellfish in contaminated areas, M.G.L. c. 130, § 74 et seq.  
Sec. 20-6. - Continuing biological evaluation of shellfish flats. 
The mayor shall cause a continuing biological evaluation of the shellfish flats to be made by a qualified marine biologist from either the state division of marine fisheries or such other qualified marine biologist selected by the mayor. The mayor shall submit the findings and recommendations of the marine biologist to the shellfish advisory commission and to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-7. - Closing of flats for shellfish taking. 
The city council may, from time to time, to preserve the shellfish resources, close any flat and prohibit the taking of shellfish for a period not to exceed three years. The areas so closed by the city council shall be plainly marked by stakes and bounds and at each shall be posted a written notice setting out the fact of closing and the period during which such areas shall be closed. After the areas have been so closed and posted, it shall be unlawful for any person to take shellfish therefrom or to injure the flats. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-8. - Mill Pond closed for taking of eels from December 1 to April 1. 
The taking of eels from the waters of the Mill Pond, in that part of the city called Riverdale, the extent of which pond is shown on a plan in the city engineer's office, is hereby prohibited from December 1 to April 1 each year. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to prohibit taking of eels, M.G.L. c. 130, § 52.  
Sec. 20-9. - Removal of shellfish or marine worms at night prohibited. 
No person shall dig, take or carry away, shellfish or marine worms between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise from any water, flats, or creeks within the limits and bounds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-10. - Interfering with seeding, cultivation, etc., of oysters. 
The digging, molesting, or in any way interfering with seeding, cultivation and propagation of shellfish, their seedlings and equipment is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995; Ord. of 3-13-2001(01), § I)  
Sec. 20-11. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
The sections of this chapter shall constitute regulations under the authority of M.G.L. c. 130, § 2, and each violation of this chapter shall be punished by fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Fines imposed under this section shall be in addition to any suspension or revocation of licenses or permits granted under this chapter. The only exception to the above being that any violation of section 20-30(a) or violation of section 20-30(b) shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  First offense: $100.00 fine and loss of license for 30 days; 
(2)  Second offense within one year of the first offense: $200.00 fine and loss of license for 90 days; 
(3)  Third offense within one year of the second offense: $300.00 fine and loss of license for one calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Secs. 20-12—20-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to issue permits for the taking of shellfish, seaworms and eels, M.G.L. c. 130, § 52. 
 
Sec. 20-20. - Required—Generally. 
Unless otherwise provided by this chapter or the laws of the commonwealth, no person shall dig or take shellfish, seaworms, or eels within the city without a valid permit. Any person who loses their right to take the aforementioned, whether through expiration, suspension or revocation of their permit issued by the commonwealth, by judicial or administrative action or otherwise, shall not later than five days thereafter surrender their municipal permit to the city clerk who shall retain the permit until the termination of the period of revocation, suspension or other loss of right to take shellfish. No municipal permits shall be issued to any person whose aforementioned permits from the commonwealth or permit from this or any other municipality within the commonwealth is under suspension. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-21. - Same—For commercial purposes. 
(a)  The licensing agent may issue permits to take shellfish, seaworms or eels at any place within the city, except the area mentioned in section 20-4 for commercial purposes in accord with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  To be eligible for a commercial permit under this section, an applicant must be a resident of the city for one consecutive year, prior to June 30, of the year application is made. Such applicant shall complete their permit application and submit it to the licensing agent for review together with any additional information or documentation required by the licensing agent to demonstrate eligibility. 
(c)  For the purpose of preserving or protecting shellfish, sea worms and eels, the city council from time to time may establish limits on the taking thereof for commercial purposes. Such limits shall apply to such places, whether approved or restricted and for such period of time as the city council may determine. 
(d)  All commercial permits, including renewal applications, issued under this section shall be issued during the month of June of each year only, effective July 1 and shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(e)  Any inhabitant of the commonwealth who is not a resident of the city who wishes to apply for a commercial permit to take shellfish from restricted areas only within the city must apply for same during the month of June of each year. 
(f)  Any fulltime student whose primary residence is the city and meeting the requirements of fulltime student as defined in section 20-3, definitions, may purchase a commercial shellfish permit for one-half price. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-19-1995; Ord. No. 11-96, § II, 4-2-1996; Ord. No. 88-1998, § I, 4-29-1998)  
Sec. 20-22. - Same—For noncommercial purposes. 
(a)  The licensing agent may issue to any resident of the commonwealth, permits to take, for one's own use, and for the use of one's family and guests, but not for commercial purposes, shellfish, seaworms or eels. 
(b)  Any resident of the commonwealth who is neither a permanent nor a temporary resident of the city may obtain a daily or annual permit under this section. Nonresidents may also obtain a noncommercial shellfish and seaworm permit. Any resident of the commonwealth who is either a permanent or temporary resident of the city may obtain an annual permit under this section. 
(c)  A permit issued under this section shall not allow the taking of shellfish, seaworms or eels of a size or at a season prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-23. - Taking of seaworms—In accordance with chapter provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take any sea worms from any place within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any resident of the commonwealth who holds a permit issued under section 20-22 may take seaworms subject to the limitations contained in section 20-30(c) and that the worms are to be used as bait for the personal use of the resident and seaworms shall not be taken for commercial purposes. This subsection shall not authorize the taking of sea worms from areas that are closed for municipal cultivation or set aside as private grants. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-24. - Same—For commercial purposes. 
The licensing agent may issue permits authorizing the commercial taking of sea worms from any areas within the geographical limits of the city and waters thereof, except those areas which are closed for municipal cultivation or set aside as private grants. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-25. - Handheld fork to be used in taking shellfish and sea worms. 
A handheld tined-type fork is the only implement that may be used for the digging or taking of shellfish and sea worms. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-26. - Permit to take eels generally; restrictions as to traps; Fyke nets prohibited. 
(a)  No trap shall be set in a manner likely to take mammals or be set to block streams or channels. No Fyke nets shall be allowed. No person shall have eels in their possession less than six inches in length, unless they have a special permit to do so. 
(b)  All traps set for the taking of eels must have owner's identification such as name or the last four digits of social security number on the buoy. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995; Ord. No. 61-1997, § I, 9-2-1997)  
Sec. 20-27. - Permit for scientific work in coastal waters and flats of city. 
(a)  No person shall conduct scientific experiments, investigations, research or laboratory work on the coastal waters and flats of the city without obtaining a special permit therefor from the city council. 
(b)  The only exception to the requirement of this section shall be collection permits granted by the state division of marine fisheries for the purpose of conducting scientific experiments. School and scout groups may be exempted when conducting experiments. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-28. - Free permit for senior citizens. 
Residents 70 years of age and over shall be granted free permits. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-29. - Fees. 
The following fee schedule (per annum) shall be followed: 
(1)  Resident, commercial, shellfish/sea worm: $400.00. 
(2)  Resident, commercial, shellfish, fulltime student (to be reviewed in two years after the adoption of this amendment): $200.00. 
(3)  Resident, commercial, senior (70 + yrs), shellfish/sea worm, eel: free. 
(4)  Resident, commercial, sea worm: $40.00. 
(5)  Resident, commercial, eel: $50.00. 
(6)  Resident, noncommercial, eel: no permit. 
(7)  Resident, noncommercial, shellfish/sea worm: $50.00. 
(8)  Resident, noncommercial, senior (70 + yrs) shellfish/sea worm: free. 
(9)  Nonresident, commercial, restricted areas, shellfish: $400.00. 
(10)  Nonresident, noncommercial, one day, shellfish: $25.00. 
(11)  Nonresident, noncommercial, shellfish/sea worm: $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995; Ord. No. 11-96, § III, 4-2-1996; Ord. of 5-28-2002(01), § I; Ord. No. 2009-144, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 20-30. - Limits. 
(a)  Shellfish, commercial. Each duly licensed commercial shellfisherman may harvest from approved and conditionally approved areas 200 pounds (including sack weight) of any or all kinds of shellfish per tide except: 
(1)  Sea clams (which may not be harvested commercially) where the noncommercial limit shall apply. 
(2)  Areas periodically designated by the city council as shellfish management areas to which special limitations may apply. When water quality allows for harvesting in the following areas: Cambridge Avenue Beach, Lighthouse Beach, Hodgkins Cove Beach and Plum Cove Beach, that they be seasonally closed for Shellfish Harvesting from June 1 through September 30, inclusive. 
In addition, no person shall take or have in their possession soft-shelled clams less than two inches in longest diameter of the shell to the amount more than five percent of any one batch. 
(b)  Shellfish, noncommercial. The amount taken by any individual for their family use shall not exceed 15 pounds of any kind or all kinds of shellfish in any one day and shall not exceed 60 pounds in any one calendar week, except that in the case of sea clams, the entire calendar week unit of 60 pounds may be taken in one day. In addition, no person shall take or have in their possession soft-shelled clams less than two inches in longest diameter of the shell to the amount more than five percent of any one batch. 
(c)  Sea worms, noncommercial. Any resident of the commonwealth who holds a permit issued under section 20-22 may take not exceeding one quart of sea worms at any one tide provided the worms so taken are to be used for bait for the personal use of the resident and no commercial use is made of such worms. This subsection shall not authorize the taking of sea worms from areas which are closed for municipal cultivation or set aside as private grants. 
(d)  Eels. Any resident of the city may take eels by the following methods for noncommercial use: five pots or less, eel spear or angling. The noncommercial limit shall be no more than 20 eels per day. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995; Ord. No. 61-1997, § II, 9-2-1997; Ord. No. 128-1998, § I, 10-27-1998)  
Sec. 20-31. - Commercial shellfishermen; reciprocity. 
Any person who has resided in the city and has held a city commercial shellfish permit who changes their permanent residence to the Towns of Essex or Ipswich may apply for a city commercial shellfish permit which shall expire upon said person's having attained one year's residence in the Towns of Essex or Ipswich. 
(Ord. No. 49-95, § I, 12-29-1995)  
Sec. 20-32. - Public notice. 
In order to inform the public on the openings of previously closed shellfish areas that have either been closed due to unacceptable water quality or for conservation purposes, excluding red tide and rain closures, a public notice shall be placed in the local newspaper one week in advance of the opening date. 
(Ord. No. 89-1998, § I, 4-29-1998)  
Chapter 21 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances or resolutions dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades of any street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); ascertainment of street grades, levels, boundaries, etc., by city engineer, § 2-129; power of department of public works pertaining to streets, sidewalks and other public places, § 2-283; certain animals not to be at large on streets, § 4-1; buildings and building regulations generally, ch. 5; furnishing street lines and grades prior to erection or alteration of fences, walls, or buildings, § 5-1; littering prohibited, § 9-7; hawkers and peddlers generally, ch. 11; sale of food by hawkers and peddlers prohibited upon certain streets, § 11-8; drinking alcoholic beverages upon public ways, § 14-3; planning, ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles generally, ch. 22; temporary closing of streets, § 22-22; driving on road surfaces under construction or repair, § 22-53; driving on sidewalks, § 22-54; insulation of wires running through streets, § 23-86. 
State Law reference— Municipal jurisdiction over highways, M.G.L. c. 82, § 17; regulations relative to sidewalks, M.G.L. c. 83, § 25 et seq.; regulations relative to public ways generally, M.G.L. c. 85; municipal authority to regulate use of public ways for certain purposes, M.G.L. c. 85, § 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Prerequisites to acceptance of ways. 
No ways shall be accepted as public ways of the city unless the order for acceptance is accompanied by a statement in writing, signed by the director of public works, the mayor and the city auditor, stating that sufficient funds are on hand and will be allocated for placing such way in safe condition for travel. 
(Code 1970, § 20-1)  
Sec. 21-2. - Record of street names, widths, etc. 
The city clerk shall keep a book, in which shall be recorded and alphabetically arranged the names of all the streets and ways in the city which are laid out and accepted, with the date of such laying out and acceptance, the widths of such streets and ways, and all alterations made therein from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 20-3)  
Sec. 21-3. - Street names. 
(a)  The several streets, ways and squares in the city shall continue to be called and known by the names heretofore established. 
(b)  All streets and ways hereafter laid out shall be named by the city council. The city council may change the name of any street or way at any time following subsections (c) through (f) of this section. 
(c)  All requests for street names and numbering plans shall be filed with either city clerk or engineering department. The written requests must contain a clear locus map to show the exact location and/or numbering being requested. The engineering department shall route all requests to the city clerk. 
(d)  The city clerk shall forward all street naming and numbering plans to the city council for review at the appropriate standing committee, planning and development. 
(e)  The planning and development committee shall request written reports from the following agencies prior to any final recommendation for action. The agencies and their respective responsibilities are set forth as follows: 
(1)  City engineer. Agency for the development of numbering plans and master list recording. 
(2)  Fire department. Input on sound-alike names, duplicate names, public safety and response aspects. 
(3)  Police department. Input on sound-alike names, duplicate names, public safety and response aspects. 
(4)  Planning department. Review with respect to names and proposed developments to avoid conflicts. 
(5)  Assessors. For review based on assessor's records to avoid conflicts. 
All departments will have 14 days to respond. No response shall indicate no concern with the name or number plan. 
(f)  The decision of the city council, along with the locus map and or numbering plan shall be routed to the departments listed in subsection (e) of this section. 
(Code 1970, § 20-2; Ord. No. 25-1994, § I, 12-13-1994) 
State Law reference— Street names, M.G.L. c. 85, §§ 3—3B.  
Sec. 21-4. - Numbers to be affixed to or inscribed on buildings. 
(a)  Numbers shall be affixed to or inscribed on all dwelling houses and other buildings in regular series, now or hereafter erected on any street or way in the city, in accordance with a plan approved by the city council. Numbers shall be not less than three inches in height and shall be of contrasting color to the surface to which they are attached. Numbers shall be prominently displayed on the house or building in such a manner as to be seen from the street at all times without difficulty. 
(b)  The primary location for numbers shall be near the door facing the street or way that provides the principal approach to the house or building. On houses or buildings obscured from the street by trees or other obstructions and houses or buildings which have a setback in excess of 150 feet from the edge of the traveled way, numbers shall be securely displayed at a distance not more than 20 feet from the edge of the traveled way. Property owners shall be notified in writing of their assigned house number in accordance with a plan approved by the city council. 
(c)  Penalty for violation of section 21-3(b). Upon finding a violation of section 21-4(b) the enforcement officer shall first issue a written warning notice. If the building is not properly numbered within 30 days, the enforcement officer may file a complaint or issue a ticket pursuant to 1-15. Upon finding a violation on section 21-4(b) the district court may fine the violator $20.00 for each offense. 
(d)  This section shall be enforced by the city building inspector or his agent. All notices and complaints shall be directed to the owner of the real estate. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20-5, 20-5.1; Ord. of 5-3-1983, § I; Ord. No. 20-1990, § I, 9-25-1990) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require numbering of buildings, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21(10).  
Sec. 21-5. - Placement and maintenance of street signs. 
In the interest of public safety, the city shall provide to those streets and ways renamed or newly named under the E911 emergency response system, street signs and poles (as necessary) conforming to the city sign regulations, whether those streets are public or private. 
(Code 1970, § 20-4; Ord. No. 21-1996, § I, 7-9-1996) 
State Law reference— Erection and maintenance of traffic signs and devices by municipalities, M.G.L. c. 85, §§ 1, 2.  
Sec. 21-6. - Authority of city council to establish, grade and construct sidewalks and make assessments therefor. 
The city council may establish, grade and construct sidewalks, and complete partially constructed sidewalks, with or without edgestones or curbing, and may cover the same with brick, flat stones, concrete, gravel or other appropriate material, in such streets of the city as, in its judgment, the public convenience may require, and may assess the abutters on such sidewalks, as provided in M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 26 through 28. The council may also cause edgestones to be set and gravel sidewalks constructed in any public street in the city, whenever they deem it necessary for the better protection of the street or foot travelers, and the expense thereof shall be paid from the appropriate department; provided, however, that no such edgestones shall be set or sidewalk constructed, until the council has by vote authorized the same. 
(Code 1970, § 20-6) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish, grade and reconstruct sidewalks, M.G.L. c. 83, § 25.  
Secs. 21-7, 21-8. - Reserved.  
Sec. 21-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-152, adopted July 14, 2015, repealed § 21-9, which pertained to the sale or display of goods and derived from Code 1970, § 20-11; Ord. of 9-13-1977, § 1; and Ord. of 9-6-1983, § I.  
Sec. 21-10. - Discharge of water or other liquid on street or sidewalk. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, on any building within the city, any gutter, spout or other fixture for the purpose of conveying water from such building to the street, unless the gutter, spout or other fixture is so constructed as to prevent any water from the same from discharging its contents upon the surface of the sidewalk. No person shall maintain or operate a washstand or any other business necessitating the disposal of water or other liquid in such a manner that water or other liquid is discharged on a street or sidewalk, such person being required to connect the waste water or other liquid discharge with and into the nearest public catch basin without the same first passing over a sidewalk or street. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain or cause to be placed or maintained on any property within the city any gutter, spout, discharge hose or pipe, or other fixture for the purpose of conveying or discharging water from such property or structures on such property, upon the surface of any sidewalk, street, way or highway; thus, causing or creating an unsafe or hazardous condition or causing deterioration of same. 
(c)  If any such person, who has other options, should refuse or neglect to keep any such sidewalk, street or way free from ice or unsafe for public travel from the improper discharge of water, then the city, through the department of public works, shall repair and keep the sidewalk or street reasonably safe for public travel, and the city shall be reimbursed for the expense of same in an action or contract against the owner of the offending property at the discretion of the department of public works director. 
(Code 1970, § 20-18; Ord. No. 8-1996, §§ I, II, 3-26-1996) 
Cross reference— Sewers, § 23-15 et seq.; water, § 23-55 et seq.  
Sec. 21-11. - Playing ball, shooting air guns, throwing snowballs, skateboarding, etc. 
(a)  No person shall shoot with or use a bow and arrow, sling or air gun, play at ball, fly any kite or balloon or throw a stone, snowball or any other missile in any street of the city. 
(b)  No person shall skateboard on sidewalks, streets or on city-owned public property in the business district or Stacy Boulevard and as further described in subsection (b)(1) of this section, except where specifically designated for this purpose or during a special city function, determined by the chief of police. 
(1)  Skateboarding prohibited in the following areas: 
a.  Angle Street. 
b.  Boynton Way. 
c.  Center Street. 
d.  City hall parking lot. 
e.  Dale Avenue from Prospect to Middle Street. 
f.  Duncan Street. 
g.  Fitz Hugh Lane lot. 
h.  Flannagan Square. 
i.  Hancock Street. 
j.  Harbor Loop. 
k.  Harbor lot. 
l.  Legion Plaza. 
m.  Lexington Avenue, Norman Avenue to Flume Road, both sides. 
n.  Library walkway and steps. 
o.  Main Street, full length. 
p.  Mansfield Way. 
q.  Manuel Lewis Road. 
r.  Middle Street. 
s.  Parsons Street. 
t.  Pleasant Street from Prospect Street to Main Street. 
u.  Pleasant Street lot. 
v.  Police station/courthouse parking lot/steps. 
w.  Porter Street. 
x.  Rogers Street, full length. 
y.  Short Street. 
z.  Town landing lot. 
aa.  Warren Street. 
bb.  Western Avenue, east and west of the Blynman Bridge from Hough Avenue to the "tavern," both sides. 
(2)  Definition. 
Skateboard. 
a.  The term "skateboard" means any wheeled device consisting of a platform or seat of metal, wood, plastic or any other material designed for recreational purposes to carry it user in an erect, kneeling, sitting or prone position in a manner similar to that of a true surfboard, whether propelled solely by the physically efforts of its user or users or by the use of a small motor. 
b.  The term "skateboard" does not include a wheelchair or any similar device used to provide transportation for any disabled person. 
(3)  Penalties. 
a.  First offense: written warning notice. 
b.  Second offense: $25.00. 
c.  Third offense and each offense thereafter: $50.00. 
Enforcing persons: police department personnel. 
(c)  Prohibited use of mini-motor bikes (aka pocket bikes, pocket rockets) and motorized scooters (not approved by the registry of motor vehicles) for purposes of public safety. 
(1)  Two-wheel miniature motorized bikes also known as pocket bikes and/or pocket bikes and/or pocket rockets, and/or motorized scooters (not RMV approved) are prohibited at all times from the streets, ways, highways, bridges, and sidewalks of the city. Excluded from this section are permissive private ways where owners exercise dominion over these ways. 
(2)  Two-wheel miniature motorized scooters (not RMV approved) are prohibited from operating on all public property including but not limited to school grounds, parks, conservation land, cemeteries, beaches, and parking lots. 
(3)  Two-wheel miniature motorized bikes, and motorized scooters (not RMV approved) may be operated only on private property and only with permission of all owners of that property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
(4)  Violations of this section shall subject the operator of the miniature motorized bike to confiscation of the bike and to the penalties as provided in subsection (b) of this section as follows: 
a.  First offense: written warning. 
b.  Second offense: $25.00. 
c.  Third offense and each offense thereafter: $50.00. 
(5)  This subsection shall also be enforced noncriminally by way of ticketing as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1970, § 20-19; Ord. No. 62-1997, § I, 9-16-1997; Ord. of 8-10-2004(03), § I) 
Editor's note— The term "street" or "way" is defined in section 1-2; the term "sidewalk" is defined in section 1-2.  
Sec. 21-12. - Encroachments. 
No person shall erect or cause to be erected any fence, wall or building on the line of any street, without first ascertaining the line and grade of the street from the city engineer. If any encroachment shall be made upon any street, and the party making it neglects or refuses to remove the same, the director of public works shall cause the person so offending to be prosecuted for such offense. 
(Code 1970, § 20-9)  
Sec. 21-13. - Obstructions; sale or display of goods. 
(a)  Generally. No person, other than one employed directly or indirectly by the city and while in the performance of necessary duties, shall at any time erect or affix or cause to be erected or affixed in any public sidewalk or city street any fixture or structure or place or leave or cause to be placed or left in any public sidewalk or city street any article or material or merchandise or park a vehicle or a cart in any public sidewalk or city street for the purpose of displaying any article or material or merchandise or for customer seating until a permit therefor has first been obtained from the building inspector. 
(b)  Main street. Except as provided in chapter 11, no person shall place or keep any table, stall, booth, erection of any kind, package, bundle or anything upon any street, public place or sidewalk, for the sale or display of, or incidental to the sale or display of, any goods or articles whatever, except on Main Street, between Flannagan Square and Washington Street, where temporary displays of merchandise may be erected on sidewalks by retail merchants in front of their stores. For the purposes of this section, temporary shall mean not in excess of 30 consecutive days. 
(c)  Pedestrians. Temporary displays authorized by subsection (b) of this section shall be only during regular business hours, and a four-foot wide portion of the sidewalk shall remain free and clear of obstructions to pedestrian movement. 
(d)  Removal; fines. Any such fixture, structure, article, material or merchandise in any city street or public sidewalk found to violate this section as determined by the building inspector or his office may be removed by or under the direction of a city police officer and at the owner's expense and such a violation may result in a fine of the cost of removal plus $50.00. 
(Code 1970, § 20-10; Ord. No. 2015-152, 7-14-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-152, adopted July 14, 2015, amended § 21-13, and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Obstructions" to "Obstructions; sale or display of goods," as set out herein. 
State Law reference— Removal of encroachments, obstructions, M.G.L. c. 86, § 3 et seq.  
Sec. 21-14. - Duty of property owners or occupants to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
(a)  Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(b)  Prior to April 1 of each spring, persons owning or occupying property shall also be required to sweep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of sand by sweeping sand accumulated over the winter onto the street along the curbside for pickup by city street sweepers. Sand shall not be swept into storm drains or into piles, but swept uniformly along the length of the sidewalk curbside. 
(Code 1970, § 10-27; Ord. of 11-28-2006(02)) 
State Law reference— Littering onto public ways, M.G.L. c. 265, § 35; refusal to remove litter placed in violation of municipal ordinance, M.G.L. c. 272, § 60.  
Sec. 21-15. - Cutting firewood on street or placing same on sidewalk. 
No person shall saw or cut any firewood in any street or place the same upon any sidewalk. 
(Code 1970, § 20-13)  
Sec. 21-16. - Gates, porches, entrances to cellars or other hazards. 
No person shall make or maintain any gate, doorstep, portico, porch, entrance or passageway to any cellar or basement, or any other structure, intending or swinging into or upon any street or sidewalk in the city. No person shall suffer the platform or gate of the entrance to his cellar or basement, in any street or sidewalk, to rise above the surface thereof, and every such entrance or passageway shall be at all times kept covered by a suitable and substantial platform or gate, unless authorized to be kept open by the mayor and in case it shall be kept open it shall be protected by a sufficient railing on both sides thereof, at least 2½ feet high. 
(Code 1970, § 20-12)  
Sec. 21-17. - Projections over streets, sidewalks, etc.; permits, bonds required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall place or maintain any signs, advertising devices, clocks, marquees, public telephones, telephone booths and other appurtenances thereto, permanent awnings and other like structures projecting into or placed on or over streets, sidewalks or other public ways in the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building inspector. All such structures shall be constructed, and, when attached to a building, shall be connected therewith, in accordance with all applicable state laws, building code regulations, city zoning regulations and applicable ordinance, and approved by the building inspector. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued under subsection (a) of this section until the applicant therefor shall file with the city clerk a liability insurance policy, protecting the city, which is approved by the mayor in the amount of $100,000.00. 
(c)  No liability insurance policy shall be required to be filed under subsection (b) of this section for a permit for an awning, canopy, shade or the frame for any of them, or for any other projection which is constructed of lightweight materials which are not a danger to passersby along the street, sidewalk or other public way over which the object shall project. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to signs or other structures projecting into or over any such street, sidewalk or way a distance of less than 12 inches, nor to poles, wires, conduits, and appurtenances of railroad, railway, telegraph and telephone, water, gas, electric light, heat and power companies. 
(Code 1970, §§ 20-14, 20-15) 
State Law reference— Permits for projections over public ways, M.G.L. c. 85, §§ 8, 9.  
Sec. 21-18. - Throwing ice and snow into street. 
No person shall throw any ice or snow into or place the same in any street outside of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1970, § 20-20)  
Sec. 21-19. - Removal of snow from sidewalks. 
The tenant or occupant, and in case there shall be no tenant or occupant, the owner, or any person having the care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street, lane, court, square or public place within the city, where there is a footway or sidewalk, shall cause all snow that may be thereon to be removed therefrom within six hours after the snow ceases to fall, if it ceases to fall in the daytime, and before 12:00 noon if it ceases to fall in the nighttime. The provisions of this section shall apply to snow which falls from buildings as well as to that which falls from the clouds. 
(Code 1970, § 20-21) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require removal of ice from sidewalks, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21(2), (3); c. 85, § 5.  
Sec. 21-20. - Removal or covering of ice on sidewalks. 
Whenever any footway or sidewalk, or any part thereof, adjoining any building or lot of land on any street, lane, court, square or public place is encumbered with ice, it shall be the duty of the tenant or occupant, and in case there is no tenant or occupant, it shall be the duty of the owner, or any person having the care of the building or lot, to cause the footway or sidewalk to be made safe and convenient, by removing the ice therefrom, or by making the ice even and keeping it covered with sand, ashes or some other suitable material to prevent slipping, within six hours after the ice forms, if in the daytime and before 12:00 noon, if it forms in the nighttime. 
(Code 1970, § 20-22) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require removal of ice from sidewalks, M.G.L. c. 40, § 21(2), (3); c. 85, § 5.  
Sec. 21-21. - Barbed wire fences along sidewalks prohibited; penalty. 
No barbed wire fence shall be built or maintained within six feet above the ground along any sidewalk located on or upon any public street or highway. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(Code 1970, § 20-23) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 86, § 6.  
Sec. 21-22. - Closing of streets, annually. 
The following streets will be closed, annually, from 3:00 p.m. on December 31 to 12:30 a.m. on January 1, for the celebration of First Night in the city: 
(1)  Main Street from Pleasant Street to Porter Street; 
(2)  Middle Street from Washington Street to Pleasant Street; 
(3)  Warren Street; 
(4)  Hancock Street; 
(5)  Center Street; 
(6)  Short Street; and 
(7)  Dale Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 134-1999, § I, 1-19-1999)  
Secs. 21-23—21-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LAYING OUT, ALTERING OR DISCONTINUING STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Laying out, altering, etc., public ways, M.G.L. c. 82. 
 
Sec. 21-35. - General authority of city council. 
(a)  The city council may lay out any new street or way, or widen or otherwise alter or discontinue any street or way, and estimate the damages any individual may sustain thereby. All questions relating to the subject of laying out, widening, altering or discontinuing any street, shall be first acted upon by the council. 
Thompson Street is designated as a "footpath," restricting motor vehicle traffic. 
(Code 1970, § 20-35; Ord. No. 31-1995, § I, 5-30-1995) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to alter, relocate or repair highways, M.G.L. c. 82, § 17; municipal authority to lay out, relocate, alter or discontinue town ways, M.G.L. c. 82, § 21; procedures for abandoning certain municipal ways, M.G.L. c. 82, § 32A.  
Sec. 21-36. - Notice to property owners—Generally. 
(a)  No street or way shall be laid out or altered unless, at least seven days previous thereto, a written notice of the intention of the city council to lay out, alter, or discontinue the same is left by it, or by its order, at the usual place of abode of the owners of the land over which such street or way is proposed to be laid out, altered or discontinued, or unless such notice is delivered to such owner in person or to his tenant or authorized agent. If the owner has no place of abode in the city, and no tenant or authorized agent therein known to the city council, or if, being a resident in the city, he is not known as such to the council, the notice shall be posted up in some public place in the city, or advertised in one or more newspapers of the city, at least seven days before the laying out, altering or discontinuing of such street or way. The notice shall specify the time and place appointed by the council for meeting and hearing the parties interested therein. 
(b)  No street or other public way shall be discontinued or abandoned by the city council except in conformance with the procedures set forth in M.G.L. c. 82, § 32A. 
(Code 1970, § 20-36)  
Sec. 21-37. - Same—Plans prerequisite to issuance. 
The city council shall not issue the order of notice required by section 21-36 until a detailed plan of the proposed laying out, alteration or discontinuance, drawn by a competent engineer, has been filed in the office of the city clerk, such plan to be furnished at the expense of the petitioners, if any, and to be and remain the property of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 20-37)  
Sec. 21-38. - Hearing by city council; view of premises. 
At the time and place appointed in the notice given pursuant to this article, the city council shall meet and hear all parties interested who claim to be heard, and may view the premises. 
(Code 1970, § 20-38)  
Sec. 21-39. - Decision of city council. 
If, after the hearing provided for in this article, the city council deems that the common convenience and benefit of the inhabitants of the city require such street or way to be laid out, altered or discontinued, it may proceed to lay out, alter or discontinue any such street or way. It shall fix the boundaries and measurements of the same, and determine what damages, if any, are sustained by any person in his property, by the laying out, altering or discontinuing of the street or way, and the amount of compensation any such person shall receive. The council shall specify the manner in which any such laying out or alteration shall be completed, and the time allowed the owner of the land through which the street or way may pass to take off trees, fences and other property, which may obstruct the building of any such street or way. 
(Code 1970, § 20-39) 
State Law reference— Acquisition of land for purposes of laying out, altering or relocating town way, M.G.L. c. 82, § 24.  
Sec. 21-40. - Notice to owners of time allowed for removal of trees, fences, etc. 
Upon the laying out, alteration or widening of a street, the city clerk shall notify every owner of land through which the street passes of the time allowed to take off his trees, fences and other property, which will obstruct the building of any such street, and the clerk shall keep a record of the time the notice was sent. 
(Code 1970, § 20-40) 
Cross reference— Trees and shrubs, § 24-15 et seq.  
Sec. 21-41. - Monuments to be erected at terminal and angles. 
The city council shall cause permanent bound stones or monuments to be erected, as provided by statute, at the terminal and angles of all streets or ways laid out or altered by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 20-41) 
State Law reference— Requirements for street monuments, M.G.L. c. 86, § 1.  
Sec. 21-42. - Minimum street width. 
No new street or way, except a footway, shall be laid out and accepted by the city council of a less width than 40 feet, provided the land through which it runs and the estates adjoining the street or way will admit of the width without material injury to the same. The city council may, however, lay out and accept any old street or way, whenever in its judgment the common convenience and benefit of the inhabitants require it. 
(Code 1970, § 20-42)  
Sec. 21-43. - Extension of streets to low-water mark. 
No street or way leading directly to any river, pond or other body of water shall be opened, laid out and accepted by the city council, unless it extends to the low-water mark, if in the opinion of the council it may be so extended without material injury to any adjoining estate. 
(Code 1970, § 20-43)  
Secs. 21-44—21-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Notice of excavations to public utility companies, municipal utility departments and natural gas pipeline companies, M.G.L. c. 82, § 40. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-55. - Permit required. 
No person shall open a permanently constructed street, sidewalk or public way for any purpose whatsoever, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the department of public works. The processes for obtaining such permit shall be governed by procedural rules adopted by the department of public works. These rules shall be subject to the provisions of city Charter § 7-16(b). 
(Code 1970, § 20-54; Ord. No. 7-1992, 2-18-1992; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-55)  
Sec. 21-56. - Application and fee for permit. 
(a)  All persons desiring to open a permanently constructed street, sidewalk or public way, for any purpose whatsoever, shall make applications in writing to the department of public works for a permit so to do. The applicant shall pay to the department of public works a $200.00 application fee and a $300.00 inspection fee for each road opening permit required of the applicant. There shall be no permit fee for work being done by a contractor performing utility work which accommodates a city public works contract. 
(b)  Work performed by those public utilities (gas, electric and telecommunication companies) subject to regulation under M.G.L. chs. 164, 165 and 166A shall not be subject to an inspection fee but are required to pay the applicable application fee only. 
(c)  Work performed by public utilities (gas, electric and telecommunication companies) shall be performed in accordance with the Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications and Energy Special Order D.T.E. 98-22, titled Standards to be Employed by Public Utility Operators When Restoring any of the Streets, Lanes and Highways in Municipalities. 
(Code 1970, § 20-55; Ord. of 9-26-1989, § I; Ord. No. 7-1992, 2-18-1992; Ord. of 11-13-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-56)  
Sec. 21-57. - View of place of excavation and estimate of cost of repair. 
The director of public works or the director's designee, upon receipt of an application for a permit required by section 21-55 shall view the street, sidewalk or public way where the excavation is to be made and estimate the cost of replacing the street, sidewalk or public way in good condition. 
(Code 1970, § 20-56; Ord. No. 7-1992, 2-18-1992; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-57)  
Sec. 21-58. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit under sections 21-55 and 21-56 shall, prior to receiving a permit, further post with the director of public works or the director's designee a bond in the amount of the estimate of replacing the street, sidewalk or public way in good condition, but in no case less than a $5,000.00 performance bond, payable to the city in order to protect the city in the event that after the opening work has been completed, in the final written judgment of the director of public works or the director's designee, the area is not properly restored by the applicant to at least comparable if not better than its condition prior to the opening. No permit is valid nor work may commence until the applicant has posted the performance bond. This bond will be released upon expiration of the guarantee period, as required in section 21-60. 
(b)  Before a permit shall be issued under this article, the applicant or contractor applying for such permit shall also be required to give a certificate of insurance for general liability to the city to indemnify and hold the city financially harmless for any sums which the city shall pay for personal injury or property damage suffered by any person by reason of any street or sidewalk being defective or being out of repair caused by or during the opening of such a permanently constructed street or sidewalk in the amount of: 
(1)  $1,000.00 per accident; and 
(2)  $2,000.00 general aggregate. 
(Ord. of 9-26-1989, § I; Ord. No. 7-1992, 2-18-1992; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-58) 
Editor's note— Section I of an ordinance adopted September 26, 1989, repealed former § 21-58, relative to the payment of cost of repair, and enacted a new § 21-58 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former § 21-58 derived from Code 1970, § 20-57.  
Sec. 21-59. - Fences and lights. 
Whenever any street, sidewalk or public way is opened or dug up, the person in charge of the work which is being performed shall cause a sufficient rail or fence to be erected, so as to enclose that portion of the street, sidewalk or public way or way so opened or dug up and the material thrown therefrom or to be placed therein. Any such fence shall be maintained during the whole time the street, sidewalk or public way is open or dug up, and a lighted red lantern or some other proper and sufficient light shall be affixed to the fence, or placed in the immediate vicinity thereof, from sunset to sunrise each and every night during that time. 
(Code 1970, § 20-58; Ord. No. 7-1992, 2-18-1992; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-59)  
Sec. 21-60. - Release of bond. 
The performance bond shall be in effect and not released until after the guarantee period of three years has expired. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-60) 
State Law reference— Excavations on property abutting public ways, M.G.L. c. 84, §§ 27, 27A.  
Secs. 21-61—21-64. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMANENT EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 21-65. - Permit required. 
No person shall make any permanent excavation under the surface of any street or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of constructing a coal hole, flagpole hole, door or other opening for an entrance to the basement or other part of any building, or for light or air, or for any other purpose, without obtaining a permit therefor from the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 20-64; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-65)  
Sec. 21-66. - Application for permit; approval of type of construction and location. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be filed with the department of public works. Any such application shall be accompanied by a plan or sketch, drawn to scale, showing the type of construction proposed and the exact location desired in the street or sidewalk. The type of construction and location shall first have the approval of the city engineer before the application may be acted upon by the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 20-65; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-66)  
Sec. 21-67. - Bond or insurance. 
(a)  Before a permit shall be issued under this division, the person applying for such permit shall give a bond in the amount of the estimate of replacing the street, sidewalk or public way in good condition, but in no case less than a $5,000.00 performance bond payable to the city in order to protect the city in the event that after the opening work has been completed, in the final written judgment of the director of public works or the director's designee, the area is not properly restored by the applicant to at least comparable if not better than its condition prior to the opening. No permit is valid nor work may commence until the applicant has posted the performance bond. This bond will be released upon expiration of the guarantee period, as required by section 21-71. 
(b)  Before a permit shall be issued under this division, the applicant or contractor applying for such permit shall also be required to give a certificate of insurance for general liability to the city to indemnify and hold the city financially harmless for any sums which the city shall pay for personal injury or property damage suffered by any person by reason of any street or sidewalk being defective or being out of repair caused by or during the opening of such a permanently constructed street or sidewalk in the amount of: 
(1)  $1,000.00 per accident; and 
(2)  $2,000.00 general aggregate. 
(Code 1970, § 20-66; Ord. of 4-5-1983, § I; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-67)  
Sec. 21-68. - Permit conditioned that owner keep streets and sidewalks safe for public travel. 
Every permit granted under this division shall contain a condition that the street or sidewalk used by the public, wherever the coal holes, flagpoles holes, folding doors, light or air conductors, or entrances or openings of any similar kind are to be placed or maintained, shall at all times be kept reasonably safe for public travel by and at the expense of the owner of such building. If any such owner should refuse or neglect to keep and maintain any such street or sidewalk safe for public travel, then the city, through its department of public works, shall repair and keep the street or sidewalk reasonably safe for public travel, and the city may be reimbursed for the expense of same in an action of contract against the owner. 
(Code 1970, § 20-67; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-68)  
Sec. 21-69. - Not to be left open and unguarded. 
No person shall leave any coal holes, flagpole holes, folding doors, entrances, openings or other such apertures covered by this division, open or unfastened between sunset and sunrise in any case, nor in the daytime unless the same shall be actually in use and then it shall be guarded by at least one person. 
(Code 1970, § 20-68; Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-69)  
Sec. 21-70. - Pre-existing permanent excavations. 
Pre-existing permanent excavations constructed prior to the initial effective dates of city ordinances contained in this division shall be subject to biannual inspection by the inspector of buildings or his designee for general public safety purposes. Each owner of a pre-existing permanent excavation in any street or sidewalk shall also give an adequate surety bond or liability insurance policty to the city in the sum of at least $200,000.00 to indemnify and hold the city financially harmless for any sums which the city shall pay for personal injury or property damage suffered by any person by reason of any street or sidewalk being defective or unreasonably out of repair caused by the opening of such a permanently constructed street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-70)  
Sec. 21-71. - Release of bond. 
The performance bond shall be in effect and not released until after the guarantee period of three years has expired. 
(Ord. of 10-17-2006, § 21-71)  
Secs. 21-72—21-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REPAIR OF PRIVATE WAYS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 017-167, adopted Aug. 22, 2017, repealed Art. IV, §§ 21-80—21-86, and reenacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 18, 1980, § 1; and ordinance adopted April 10, 2012(01); and an ordinance adopted Sept. 24, 2013(24). 
State Law reference— Repair of private ways and bridges, M.G.L. c. 84, § 12 et seq. 
 
Sec. 21-80. - Purpose; definitions; exclusions; city not required to maintain. 
(a)  Purpose . The purpose of this article is to provide for the permanent or temporary construction or repair of private ways in the interest of public safety. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Abutter and abutting owner means all persons holding ownership rights in property abutting a private way and all persons holding ownership rights in any property the access to which, by necessity, requires travel over such private way. 
Abutting parcel means any property actually abutting the private way regulated by this article and any property the access to which, by necessity, requires travel over such private way, 
Private way. 
(1)  The term "private way" includes, within the scope of this article, statutory private ways and dedicated private ways. 
a.  The term "statutory private ways" means those ways which have been laid out pursuant to M.G.L. c. 82, § 21 and are subject to M.G.L. c. 84, §§ 23, 24. Such ways are open to the same type and extent of use as public ways. 
b.  The term "dedicated private ways" are those ways that were not laid out under statutory authority but are open to free public use of a nature and extent sufficient to constitute evidence of the permanent intention of abutting property owners to abandon private rights in the ways. 
(2)  The term "private ways" within the scope of this article does not include permissive private ways or unconstructed (paper) ways. 
a.  The term "permissive private ways" means those ways that have not been laid out by a public authority or dedicated to public use and are wholly the subject of private ownership. A permissive private way is open to public use solely by the continuing permission or license of the owner or abutter where such owner or abutter displays a continuing intent to exercise dominion over the way and may, for example, post the way with signs limiting or prohibiting public use. 
b.  The term "unconstructed" or "paper ways" means those ways or portions thereof that have been created on paper by a deed, easement, plan or other instrument or by subdivision or approval not required (ANR) plan under the Subdivision Control Act, but have not yet been paved, improved or otherwise constructed on the ground. 
c.  Pursuant to chapter 325 of the Acts of 2002 and M.G.L. c. 84, § 12 and c. 40, § 6N, this article is intended to establish the process by which temporary and permanent repairs may be made to private ways. 
d.  In order to qualify for permanent or temporary construction or repair under this article, all private ways otherwise eligible must have been open to the public for six or more years and must abut four or more occupied residences or operating businesses. 
e.  None of the ways described in this section are of the type of which the city has an existing duty of maintenance or repair for which the city is liable in damages for defects. Abutters to private ways are responsible for the maintenance of such ways. Constructed private ways must be maintained so that there are no defects to impede the safe passage of emergency vehicles. Nothing in this article is intended to create any duty to maintain or repair such private ways or to subject the city to any liability for defects therein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017)  
Sec. 21-81. - Permanent construction or repair. 
Permanent construction or repair may be performed by the city in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 21-84. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017)  
Sec. 21-82. - Temporary repair. 
(a)  Temporary repair shall include the filling of potholes in the subsurface of private ways and repairs to the surface materials, but shall not include significant excavation, regrading, drainage work, or the resurfacing thereof. 
(b)  Temporary repair may be performed by the city upon a determination by the director of public works that the condition of a way adversely affects the safety of the inhabitants and that repair of a permanent nature is unnecessary to cure the condition, or upon a determination that the condition of the way constitutes an emergency which requires immediate repair in order to protect the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(c)  Such temporary repair shall not be considered as maintenance of the private way nor shall the way be considered a public way as the result of any repair. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017)  
Sec. 21-83. - Funding for approved construction or repair. 
(a)  The total cost of the approved permanent construction or repair work shall be paid by the abutting owners, the amount to be paid will be divided by the number of abutting parcels and assessed to the owners thereof. 
(b)  Betterments shall be assessed and collected for such work in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 80, § 1 et. seq. and other applicable laws. All betterments shall be apportioned at either five or ten year terms based on the size of the project. Individual total assessments totaling $3,000.00 or more may be apportioned over a ten-year term. 
(c)  In the case of temporary repairs, the city shall pay the total cost. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2018-079, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 21-84. - Permanent construction or repair. 
(a)  Any performance of permanent construction or repair to a private way as set forth in this article is subject to the availability of funding and the authorization for said funding must be made by recommendation of the mayor and a two-thirds vote of the city council. 
(b)  Abutters to a private way shall begin the process of seeking permanent repair to the private way by submitting a petition to the city clerk signed by not less than 75 percent of all abutting owners to the private way. Petitioners shall use only official petition forms, available from the city clerk's office upon request. 
Petitioners shall agree in writing that (1) the city may not accept the road as public as a result of the permanent repair process outlined herein; (2) city employees shall be allowed on each abutting parcel in order to repair the private way; (3) any deviation from the current road layout of the existing travelled way as a result of the repair of the private way shall be done at the discretion of the director of public works; and (4) a non-refundable fee shall be assessed with the petition of $1.00 per linear foot of the private way at the discretion of the director of public works. Petitioners shall include the name and contact information for no less than three primary contact persons who shall also be abutting owners. In order to proceed, the city clerk must certify all signatures on the petition as submitted. 
(c)  The city clerk shall refer the petition to the mayor's office with a request for a feasibility determination. 
(d)  The mayor's office shall refer the petition to the department of public works for a feasibility determination whereby the department of public works shall (1) consult with the fire department, police department, conservation commission, chief financial officer/treasurer, and the city engineer; (2) determine the parameters of the project; and (3) set a price range for the project. The director of public works shall then respond to the primary contact persons with, among other things. a memorandum outlining the determinations and an official abutters' list to be used in noticing a meeting of all abutters' as outlined in section 21-84(e). 
(e)  Three or more abutting owners shall call and hold a meeting of abutting owners. Notice of such meeting shall include the date, time and location thereof and shall be given at least seven days in advance by posting the notice in the city clerk's office and by mailing the notice to all abutting owners by certified mail, return receipt requested. A receipt of the certified mailing shall be required as evidence that notice has been provided to all abutting owners. 
(f)  At the meeting as outlined in section 21-84(e), the abutting owners shall vote to determine whether certain repairs are to be sought according to (1) the project parameters and (2) the price range as provided by the director of public works. Seventy-five percent of all abutting owners on the private way must be present at the meeting; 66 percent of all abutting owners on the private way must vote in favor in order to qualify for permanent repair under this article. 
(g)  Any abutting owner may designate a proxy to represent them and cast the requisite vote(s) on matters required by this section. Such a designation shall be a notarized letter by the abutting owner that includes the following: 1) the name and address of the abutting owner, 2) the name and address of the proxy, 3) language from the abutting owner expressly granting permission to the proxy to vote on the abutting owner's behalf, 4) a copy of the proxy's valid state or federal picture identification, and 5) a copy of the abutting owner's valid state or federal picture identification and 6) the abutting owner's signature. The designation documents must be 1) delivered to the city clerk no later than 48 hours before the date and time set for the meeting at which votes will be cast, and 2) presented at the meeting under section 21-84(e) prior to voting. 
(h)  An official record of the meeting as outlined in section 21-84(f), including the attendees' names, addresses and signatures, as well as evidence of the votes cast shall be submitted to the city clerk within seven days of the meeting. 
(i)  The city clerk shall file a copy of the official record with the mayor's office. 
(j)  The mayor's office may submit the petition and official record with a recommendation to the city council for funding consideration. 
(k)  Upon the mayor's submission of the petition, the city council shall hold a public hearing within 60 calendar days except that, by a two-thirds vote thereof, the deadline for the hearing may be extended by no more than 30 days. Review of the petition by the city council shall include a vote on (1) a determination that the construction or repair is required by public necessity and (2) an authorization of funding for the project. 
(l)  Notice of the city council's decision shall be posted and a copy thereof shall be provided to all abutting owners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2019-033, 2-13-2019)  
Sec. 21-85. - Petition submission schedule. 
(a)  All petitions requesting permanent construction or repair pursuant to section 21-84 shall be submitted annually to the city clerk no later than December 31st in order to be scheduled for completion the following year. 
(b)  Should the city fail to complete a project in any given year, the project shall automatically be re-scheduled for the following year. 
(c)  Should the abutters fail to secure the appropriate and necessary approval, the project shall be eligible for re-submission in no less than two years. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017)  
Sec. 21-86. - Municipal liability for construction or repair. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for any damage whatsoever caused by construction or repair performed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No term or provision of this article shall be interpreted or construed to constitute the acceptance by the city of any duty, responsibility or liability for the enforcement of any private right of any petitioner or abutting owner, including without limitation any right to improve or maintain a private way or to keep a private way free from encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-167, 8-22-2017)  
ARTICLE V. - WEST GLOUCESTER FIRING RANGE 
 
Sec. 21-87. - West Gloucester firing range. 
(a)  This article shall govern the use and maintenance of the West Gloucester Firing Range located at the terminus of Forest Lane in West Gloucester ("the range"). The implementation of this article shall be under the control of the director of the department of public works. 
(b)  Use of the range shall be limited to firearms training for active and retired members of the city police department (GPD) and any unit of the armed forces, which is permanently stationed in the city as required by M.G.L. c. 33, § 121. 
(c)  The range shall be open for such training for not more than 15 days each year, all of which shall be held in the month of March and all of which are subject to the notice provisions set forth herein. The hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except that one of the 15 days may be used for evening firearms called "low-light training," to be conducted between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. All training days shall be scheduled only after reasonable prescheduling approval by the DPW director after consultation with the GPD. 
(d)  No shooting is permitted on Saturday or Sunday or state recognized holidays. Not less than seven days prior to each scheduled shooting, the GPD shall provide notice, including identification of the specific date for the evening shoot, if applicable, in the following manner: 
(1)  Written notice to the mayor, the councilor for the ward wherein the range is located and such other city officials may be designated by the DPW director; 
(2)  A posting on the GPD's official web page; and 
(3)  Email notification to any citizen of the city. 
(e)  Whoever shall elect to receive such notice, shall do so in accordance with procedures to be prescribed by the DPW director. 
(f)  The range shall at all times be secured by fencing, with a locked gate, adequate to deter illegal use of the range, as determined by the DPW director. The entrance and both sides of the range shall be posted with signage, the exact size and location of which shall be determined by the DPW director, indicating that the range is for use by the GPD only and that trespassers are subject to arrest. 
(g)  The entrance and both sides of the range shall be posted with the following signs: 
Police Firing Range 
Keep Out 
Trespassing Beyond This Point 
Trespassers Subject To Arrest In Accordance With City Of Gloucester Code Of Ordinances, Section 14-6. 
(h)  The DPW shall be responsible for maintenance of the range and shall implement a maintenance plan the same or substantially similar to the environmental stewardship plan for management of lead shot/bullets, as suggested by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The range shall be maintained in accordance with the foregoing at least once every two years. 
(i)  There shall be no use of the firing range, unless, until and for so long as the above-described conditions are in place and maintained. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(02))  
Chapter 22 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dismantled, wrecked, etc., motor vehicles, § 9-9; offenses, ch. 14; police, ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21; vehicles for hire, ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate carriages and vehicles, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22; regulations and bylaws relative to ways and bridges, M.G.L. c. 85; law of the road, M.G.L. c. 89; motor vehicles generally, M.G.L. c. 90. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bus stop shall mean an area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or alighting from and the parking of buses. 
Commercial vehicle shall mean any vehicle being used in the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise for commercial purposes. 
Commercial vehicle, heavy, shall mean any commercial vehicle 2½-ton capacity or over. 
Compact Vehicle shall mean any vehicle less than 161 inches in length. 
Compact vehicle parking space shall mean a parking space that is eight feet wide by 16 feet long. 
Crosswalk shall mean that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections, or any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines on the road surface or by other markings or signs. 
Electric vehicle shall mean a vehicle that operates, either partially or exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-grid source, that is stored on board for automotive purposes. 
Electric charging station shall mean equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electric energy to a battery or other energy storage device on an electric vehicle. 
Emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and municipal departments or public service corporations, when the latter are responding to an emergency in relation to the police or fire department. 
Fire lane shall mean any street or highway so designated by the city council under the provisions of section 22-152 and specified under section 22-292 so as to ensure at least a ten-foot clear and unobstructed way for the purpose of public and emergency vehicle travel. 
Funeral shall mean any procession of mourners properly identified as such accompanying the remains of a human body. 
Lane shall mean a longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles. 
Officer shall mean, for the purpose of this chapter, an officer shall be construed to mean any police officer of the city, any investigator, examiner or inspector of the registry of motor vehicles, and any constable or special officer, provided he has his badge of office displayed over his left breast and upon his outer garment. 
Official curb marking shall mean that portion of a curbing, the painting of which has been authorized by the city council, and which has the written approval of the department of public works of the commonwealth. 
Official street marking shall mean any painted line, legend, marking or marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the city council and which has the written approval of the department of highways of the commonwealth. 
Official traffic signals shall mean all signals conforming to the standards as prescribed by the department of highways of the commonwealth, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing or warning traffic. 
Official traffic signs shall mean all signs, markings and devices, other than signals, not inconsistent with this chapter, and which conform to the standards prescribed by the department of highways of the commonwealth, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning, or regulating traffic. 
Parking shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being made to move such vehicle. 
Parking control device shall mean any mechanism for collecting payment for parking and shall also include parking meters. Where "parking meters" and "coins" appear in the ordinances, it shall also mean parking control devices and other forms of payment. 
Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by human power, except bicycles or tricycles. 
Railroad crossing shall mean any intersection of ways with a railroad right-of-way. 
Roadway shall mean that portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and intended to be used for vehicular traffic. 
Safety zone shall mean any area or space set aside within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which has been indicated by signs, lines or markings, having the written approval of the department of highways of the commonwealth. 
Service zone shall mean an area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation of commercial and transient vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street or highway set aside for pedestrian travel. 
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between property lines of every way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel. 
Taxicab stand shall mean an area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are required to park while waiting to be engaged. 
Traffic shall mean pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles or other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or highway for the purpose of travel. 
Traffic control area shall mean any area along any way, other than an intersecting way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic-control signals. 
Traffic control signal shall mean any device using colored lights which conforms to the standards as prescribed by the department of highways of the commonwealth, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Traffic island shall mean any area or space set aside within a roadway, which is not intended for use of vehicular traffic. 
U-turn shall mean the turning of a vehicle by means of a continuous left turn whereby the direction of the vehicle is reversed. 
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1970, § 21-1; Ord. No. 11-1992, § I, 4-21-1992; Ord. of 10-9-2012(01); Ord. No. 2017-101, 5-23-2017; Ord. No. 2018-028, 2-27-2018; 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions for state vehicle laws, M.G.L. c. 90, § 1.  
Sec. 22-2. - Accident reports. 
Every person operating a motor vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident in which any person is killed or injured or in which there is damage in excess of $1,000.00 to any one vehicle or other property shall within five days after such accident report in writing to the registrar of motor vehicles of the commonwealth on a form approved by him and send a copy thereof to the police department of the city. Such report shall not be required during the period of incapacity of any person who is physically incapable of making a report. If the operator is not the owner of the vehicle and is physically incapable of making such written report, the owner shall within five days after the accident make such report based on such knowledge as he may have and such information as he can obtain regarding the accident. 
(Code 1970, § 21-9; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 90, § 26.  
Sec. 22-3. - Sleigh or sled; bells. 
No person shall travel on a way with a sleigh or sled drawn by a horse, unless there are at least three bells attached to some part of the harness. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 3.  
Sec. 22-4. - Use of white canes by pedestrians. 
For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public streets, it shall be unlawful for any person, except persons wholly or partially blind, to carry or use on the public streets of the city any cane or walking stick which is white in color, or white with red end or bottom. Such canes or walking sticks may be used on the streets and other public places of the city by persons wholly or partially blind, as a means of protecting them and for the purpose of identifying them to drivers of vehicles and operators of motor-driven vehicles and other pedestrians with whom they come in contact on such streets and public places. 
(Code 1970, § 21-6)  
Sec. 22-5. - Exemptions from chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to drivers actually engaged in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under construction or repair, to officers when engaged in the performance of public duties, nor to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency and in performance of public duties when the nature of the work of any of these necessitates a departure from any part of this chapter. These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1970, § 21-10) 
State Law reference— Police and fire department vehicles and ambulances exempt from certain traffic regulations, M.G.L. c. 89, § 7B.  
Sec. 22-6. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation or order made under this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for each offense, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1970, § 21-11) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish penalty for violation of ordinances regulating vehicles, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22.  
Secs. 22-7—22-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-20. - Enforcement of chapter by police officers. 
It shall be the duty of police officers designated by the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 21-2) 
Cross reference— Police department, § 17-15 et seq.  
Sec. 22-21. - Authority of officers of police and fire departments to direct traffic. 
Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that in the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers or fire fighters may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1970, § 21-3) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-15 et seq.; police department, § 17-15 et seq.  
Sec. 22-22. - Authority to close streets temporarily. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to close temporarily any street or highway in an impending or existing emergency, or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided there is reasonable justification for the closing of the street. 
(b)  The director of public works is hereby authorized to close temporarily or otherwise direct or redirect traffic on any street or highway for the purpose of construction, maintenance, repair, demolition, tree work, snow removal, and other such surface and subsurface work as may be required to be accomplished in the interest of public betterment. 
(c)  Whenever signs are in place giving notice that any street or highway has been closed pursuant to this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on any such closed street or highway. 
(Code 1970, § 21-4; Ord. No. 4-96, § I, 2-20-1996) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21.  
Sec. 22-23. - Experimental regulations. 
For purposes of trial, the city vehicle may make temporary rules regulating traffic. No such experimental rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect for a period of time longer than 30 days. 
(Code 1970, § 21-5)  
Secs. 22-24—22-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, councils and committees, § 2-400 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-30. - Created; purpose. 
As a continuation of planning board work and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, to lessen congestion and confusion in the streets, to lessen the danger from fire and assist the fighting of it and to facilitate the creation of more adequate provision for transportation and parking, there is hereby created a traffic commission. The commission shall have as its primary purpose the making of studies and presenting of recommendations to the mayor in the matter of regulating traffic and parking in the city. 
(Code 1970, § 21-22)  
Sec. 22-31. - To act in official capacity under control of mayor. 
The traffic commission shall act in an official capacity for the city and shall be under the overall control and authority of the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 21-25)  
Sec. 22-32. - Composition; appointment; terms of members. 
The traffic commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. Appointments to the commission shall be for terms of three years. In case of the resignation, death or disqualification of any member of the commission, or for the purpose of filling a vacancy for any other reason, an appointment for the unexpired term shall immediately be made by the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 21-23)  
Sec. 22-33. - Organization meeting; officers. 
As soon as possible after the membership of the traffic commission is determined in each year, the commission shall meet and elect from its own membership a chairperson and secretary-treasurer to serve for the term of one year. The secretary-treasurer shall give official notice in writing to the mayor that the commission has organized, giving the names of the chairperson and secretary-treasurer. 
(Code 1970, § 21-24)  
Sec. 22-34. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the traffic commission to make detailed studies of the motor vehicle and all other forms of traffic within the city, its present and future parking needs and related matters, and to determine, on a community-wide basis, an overall long range plan to meet the city's needs. As such needs are determined, recommendations for the improvement of conditions, accompanied by such maps, graphs and charts as may have been prepared, shall be submitted to the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 21-26)  
Sec. 22-35. - Assistance of city officials, boards and employees. 
The traffic commission may request the services and assistance of any of the officials, boards and employees of the city at all reasonable times when the commission determines that it requires the assistance and advice of such officials, boards and employees in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1970, § 21-27)  
Sec. 22-36. - Annual report. 
The traffic commission shall make an annual written report of its activities to the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 21-28)  
Sec. 22-37. - Commission's authority to reserve parking areas for handicapped persons and disabled veterans. 
(a)  The traffic commission may, after conducting a duly noticed public meeting, promulgate regulations to designate certain parking areas reserved for handicapped persons and disabled veterans. 
(b)  A request for a handicapped person and disabled veteran parking area shall be filed with the commission through the city clerk's office. Each request shall be accompanied by proof of a handicapped plate or placard. As a part of the public meeting, the commission shall consider the recommendation of the director of the department of public works, police and fire chief. At the close of the public meeting, the commission may, by majority vote, reserve parking areas as reserved for handicapped persons and disabled veterans. The commission shall file notice of its decision to promulgate such regulation with the office of the city clerk. All approved reserved areas shall be published as regulations known as the "List of Parking Areas Reserved for Handicapped Persons and Disabled Veterans in the City of Gloucester" and enforced when official signs are in place. 
(c)  The city council committee on ordinances and administration may review the regulation reserving the parking space upon request of an aggrieved party. The committee's approval or disapproval of such a reservation shall be considered final action and shall not be subject to further review. The request for review shall be filed by an aggrieved party within 30 days of the traffic commission's filing its decision with the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2014-135, 4-22-2014)  
Secs. 22-38—22-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Driving precautions for safety of other travelers, M.G.L. c. 90, § 14. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-50. - Care in starting, stopping, turning or backing. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct line or backing shall first see that such movement can be made in safety. If the movement cannot be made in safety or if it interferes unduly with the normal movement of other traffic, the driver shall wait for a more favorable opportunity to make the movement. 
(b)  If the operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning movement, the driver of the other vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal, as required by M.G.L. c. 90, § 14B. 
(Code 1970, § 21-54)  
Sec. 22-51. - Emerging from alley, driveway or garage. 
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alleyway or driveway. 
(Code 1970, § 21-58)  
Sec. 22-52. - Obstructing traffic unnecessarily. 
No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily the normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this section to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until such traffic as has been delayed has passed. 
(Code 1970, § 21-51)  
Sec. 22-53. - Driving on road surfaces under construction or repair. 
No operator of a vehicle shall enter upon the road surface of any street or highway or section thereof, when, by reason of construction, surface treatment, maintenance or the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, the road surface is closed to travel, and one or more signs, lights or signals have been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the street or highway is not to be used, or when so advised by an officer, watchman, member of a street or highway crew or employee of the city, either audibly or by signals. 
(Code 1970, § 21-60) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21.  
Sec. 22-54. - Driving on sidewalks. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1970, § 21-61) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21.  
Sec. 22-55. - Driving through safety zone. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, except on signal from a police officer, to drive the same over or through a safety zone. 
(Code 1970, § 21-62)  
Sec. 22-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-045, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed § 22-56, which pertained to identification of funeral processions and derived from Code 1970, § 21-8.  
Sec. 22-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-045, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, repealed § 22-57, which pertained to rights and duties of drivers in funeral or other processions and derived from Code 1970, § 21-8.  
Sec. 22-58. - Duty of drivers when meeting other vehicles. 
(a)  When persons traveling with vehicles meet on a way, each shall reasonably drive his vehicle to the right of the middle of the traveled part of such way, so that the vehicles may pass without interference, except where the department of highways of the commonwealth or the department of public works of the city has modified the way by pavement markings thereon. All such markings shall be in accordance with accepted standards of engineering practice, as provided in M.G.L. c. 85, § 2. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting a vehicle from crossing a solid center pavement marking line in making a left turn into or from a private way. 
(Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 1.  
Sec. 22-59. - Driving vehicles in a single lane; motorcycles, riding and passing. 
When any way has been divided into lanes, the driver of a vehicle shall so drive that the vehicle shall be entirely within a single lane, and he shall not move from the lane in which he is driving until he has first ascertained if such movement can be made with safety. The operators of motorcycles shall not ride abreast of more than one other motorcycle, shall ride single file when passing, and shall not pass any other motor vehicle within the same lane, except another motorcycle. 
(Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 4A.  
Sec. 22-60. - Driving in lane nearest the right side of the way. 
Upon all ways, the driver of a vehicle shall drive in the lane nearest the right side of the way when such lane is available for travel, except when overtaking another vehicle or when preparing for a left turn. When the right lane has been constructed or designated for purposes other than ordinary travel, a driver shall drive his vehicle in the lane adjacent to the right lane except when overtaking another vehicle or when preparing for a left or right turn: provided, however, that a driver may drive his vehicle in such right lane if signs have been erected by the department of highways permitting the use of such lane. 
(Code 1970, § 21-48; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 4B.  
Sec. 22-61. - Keeping to right while view obstructed. 
(a)  Whenever on any way, public or private, there is not an unobstructed view of the road for at least 400 feet, the driver of every vehicle shall keep his vehicle on the right of the middle of the traveled part of the way, whenever it is safe and practicable so to do, except where the department of highways of the commonwealth or the department of public works of the city has altered the way by the use of restrictive pavement markings in areas of limited sight distance, at intersections and at obstructions in the way; provided, however, that such markings shall be in accordance with accepted standards of engineering practice. 
(b)  Notwithstanding provisions of subsection (a) of this section, every driver of a slow moving vehicle, while ascending a grade shall reasonably keep his vehicle in the extreme right-hand land until the top of such grade has been reached. 
(Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 4.  
Sec. 22-62. - Heavy trucks; driving in right-hand lane on multi-lane highways. 
(a)  On any highway with more than one passing lane in the same direction, heavy commercial vehicles, except buses, shall be restricted in ordinary operation to the righthand travel lane, and in overtaking and passing shall be restricted to the next adjacent passing or travel lane, and shall not use any other lanes except in an emergency. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, heavy commercial vehicles shall be defined as those in excess of 2½ tons used for transportation of goods, wares and merchandise. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 4C.  
Sec. 22-63. - Following too closely. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the street or highway. 
(Code 1970, § 21-53)  
Sec. 22-64. - Overtaking vehicles traveling in same direction. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction shall drive a safe distance to the left of such other vehicle and shall not return to the right until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle; and, if the way is of sufficient width for the two vehicles to pass, the driver of the leading one shall not unnecessarily obstruct the other. 
(b)  If it is not possible to overtake a bicycle or other vehicle at a safe distance in the same lane. The overtaking vehicle shall use all or part of the adjacent lane if it is safe to do so or wait for a safe opportunity to overtake. 
(c)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on visible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle may, if the roadway is free from obstruction and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles, overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle when the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn, upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement. 
(Code 1970, § 21-49; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 2.  
Sec. 22-65. - Operation of privately owned vehicles prohibited in Dogtown. 
(a)  Operation of privately owned motor vehicles and recreational vehicles is prohibited on Dogtown Road and Commons Road except between one-half hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset daily up to the so-called Gronblad's Pit parking area and on all city-owned land in Dogtown, as defined on the map of Dogtown, on file in the office of the city engineer and city clerk. 
(b)  The term "recreational vehicles" shall include every motor vehicle designated or modified for use over unimproved terrain with the exception of snow vehicles registered to city residents only affixed with beach stickers issued by the department of public works. Snow vehicles are those vehicles designed to travel over ice or snow supported in whole or in part by skis, belts or cleats. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 23, 1985, § I, adding § 21-66 to the 1970 Code, has been included as § 22-65 hereof at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 22-66—22-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 22-75. - Restrictions on right and left turns. 
No driver shall turn his vehicle so as to proceed in any direction other than to the right or left at the points of intersection described in section 22-265, and in the direction indicated, when official signs are in place. 
(Code 1970, § 21-55(a))  
Sec. 22-76. - Restrictions on U-turns. 
No driver shall back or turn his vehicle so as to proceed in a direction opposite to that in which the vehicle is headed or traveling on the streets described in section 22-266 when official signs are in place. 
(Code 1970, § 21-55(b))  
Sec. 22-77. - Violation of one-way traffic provisions; civil liability. 
The violation by the operator or driver of a motor or other vehicle of any rule, regulation, section of this Code or other ordinance or any bylaw limiting traffic on any specified way to traffic moving in one direction shall not, in respect to any civil liability, render such operator or driver, or such vehicle or any occupant thereof, a trespasser upon said way. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 10.  
Secs. 22-78—22-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 22-90. - Stopping and yielding at intersections. 
(a)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign or a flashing red signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways; provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, any such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not cross or enter an intersection, which it is unable to proceed through, without stopping and thereby blocking vehicles from travelling in a free direction. A green light is no defense to blocking the intersection. The driver must wait another cycle of the signal light, if necessary. 
(Code 1970, § 21-56; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 9.  
Sec. 22-91. - Operation at underpass or overpass and at intersections with islands. 
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been separated and where the ways are connected by ramps, and at any intersection of ways in which there are channelizing islands, drivers, of vehicles shall proceed only as indicated by signs, signals or markings. 
(Code 1970, § 21-65)  
Sec. 22-92. - Right-of-way at intersecting ways; turning on red signals. 
(a)  When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection of any ways, as defined in M.G.L. c. 90, § 1, at approximately the same instant, the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. Any operator intending to turn left, in an intersection, across the path or lane of vehicles approaching from the opposite direction shall, before turning, yield the right-of-way until such time as the left turn can be made with reasonable safety. Any operator of a vehicle entering a rotary intersection shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle already in the intersection. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply when an operator is otherwise directed by a police officer, or by a lawful traffic regulating sign, device or signal maintained by or with the written approval of the department of highways of the commonwealth or the department of public works of the city and while such approval is in effect or otherwise lawfully maintained. 
(b)  At any intersection on ways, as defined in M.G.L. c. 90, § 1, in which vehicular traffic is facing a steady red indication in a traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable at the entrance to the crosswalk or the near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the entrance to the intersection in obedience to such red or stop signal, may make a right turn or a left turn from a one-way street to another one-way street but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection, except where such turns are prohibited by signs erected at such intersection giving notice of such prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 8.  
Sec. 22-93. - Marked crosswalks; yielding right-of-way to pedestrians. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be so to yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk marked in accordance with standards established by the department of highways of the commonwealth if the pedestrian is on that half of the traveled part of the way on which the vehicle is traveling or if the pedestrian approaches from the opposite half of the traveled part of the way to within ten feet of that half of the traveled part of the way on which such vehicle is traveling. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall pass any other vehicle which has stopped at a marked crosswalk to permit a pedestrian to cross, nor shall any such operator enter a marked crosswalk while a pedestrian is crossing or until there is a sufficient space beyond the crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating, notwithstanding that a traffic control signal may indicate that vehicles may proceed. 
(c)  Whenever a pedestrian is injured by a motor vehicle in a marked crosswalk, the department of state police or the municipal police department with jurisdiction of the street, in consultation with department of state police if deemed appropriate, shall conduct an investigation into the cause of the injury and any violation of this section or other law or ordinance and shall issue the appropriate civil or criminal citation or file an application for the appropriate criminal complaint, if any. This section shall not limit the ability of a district attorney or the attorney general to seek an indictment in connection with the operation of a motor vehicle which causes injury or death and which violates this section. 
(Code 1970, § 21-52; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 11.  
Sec. 22-94. - Duty of drivers and pedestrians approaching pedestrian carrying white cane; penalty. 
Whenever a totally or partially blind pedestrian, guided by a guide dog or carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, crosses or attempts to cross a way, the driver of every vehicle approaching the place where any such pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross shall bring his vehicle to a full stop, and before proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injuring the pedestrian. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind person, not carrying such a cane or walking stick or not being guided by a dog, of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians crossing ways, nor shall the failure of such blind person to carry a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog while on the ways of the city be held to constitute or be evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1970, § 21-7; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 90, § 14A.  
Sec. 22-95. - Right-of-way of fire engines, patrol vehicles and ambulances. 
The members and apparatus of a fire department while going to a fire or responding to an alarm, police patrol vehicles and ambulances, and ambulances on a call for the purpose of hospitalizing a sick or injured person shall have the right-of-way through any street, way, lane or alley. No person shall willfully obstruct or retard the passage of any of the foregoing persons or vehicles in the exercise of any such right. 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-15 et seq.; police department, § 17-15 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 7.  
Sec. 22-96. - Restrictions on use of ways upon approach of emergency vehicles; crossing fire hoses. 
(a)  Upon the approach of any fire apparatus, police vehicle, ambulance or disaster vehicle which is going to a fire or responding to a call, alarm or emergency situation, every person driving a vehicle on a way shall immediately drive his vehicle as far as possible toward the right-hand curb or side of the way and shall keep the same at a standstill until such fire apparatus, police vehicle, ambulance or disaster vehicle has passed. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle within 300 feet of any fire apparatus going to a fire or responding to an alarm, nor drive his vehicle, or park or leave the same unattended, within 800 feet of a fire or within the fire lanes established by the fire department, or upon or beside any traveled way, whether public or private, leading to the scene of a fire, in such a manner as to obstruct the approach to the fire of any fire apparatus or any ambulance, safety or police vehicle, or of any vehicle bearing an official fire or police department designation. 
(c)  Authorized police or fire department personnel may tow a vehicle found to be in violation of the provisions of this section or which is illegally parked or standing in a fire lane as established by the fire department, whether or not a fire is in progress, and such personnel shall not be subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 266, § 120D. 
(d)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle behind any such fire apparatus, ambulance, safety or police vehicle, or any vehicle bearing an official fire or police department designation which is operating with emergency systems on, for a distance of 300 feet. 
(e)  No person shall drive a vehicle over a hose of the fire department without the consent of a member of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-045, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, amended § 22-96 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Restrictions on use of ways upon approach of fire apparatus; crossing fire hoses" to "Restrictions on use of ways upon approach of emergency vehicles; crossing fire hoses," as set out herein. 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-15. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 7A.  
Sec. 22-97. - Operation of emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle of a fire, police or recognized protective department and the driver of an ambulance shall be subject to the provisions of any section of this Code or other ordinance or any bylaw relating to the operation or parking of vehicles, except that a driver of fire apparatus while going to a fire or responding to an alarm, or the driver of a vehicle of a police or recognized protective department or the driver of an ambulance, in an emergency and while in performance of a public duty or while transporting a sick or injured person to a hospital or other destination where professional medical services are available, may drive such vehicle at a speed in excess of the applicable speed limit if he exercises caution and due regard under the circumstances for the safety of persons and property, and may drive such vehicle through an intersection of ways contrary to any traffic signs or signals regulating traffic at such intersection if he first brings such vehicle to a full stop and then proceeds with caution and due regard for the safety of persons and property, unless otherwise directed by a police officer regulating traffic at such intersection. 
(b)  The driver of any such approaching emergency vehicle shall comply with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 90, § 14 when approaching a school bus which has stopped to allow passengers to alight or board from the same, and whose red lamps are flashing. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 89, § 7B.  
Secs. 22-98—22-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 22-110. - Restriction on direction driven—Annually. 
Upon the streets or parts of streets described in section 22-267 vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated therein and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in any other direction throughout the entire calendar year. 
(Code 1970, § 21-90)  
Sec. 22-111. - Same—From May 1 to September 15. 
Upon the streets or parts of streets described in section 22-268 vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated therein during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, and no person shall drive a vehicle in any other direction during such period. 
(Code 1970, § 21-91)  
Secs. 22-112—22-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal responsibility for traffic control devices, M.G.L. c. 85, §§ 1, 2; c. 89, § 9; c. 90, § 14. 
 
Sec. 22-125. - Duty of director of public works to place and maintain; conformity to state standards. 
The director of public works is hereby authorized, and as to those signs and signals required under this chapter, it shall be his duty, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs, signals, markings and safety zones. All signs, signals, markings, and safety zones shall conform to the standards prescribed by the department of highways of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1970, § 21-31; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 22-126. - Testing. 
The city council may test, under actual conditions, traffic signs, markings or other devices, except signals. 
(Code 1970, § 21-32)  
Sec. 22-127. - Required obedience. 
No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Code 1970, § 21-33)  
Sec. 22-128. - Stop intersections. 
The erection and maintenance of official "Stop" signs or flashing red signals is authorized at the locations described in section 22-269, such signs to face traffic proceeding in the direction indicated. 
(Code 1970, § 21-57)  
Sec. 22-128.1. - Yield intersections. 
The erection and maintenance of official "Yield" signs is authorized at the locations described in section 22-269.1, such signs to face traffic proceeding in the direction indicated. 
(Ord. No. 37-1996, § II, 9-3-1996)  
Sec. 22-129. - Necessity of signs. 
Whenever any provision of this chapter requires signs giving notice thereof, such provisions shall be effective only during such time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained designating such provision and located so as to be easily visible to approaching drivers. 
(Code 1970, § 21-34)  
Sec. 22-130. - Unauthorized signs, signals and markings. 
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unofficial device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view any official sign, signal, marking or device. The chief of police is hereby empowered to remove every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1970, § 21-36)  
Sec. 22-131. - Defacing, injuring, etc., signs, signals and markings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign, signal or marking. 
(Code 1970, § 21-37) 
State Law reference— Malicious destruction of traffic control devices, M.G.L. c. 266, § 94.  
Secs. 22-132—22-144. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-145. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway under the control of the city in violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinances or orders adopted by the city council, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police official or traffic sign or signal; and in particular, in any of the following places: 
(1)  Within an intersection, except where the installation of parking meters has been specifically approved by the department of highways of the commonwealth; 
(2)  Upon any sidewalk; 
(3)  Upon any crosswalk; 
(4)  Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district; 
(5)  Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on the right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as one-way streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked in the direction in which such vehicle is moving and with both wheels within 12 inches of the curb. This shall not apply to streets or parts of streets where angle parking is required by section 22-169 of this chapter; 
(6)  Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and unobstructed lane at least ten feet wide for passing traffic; 
(7)  Upon any street or highway within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(8)  In front of a private road or driveway; 
(9)  Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way, except alleys, unless otherwise provided; 
(10)  Within 15 feet of a wall of a fire station or directly across the street from such station, provided signs are erected acquainting the driver with such restriction; 
(11)  Within 20 feet of either end of a safety zone which is located within 30 feet of the curb or edge of the roadway; 
(12)  Within 25 feet of a crosswalk, where so designated and established, in front of a school building entrance, when signs are in place giving notice of such prohibition; 
(13)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(12) of this section, within 50 feet of a crosswalk leading to the main entrance of the following schools: Maplewood Avenue School, Faith Christian School (Calvary Chapel) Baptist Independent Church, 394 Washington Street and Ward 2 Veterans Memorial School. The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on days when such schools are in session. This subsection shall not be effective unless signs are in place giving notice of such prohibition; 
(14)  Upon or within any area described in section 22-291. 
(15)  Live parking (drivers to remain with their vehicles) for the purpose of picking up students at West Parish School will be permitted on the north side of Concord Street from the entrance of West Parish School 444 feet in a northerly direction (towards the fire station) from 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., and on early release days from 11:45 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. 
(b)  Vehicles found in violation of subsection (a) of this section may be moved, by or under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the owner, to a place where parking is allowed. 
(c)  No person shall cause, allow, or permit a motor vehicle owned by him which is either unregistered, uninsured, nonoperating, or junked to be left on a public or private way under the control of the city. Any such vehicle which is determined upon investigation by an officer to have been left or abandoned by the owner for a period of 72 hours or more on a public or private way may be removed and disposed of pursuant to M.G.L. c. 90, § 22C; M.G.L. c. 135, § 8; M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D; and sections 22-240 to 22-246. Notice to the owner prior to disposal shall be by certified or registered mail if the owner is known and otherwise by publication in the local newspaper. 
(Code 1970, § 21-103; Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I; Ord. No. 25, 1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 2018-021, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 2018-137, 8-14-2019; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 22-146. - Temporary prohibitions. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending or existing emergency, or for a lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession; provided there is reasonable justification for such prohibition. 
(b)  Whenever signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any place where such parking is prohibited under this section. 
(c)  Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be moved by or under the direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1970, § 21-104)  
Sec. 22-147. - Duty to move vehicle upon request of police. 
Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle parked or standing on a public street or place where the traveling public has the right of access shall, when requested by a police officer on duty, move such vehicle, should such moving be desirable or required to facilitate the movement of traffic, to serve the convenience of the traveling public, to better protect the safety of the traveling public, or if such vehicle is parked or operated in an illegal manner. 
(Code 1970, § 21-118) 
Cross reference— Police department, § 17-15 et seq.  
Sec. 22-148. - Prohibited for purpose of displaying vehicle for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any vehicle displayed for sale. 
(Code 1970, § 21-106)  
Sec. 22-149. - Trailer coaches prohibited between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.; exception. 
The parking of trailer coaches between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. shall be prohibited on any street in the city, except in an approved trailer coach park. 
(Code 1970, § 21-108)  
Sec. 22-150. - Loading and unloading on city streets. 
There shall be no loading or unloading on all city streets, including trucks, forklift trucks and/or any other loading machines between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. with penalties as described in section 1-15, penalty for violation of certain specified sections of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 29-1997, § I, 2-18-1997; Ord. No. 32-1997, § I, 3-18-1997) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 22-150 by Ord. No. 29-1997, § I of an ordinance adopted April 12, 1988, repealed former § 22-150, relative to interfering with snow and ice removal, which derived from Code 1970, § 21-110.  
Sec. 22-151. - City council to specify location of bus stops, taxicab stands and service or loading zones. 
The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service or loading zones shall be specified by the city council and in the case of taxicab stands, the city council shall designate who may use them as such. 
(Code 1970, § 21-111)  
Sec. 22-152. - Leaving vehicle unattended on private ways so as to block access for fire apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle unattended within the limits of private ways furnishing means of access for fire apparatus for any building. The city council shall have the authority to designate private ways and parts thereof, listed in section 22-192, as fire lanes with restrictions thereon as necessary to ensure at least a ten-foot clear and unobstructed way is available at all times. The fire lane and restrictions thereon shall be detailed on the signs in place on the way. 
(Code 1970, § 21-131; Ord. No. 10-1992, § I, 3-24-1992) 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 8-15 et seq.; schedule of fire lanes, § 22-292.  
Sec. 22-153. - Privately owned open-air parking spaces. 
(a)  Authority to grant license and compliance with zoning. The city council is authorized to grant licenses for the conduct or maintenance of open-air parking spaces, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 148 § 56 following a public hearing as specified in subsection (e) of this section. Applicants for a license under this section must first obtain any necessary zoning relief required by section 2.3.6 (1) or (2) of the zoning ordinance for parking lots or obtain certification from the building inspector that no such relief is needed. Any applicant who does not own the premises shall provide written permission of the property owner with the application. 
(b)  Contents, limitations, suspension and revocation of license. Every license issued under this section shall specify the premises to be occupied by the licensee as shown on a plan to be submitted to the city council and shall be subject to all the provisions of M.G.L. c. 148 § 56. The license may be suspended or revoked by the city council and the fire chief after notice and a public hearing. Licenses shall be nontransferable. 
(c)  Penalty for engaging in business without a license. Any person or entity who engages in the business of conducting an open air parking space without the license required herein shall be subject to the penalty of $300.00 as provided in M.G.L. c. 148 § 56. 
(d)  Fee for open-air parking. The fee for the initial license granted shall be $100.00 plus an additional $10.00 for each parking space and said license shall expire each year on April 30 th and be renewable on a yearly basis for the same fee. 
(e)  Review by city council and public hearing. The city council shall hold a public hearing every five years to determine if the license shall be reissued for another five year term with seven days' notice to abutters to be given by the parking lot applicant/operator. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-187—21-189; Ord. No. 13-1993, § I, 11-16-1993; Ord. of 5-16-2006(03); Ord. No. 2015-018, 1-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-154. - Reserved parking space in front of doctors' offices. 
All doctors in the city possessing an M.D. degree shall have in front of their offices for the parking of one motor vehicle, an area marked "No Parking—Doctor's Office." When such an area is marked, no person other than the doctor for whom it is marked shall park a vehicle therein. 
(Code 1970, § 21-117)  
Sec. 22-155. - Electric vehicle parking. 
(a)  Certain designated, reserved and clearly marked parking spaces on the street at or near electric charging stations for use by electric vehicles only shall be specified by the city council. 
(b)  When a space has been so marked no person shall park or stand any nonelectric vehicle in that space. 
(c)  If an electric vehicle is parked in such a designated space but is not attached to the charging station it shall be a violation of this section. 
(d)  Any nonelectric vehicle so parked is subject to civil fine consistent with section 22-176 or removal. 
(e)  The fine for violation of this section shall be collected in the same manner and with the same penalties for late payments as other on street parking violations. 
(f)  Any vehicle parked in such a space must make the appropriate payment for the space and observe the time limit for the underlying parking zone. 
(Ord. No. 2017-101, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 22-156. - Same—At all times. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-270, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-125)  
Sec. 22-157. - Same—From May 1 to September 15—Generally. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-271, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-126)  
Sec. 22-158. - Same—From May 1 to September 15 on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Upon the streets or parts of thereof, described in section 22-272, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the days and between the hours indicated for each specific area, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-127; Ord. No. 10-1997, § I, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 22-159. - Same—Between certain hours and on certain days. 
When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any streets or parts thereof, between the hours posted on such signs and on the days posted on such signs, as described in section 22-273 in the following places: 
(1)  Gloucester High School parking lot. In the high school parking lot, parking is by permit only, on school days from 7:00 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. 
(2)  Davis Street extension. On the Davis Street extension, both sides starting at its intersection with Chapel Street for a distance of 31 feet in a northerly direction and Davis Street, both sides starting at its intersection with Chapel Street for a distance of 34 feet in a southerly direction and Chapel Street, both sides starting at its intersection with Davis Street and Davis Street Extension, for a distance of 36 feet in an easterly direction as delineated between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on school days. 
(3)  Davis Street extension. Beginning at the northwest corner of 3 Davis Street Extension and continuing southeasterly on the southerly side for a distance of 60 feet between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 [p.m.] to 3:00 p.m. on school days when school is in session. 
(Code 1970, § 21-130; Ord. of 10-25-2005, § I; Ord. of 2-12-2008; Ord. of 7-10-2012(01); Ord. No. 2014-264, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2016-152, 7-26-2016)  
Sec. 22-160. - Two-hour limit between certain hours—Generally. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-274, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, between the hours and on the days so described. 
(Code 1970, § 21-134)  
Sec. 22-161. - Same—From May 1 to September 15. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-275, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, between the hours and on the days so described. 
(Code 1970, § 21-135; Ord. No. 11-1997, § I, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 22-161.1. - Same—From May 1 to September 15 and certain days. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, described section 22-275.1 and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, between the hours and on the days so described. 
(Ord. No. 2016-097, 6-7-2016)  
Sec. 22-162. - One and one-half hour parking on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Upon the streets and parts thereof, described in section 22-276, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 1½ hours on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-136)  
Sec. 22-163. - One-hour parking—Generally. 
Upon the streets and parts thereof, described in section 22-277, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour at any time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-137)  
Sec. 22-164. - Same—Between certain hours. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-278, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour, between the hours specifically designated for each such area, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-138; Ord. No. 12-1997, § I, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 22-165. - Thirty-minute parking. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-279, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 30 minutes: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on any business day except Friday; 
(2)  On Fridays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; and 
(3)  Specifically excepting Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1970, § 21-139)  
Sec. 22-166. - Fifteen-minute parking. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-280, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 15 minutes between the hours indicated for each specific area, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-140)  
Sec. 22-167. - Ten-minute parking. 
Upon the streets or parts thereof, described in section 22-281, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than ten minutes, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 21-141)  
Sec. 22-168. - Exception from time limits for loading and unloading on Main Street. 
In permitted parking areas on Main Street, wherein the time of parking is limited by this article, time shall be given trucks parked parallel to the curbing for loading and unloading between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. daily. 
(Code 1970, § 21-142)  
Sec. 22-169. - Angle parking. 
(a)  The city council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets or cause the same to be marked or signed. 
(b)  Upon the streets or parts of streets described in section 22-282; which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12 inches of the curb, at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or official signs, and wholly within the painted lanes provided. 
(Code 1970, § 21-105)  
Sec. 22-170. - Use of bus stops. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, as described in section 22-283, when such bus stop is indicated by an official sign. 
(b)  No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at any place other than a bus stop, when a nearby bus stop is available for use. 
(Code 1970, § 21-113)  
Sec. 22-171. - Use of taxicab stands. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street within a business district in any taxicab stand, when such stand is indicated by an official sign. 
(b)  No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district at any place other than the taxicab stands designed for the use of his taxicab, except while engaged. 
(Code 1970, § 21-114) 
Cross reference— Taxicab and private livery vehicles, § 25-15 et seq.  
Sec. 22-172. - Use of service or loading zones. 
When official signs are in place no person shall park a vehicle upon any street in any loading zone described in section 22-284, for a period of time longer than five minutes and except while actually engaged in loading or unloading, except during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. of each day. 
(Code 1970, § 21-116)  
Sec. 22-173. - Operation of trucks, trailer trucks and other commercial vehicles. 
(a)  The operation of trucks, trailer trucks and other commercial vehicles is hereby regulated in the manner outlined and during the period of time set forth in section 22-285. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to such vehicles when delivering goods to or taking goods from points located on the streets described in section 22-285, nor shall it apply to vehicles going to or coming from places upon such streets or adjoining streets or ways to which access cannot otherwise be gained, nor shall it apply to vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations having emergency work to do on such streets or adjoining streets, or to U.S. mail vehicles collecting mail on such streets, or to police and fire department vehicles, or to ambulances. 
(c)  Signs in such form and of such design as the director of public works shall determine, shall be placed on streets designated in subsection (a) of this section, and subsection (a) of this section shall be effective only during such times as a sufficient number of official traffic signs are in place and legible to warn approaching drivers of the restrictions. 
(d)  No operator with a motor vehicle shall enter the bridge designated G59 at Route 127, Thatcher Road, if the vehicle has: 
(1)  Two axles and weighs in excess of 15 tons; 
(2)  Three axles and weighs in excess of 19 tons; or 
(3)  Five axles and weighs in excess of 20 tons. 
Signs shall be posted to that effect in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1970, § 21-64; Ord. of 11-24-1987, § I)  
Sec. 22-174. - Operation of semitrailers and semitrailer units. 
(a)  The operation of any semitrailer or semitrailer unit is hereby regulated as provided in section 22-286. No person shall park or stand any semitrailer or semitrailer unit on any part of any street, way, highway or roadway under the control of the city unless such semitrailer or semitrailer unit is attached to a motor vehicle capable of towing it, except during actual loading or unloading of goods, wares, merchandise or other materials. In the event of construction, a special permit shall be obtained from the police department. 
(b)  The police department is hereby authorized and directed to immobilize any detached trailer, by appropriate means, found parked in violation of subsection (a) of this section. The expense of the immobilization shall be collected from the owner, and any storage charges incurred shall be collected from the owners of the vehicle. 
(Code 1970, § 21-121; Ord. of 9-5-1974, § 1; Ord. of 8-19-1976, § 1; Ord. of 6-8-1977, § I)  
Sec. 22-175. - Parking for disabled veterans, handicapped persons. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle which does not bear the distinctive number plates or placard authorized by M.G.L. c. 90, § 2 for disabled veterans and handicapped persons in any of the duly posted locations maintained in the regulations of the city traffic commission as its "List of Parking Areas Reserved for Handicapped Persons and Disabled Veterans in the City of Gloucester". 
(b)  Requests for disabled veterans and handicapped persons parking spaces in the city shall be accompanied by proof of handicapped plate or placard, submitted to the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  When a handicapped parking space is no longer required at a specific address, the city clerk shall be notified by the ward councilor or any other person. Upon verification that the handicapped person or disabled veteran no longer resides in the area or no longer requires the designated parking space, the city clerk shall notify the department of public works who will remove the sign. The regulations entitled "List of Parking Areas Reserved for Handicapped Persons and Disabled Veterans in the City of Gloucester" shall be updated accordingly. 
(Ord. of 3-23-1982, § I; Ord. No. 151-1999, § I, 2-16-1999; Ord. No. 2014-135, 4-22-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to restrict certain areas for on-street parking for disabled veterans and handicapped persons, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22A.  
Sec. 22-176. - Penalties for parking violations. 
(a)  Generally. Pursuant to the authority granted in M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A1/2, any person violating the provisions of this article regulating the parking of motor vehicles, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section shall be punished by a fine as follows: 
Code 	Violation 	Fine 
01 	Within ten feet of a hydrant 	$15.00 
02 	Within ten feet of the entrance to a fire station 	15.00 
03 	Across the street from a fire station 	15.00 
04 	Prohibited area (beach district) 	75.00 
05 	Upon roadway in a rural district 	15.00 
06 	Less than ten feet from obstructed lane 	5.00 
07 	Within 20 feet of an intersection 	5.00 
08 	Obstructing public transportation 	5.00 
09 	Across a private road or driveway entrance 	10.00 
10 	Upon a sidewalk or crosswalk 	25.00 
11 	All-night parking when restricted 	10.00 
12 	Bus stop or taxi stand 	100.00 
13 	Upon a roadway in a rural and nonbeach district 	5.00 
14 	Double parking 	5.00 
15 	Obstructing snow removal or parking on emergency snow artery 	10.00 
16 	Wrong direction (right wheels not at curb) 	6.00 
17 	Obstructing street cleaning 	5.00 
18 	Prohibited area, nonbeach district 	5.00 
19 	Overtime parking 	5.00 
20 	Vehicle for sale sign 	5.00 
21 	Over one foot from curb 	5.00 
22 	Service or loading zone 	25.00 
23 	Within intersection 	10.00 
24 	Meter violation 	15.00 
25 	Improper angle parking 	5.00 
26 	Disabled or handicapped parking 	25.00 
27 	Electrical vehicle charging stations 	$15.00 
28 	Compact vehicle parking 	$15.00 
 
(b)  If the citation is paid not more than 21 days after the issuance of the fine, the fine shall be $75.00; if the citation is paid more than 21 days after the issuance of the fine, but before the parking clerk reports to the registrar as provided under M.G.L. c. 90, § 20A½, the fine shall be $80.00; if the citation is paid more than 21 days after the issuance of the fine and after the parking clerk has so reported, the fine shall be $100.00. 
(C)  In beach district. For the purposes of this subsection, the beach district shall consist of the following streets or parts of streets: 
(1)  Atlantic Road. 
(2)  Atlantic Street. 
(3)  Arlington Street. 
(4)  Bass Avenue. 
(5)  Bass Rocks Road. 
(6)  Beach Road, from the intersection of Nautilus Road to Brightside Avenue. 
(7)  Bridgewater Street. 
(8)  Eastern Point Road, from Rocky Neck Avenue to Farrington Avenue. 
(9)  Farrington Avenue. 
(10)  Harbor Road. 
(11)  Hough Avenue. 
(12)  Locust Grove Cemetery. 
(13)  Loma Drive. 
(14)  Nautilus Road. 
(15)  Puerto Drive. 
(16)  Rio Drive. 
(17)  River Road. 
(18)  Rocky Neck Avenue. 
(19)  Salt Island Road. 
(20)  Seaside Cemetery. 
(21)  Stephen's Lane. 
(22)  Thatcher Road. 
(23)  Washington Street, both sides, from Langsford Street to the Rockport Line. 
(24)  Witham Street, from Starknaught Heights to Salt Island Road. 
In the beach district, any person violating any of the provisions of this article regulating the parking of motor vehicles shall be punished as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section except that, between May 1 and September 15, of each year, parking is prohibited at all times in the beach district and the beach district is hereby declared to be a prohibited area for the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, as set forth in code 04. Any person parking in the beach district between May 1 and September 15 shall receive a citation for parking in a prohibited area in addition to any other citation he may receive for any other parking violation he may commit. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-119, 21-120; Ord. of 7-10-1975, § 1; Ord. of 2-19-1976, § 1; Ord. of 6-17-1976, § 1; Ord. of 11-17-1976, § 1; Ord. of 1-9-1979, § I; Ord. of 7-10-1979, § I; Ord. of 3-2-1982, § I; Ord. of 4-14-1987, § I; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § II; Ord. No. 96-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. of 5-13-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 11-28-2006(03); Ord. of 4-27-2010(02); Ord. of 7-23-2013(177); Ord. of 7-23-2013(178); Ord. No. 2017-101, 5-23-2017; Ord. No. 2018-028, 2-27-2018; Ord. No. 2018-141, 8-14-2018; Ord. No. 2018-142, 8-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Section 22-176(c), relative to payment schedule for fines imposed under section 22-176, has been deleted as being superseded by the provisions of an ordinance of April 14, 1987, § I, at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 22-177. - Towing or immobilization of legally parked vehicles with outstanding notices of violation. 
If in any calendar year, and the calendar year immediately preceding, five or more notices of violation of any of the provisions of this article in the aggregate have been affixed to any motor vehicle and have not been disposed of, such motor vehicle may be immobilized or removed to and stored in a convenient place in the city until all charges lawfully imposed for such removal and storage have been paid and due notice has been received that either the fines provided for in such notice has been received that either the fines provided for in such notices have been paid or security for the payment thereof has been deposited. Any vehicle immobilized pursuant to this article shall have a warning sign affixed to its front windshield at the time of immobilization advising that any attempt to move the vehicle prior to removal of the immobilizing device may result in serious damage to the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 5-18-1982, § 2)  
Sec. 22-178. - Snow and ice—Authority of the mayor to declare emergencies. 
(a)  Whenever, in the opinion of the mayor, existing or impending meteorological conditions warrant, he may declare a snow or ice emergency. 
(b)  Such a declaration may include but not be limited to a ban on parking on public and private ways within the city for such periods of time as the mayor in his discretion deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and convenience of the city. 
(c)  The mayor shall utilize the media, including local cable television, radio and print media to inform the public of a declaration of snow or ice emergency under this section. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1988, § III)  
Sec. 22-179. - Same—Interfering with removal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave a motor vehicle upon a public way so that the same interferes with the removal of snow or ice from such way. 
(b)  The director of public works is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, to some convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle interfering with the removing or plowing of snow, or the removing of ice from any public way in the city, and the cost of removal and the storage of such vehicle, if any, resulting from removal, shall be paid by the owner of such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1988, § III)  
Sec. 22-180. - Same—Designation of emergency streets. 
(a)  The mayor, upon advice of the traffic commission, director of public works, chief of police and fire chief, shall identify those streets within the city that public safety and convenience require to be designated as snow and ice emergency streets, in addition to those listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  The mayor shall recommend to the city council that the streets so identified be declared snow and ice emergency streets. 
(c)  After approval by the city council, and passage of an ordinance amendment to include such streets in subsection (d) of this section, the mayor shall direct the director of public works to post permanent signs stating that there shall be no parking on those streets during snow or ice emergencies and that vehicles may be towed and their owners be subject to fines. 
(d)  The following streets are hereby designated as snow and ice emergency streets and shall be posted as such in accordance with subsection (c) of this section: 
Arthur Street 	Maplewood Avenue 
Bass Avenue 	Middle Street 
Beacon Street 	Mt. Vernon Street 
Centennial Avenue 	Pine Street 
Chestnut Street 	Pleasant Street 
Cleveland Street 	Porter Street 
Commercial Street 	Proctor Street 
Commonwealth Avenue 	Prospect Street 
East Main Street 	Rocky Neck Avenue 
Elm Street 	Rogers Street 
Exchange Street 	School Street 
Fair Street 	Short Street 
Friend Street 	Taylor Street 
Granite Street 	Warner Street 
Langsford Street 	Washington Square 
Leonard Street 	Washington Street 
Lexington Avenue 	Wells Street 
Main Street 	
 
(Ord. of 4-12-1988, § III; Ord. of 11-29-1988, § I)  
Sec. 22-181. - Same—Authority of the chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby vested within the same authority as the director of public works under section 22-179(b). 
(b)  Wherever signs are in place giving notice under section 22-180(c), it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, during a declared snow or ice emergency, in any place where such parking is prohibited. 
(c)  Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited due to a snow or ice emergency may be moved during such an emergency under the direction of a police officer and their owners shall be subject to a fine as set forth in section 22-176. 
(Ord. of 4-12-1988, § III)  
Sec. 22-182. - Compact vehicle parking as follows. 
Only compact vehicles as defined in section 22-1 shall park in Compact Vehicle parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2018-028, 2-27-2018)  
Secs. 22-183—22-189. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY-OWNED OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS 
 
Sec. 22-190. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the term "off-street parking area" shall mean an off-street parking area established by section 22-191. 
(Code 1970, § 21-148) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-191. - Established. 
There are hereby established nine off-street parking areas within the city, which are designated in section 22-288. 
(Code 1970, § 21-149; Ord. No. 30-1991, § 1, 9-3-1991; Ord. No. 22-1997, § I, 2-4-1997; Ord. of 8-27-2013(193); Ord. No. 2016-208, 11-7-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to acquire and maintain off-street parking areas, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22B.  
Sec. 22-192. - Plans incorporated by reference; on file. 
The plans or copies thereof described in section 22-191 shall be kept on file with the city clerk and the city engineer. Such plans are specifically incorporated into this division by reference. 
(Code 1970, § 21-150)  
Sec. 22-193. - Vehicles to be parked within designated spaces. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked in an off-street parking area, the operator of the vehicle shall park in a parking space, as designated by the marking lines, as indicated for parking. 
(Code 1970, § 21-151)  
Sec. 22-194. - Parking prohibited between midnight and 6:00 a.m. from December 15 to March 15. 
During the period from December 15 to March 15 of each year, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to park such vehicle on any off-street parking area between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. The police department is hereby authorized and directed to remove to any public garage any vehicle found parked on any off-street parking area during such period of the year and within such hours, and the expense of towing such vehicle and any storage charges incurred shall be collected from the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1970, § 21-152)  
Sec. 22-195. - Backing into parking spaces prohibited. 
No vehicle shall back into any of the parking spaces provided in any off-street parking area. 
(Code 1970, § 21-153)  
Sec. 22-196. - Parking in open spaces or driveways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in or on any open space or driveway in any off-street parking area, such spaces and driveways being shown on the drawings referred to in section 22-191. 
(Code 1970, § 21-154)  
Sec. 22-197. - Parking of trucks greater than one-half ton, buses and trailers prohibited. 
The parking of trucks of more than one-half ton capacity, the parking of buses and the parking of trailers, or any section or sections thereof, is hereby prohibited at all times on any part of any off-street parking area. 
(Code 1970, § 21-155)  
Sec. 22-198. - Removal of vehicle at police officer's request. 
Any owner or operator of a vehicle parked upon any off-street parking area shall, on request by any police officer on duty, move such vehicle from such parking area, if such removal is deemed necessary to facilitate snow removal or to better protect the safety of the traveling public, or if such vehicle is parked or operated in an illegal manner. 
(Code 1970, § 21-156)  
Sec. 22-199. - City hall yard parking area. 
(a)  There are hereby established, set aside and reserved in the city hall yard, six automobile parking spaces for the sole and exclusive use of the mayor and such other officials of the city as the mayor may from time to time designate. 
(b)  There are hereby established, set aside and reserved in the city hall yard, an additional 17 automobile parking spaces for the sole and exclusive use of such city employees as the mayor may from time to time designate. 
(c)  The automobile parking spaces established, set aside and reserved by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be so located, marked, designated and changed as the mayor shall from time to time, by exclusive order, direct. The mayor is hereby expressly authorized to promulgate and establish such rules and regulations relative to the location and use of such parking spaces as he shall from time to time, in his sole discretion, deem necessary or desirable in the best interests of the city. 
(d)  The automobile parking spaces in the city hall yard, not established, set aside and reserved by the preceding provisions of this section, shall be reserved for the use of the general public having business in the city hall. 
(Code 1970, § 21-157)  
Secs. 22-200—22-209. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority relative to parking meters, M.G.L. c. 40, §§ 22A—22C. 
 
Sec. 22-210. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Off-street parking areas shall mean the off-street parking areas established by section 22-191. 
Parking meter shall mean a mechanical device which consists of a standard upon which a case is set containing a timing device and signal, indicating clearly the time to elapse until the period of legal parking expires, during which period parking is permitted in the parking spaces which the parking meter controls. The signal shall also indicate when the time for legal parking has expired in such space. 
Parking meter space shall mean the space alongside the curb in which a vehicle may be properly parked, which shall be indicated clearly by painted lines or otherwise, and adjacent to which a parking meter is installed. The term "parking meter space," as used in connection with off-street parking areas, shall mean a parking space, as defined in this section, adjacent to the front end of which a parking meter is installed. 
Parking space, as used in connection with off-street parking areas, shall mean the space indicated on plans of the off-street parking areas on file in the city clerk's office in which a vehicle may be properly parked and which shall be indicated clearly by painted lines or otherwise. 
Parking meter zones shall mean the streets or parts of streets in which the use of parking meters is authorized by this division, and the numbered parking spaces on each of the off-street parking areas in which the use of parking meters is authorized by this division. 
(Code 1970, § 21-163) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-211. - Meter zones and parking time limits established—On-street parking. 
The streets or parts of streets described in section 22-289 are hereby established as parking meter zones, with parking restrictions as specifically indicated for each such zone. 
(Code 1970, § 21-164)  
Sec. 22-212. - Same—Off-street parking areas. 
The numbered parking spaces as shown on plans for each individual off-street parking area and described in section 22-290, are hereby established as parking meter zones, with parking meter restrictions as specifically indicated for each zone. 
(Code 1970, § 21-165; Ord. No. 13-1997, § I, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 22-213. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  The director of public works shall install and repair parking meter poles, including curb or street marking lines and lines on the off-street parking areas, in the areas designated in this division as parking meter zones. The chief of police shall have charge of the regulation and operation thereof and shall maintain such meters in good workable condition. 
(b)  Parking meters shall not be installed at locations designated as service zones. 
(Code 1970, § 21-166; Ord. of 12-10-1985, § IB; Ord. No. 97-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. of 10-19-2004(03), § I)  
Sec. 22-214. - Location and construction generally. 
In on-street parking meter zones, parking meters shall be placed upon the curb, next to the individual parking places. Parking meters shall be placed on the various off-street parking areas, as shown on the plans on file with the city clerk, in the spaces designated in section 22-290. All such meters shall be so constructed as to display a signal showing legal parking, upon the deposit of proper coins indicated by the instructions on the meters. 
(Code 1970, § 21-167)  
Sec. 22-215. - Location where parking prohibited. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, parking meters shall not be erected nor shall parking meter spaces and zones be established in any street or parts of streets where parking may by law be prohibited, except as specifically provided herein. 
(Code 1970, § 21-168)  
Sec. 22-216. - Hours of operation. 
Parking meters shall operate and control parking in the parking meter zones established in this division between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day, specifically exempting Sundays and legal holidays, except for ten-hour parking meters, which shall operate and control parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day, specifically exempting Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Code 1970, § 21-169; Ord. No. 30-1991, 9-3-1991)  
Sec. 22-217. - Vehicle to be parked within lines of metered space. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked adjacent to a parking meter on a street, the operator of the vehicle shall park within the area designated by the curb or street marking lines as indicated for angle or parallel parking. In off-street parking areas, the vehicle shall be parked within the lines indicating the parking space, as required by section 22-193. 
(Code 1970, § 21-171)  
Sec. 22-218. - Deposit of coin required; overtime parking; exemption. 
(a)  When a vehicle is parked in a parking space for which a parking meter has been installed under this division, the driver shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit, in the meter, appropriate coins as indicated by the instructions on the meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or neglect to deposit such coins. Upon such deposit, the parking space may then be used by such vehicle during the time prescribed in this division according to the sum thus deposited. The vehicle shall be unlawfully parked if it shall remain in such space beyond the period of time which the driver shall have deposited such coins in the meter. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be unlawfully parked as provided in this section. 
(b)  No parking meter fees shall be exacted under subsection (a) of this section nor shall any penalty be imposed for failure to pay such fees for the parking of any vehicle owned and driven by a disabled veteran or by a handicapped person and bearing the distinctive number plates authorized therefor by M.G.L. c. 90, § 2. 
(Code 1970, § 21-172; Ord. No. 2014-254, 7-22-2014; Ord. No. 2018-090, 6-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-090, 6-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-219. - Parking meter fees prescribed. 
All meter fees shall be at the rate of $0.25 per half hour. 
(Code 1970, § 21-170; Ord. of 1-11-1983; Ord. of 4-19-1983, § II; Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. No. 107-1998, § I, 7-28-1998)  
Sec. 22-220. - Deposit to extend parking time beyond maximum legal time prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in a parking meter any coin for the purpose of extending the parking period beyond the maximum legal limit established for any particular parking meter zone established by this division. 
(b)  The parking meter attendant shall have no authority to turn the parking meters when left with unused time on the dials. 
(c)  In order to regulate the practice of shuffling cars from one metered space to the next throughout the workday within the downtown area from Main and Spring Streets to the intersection of Main Street and Washington Street, once a meter expires it shall be unlawful to park the car in another metered space within the area all days except Sundays and holidays between the hours of 9:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 
(Code 1970, § 21-173; Ord. of 1-11-1983, § V; Ord. of 11-23-2010; Ord. No. 2018-127, 7-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-221. - Exemptions from deposit for commercial vehicles loading or unloading. 
Operators of commercial vehicles may park in an on-street metered space without depositing a coin for a period not to exceed 30 minutes for purposes of loading or unloading. Parking in excess of this time limit, without depositing the proper coin, shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1970, § 21-174)  
Sec. 22-222. - Tampering with, breaking, etc., meters; depositing slugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not authorized to do so, to tamper with, break, injure or destroy any parking meter, or to deposit or cause to be deposited therein any slugs or any other device or metallic substance or any other substitute for the coins required to be deposited by this division. 
(Code 1970, § 21-175)  
Sec. 22-223. - Collection of deposits and inspection of meters. 
The chief of police shall have the authority and duty to collect or cause to be collected, weekly or more often at his discretion, all coins deposited in the parking meters located in the city and to inspect or cause to be inspected such parking meters weekly, or may be necessary, to see that they are in proper working order. The chief of police shall maintain a list of the number of each parking meter which is not in proper working order. Said list shall be posted in the police station and a copy provided to the parking clerk. 
(Code 1970, § 21-176; Ord. of 12-10-1985, § IA; Ord. No. 98-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. of 10-19-2004(04), § I)  
Secs. 22-224—22-226. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-1992, § I, adopted July 14, 1992, amended this Code by repealing §§ 22-224—22-226. Formerly, § 22-224 pertained to disposition of deposits generally and derived from the 1970 Code, § 21-177, an ordinance adopted December 10, 1985, § IB, Ord. No. 41-1991, § I, adopted December 17, 1991 and Ord. No. 30-1991, adopted September 3, 1991. Section 22-225 pertained to payment of salaries and wages etc., from the parking meter account and was derived from the 1970 Code, § 21-178. Section 22-226 pertained to the purchase of equipment necessary to enforce the division and was derived from the 1970 Code, § 21-179.  
Sec. 22-227. - Records of receipts and disbursements. 
The chief of police and the city treasurer shall keep whatever records may be necessary to show all parking meter receipts and disbursements. 
(Code 1970, § 21-180; Ord. of 12-10-1985, § IB; Ord. No. 99-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. of 10-19-2004(02), § I)  
Sec. 22-228. - Duty of police as to violations of division. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to take the parking meter number and the state vehicle number of all vehicles whose operators violate the provisions of this division and to cause to be imposed the penalties provided in section 1-14. When a parking meter is found to be not in proper working order by the police chief, the meter number shall be posted and no violation of section 22-218 of this division shall issue. 
(Code 1970, § 21-181; Ord. of 12-10-1985, § IC)  
Sec. 22-229. - Parking control device. 
(a)  Any spaces or portions thereof used to locate equipment, such as dumpsters, jersey barriers, or scaffolding but not work vehicles shall pay $10.00 per metered space. 
(b)  Each space shall be reserved for the day by covering the meter with a bag issued by the building inspector's office and must be located directly in front of the work site. 
(c)  Each bag shall cost $5.00 per day and shall have the time period and an expiration date inscribed thereon. 
(d)  No more than three bags a day shall be provided per work site for a maximum of two consecutive weeks. 
(e)  At no time shall the use of parking spaces under this section unreasonably interfere with traffic. 
(Ord. No. 23-1994, § I, 11-1-1994; Ord. of 10-19-2004(01), § I; Ord. of 2-2-2010(02); Ord. No. 2018-128, 7-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-230. - Downtown parking permits. 
The fee for downtown permit parking for all ten-hour meters and for municipal parking lots, where 10-hour parking is permitted, shall be per person, as follows: 
(1)  $50.00 per month; or 
(2)  $550.00 annually. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2004, § I; Ord. No. 2015-197, 9-22-2015)  
Secs. 22-231—22-239. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TOW-AWAY ZONES 
 
Sec. 22-240. - Statutory authority. 
In accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D, the city council hereby enacts the regulations imposed by this division authorizing the immobilization or removal to a convenient place of vehicles parked or standing in such manner, or in such areas as are hereinafter described on any way under the control of the city. Vehicles specifically exempt by M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D shall not, however, be subject to such immobilization or removal. 
(Code 1970, § 21-191)  
Sec. 22-241. - Authorization of police. 
The moving, towing or immobilization of any vehicle under the provisions of this division shall be by and at the direction of the chief of police or such other officers of the rank of sergeant or higher as he may designate from time to time and at the request of the director of public works as may be necessary to perform the duties of the public works department. 
(Code 1970, § 21-192; Ord. of 5-18-1982, § 4; Ord. of 1-23-2007, § I) 
Cross reference— Police department, § 17-15 et seq.  
Sec. 22-242. - Parking prohibitions; towing; immobilization; signs. 
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following locations: 
(1)  Upon any way in such a manner as to impede the removal or plowing of snow or ice, except vehicles parked in accordance with approved regulations governing all-night parking; 
(2)  Upon any sidewalk, with or without curbing; 
(3)  Upon any crosswalk; 
(4)  Upon any way within 20 feet of an intersecting way, except alleys; 
(5)  Upon any curb ramp designed for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way; 
(6)  In any parking space reserved for a vehicle used by a disabled veteran or handicapped person, when the vehicle occupying or obstructing such space does not bear the distinguishing license plate authorized by M.G.L. c. 90, § 2; 
(7)  Upon any way within ten feet of a fire hydrant; 
(8)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of the way; 
(9)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(10)  Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and unobstructed lane at least ten feet wide for passing traffic; 
(11)  In the beach district, as designated in section 22-176(b); 
(12)  In or upon streets or ways or parts of streets or ways described in section 22-291 which have been designated or may hereafter be designated through ordinance amendments, which streets or ways shall be considered included as part of this section; 
(13)  Upon any public landing where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and unobstructed lane at least 12 feet wide for passing vehicles and boat trailers; 
(14)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any way during the days and times that it is scheduled for street sweeping; 
(15)  On Haven Terrace, extending the fire lane east side from utility pole #5610 north to utility pole #2896; 
(16)  No parking at Magnolia Woods east and south of the turnaround on the entrance road. This prohibition extends to all playing fields and surrounding slopes and to all paved walkways, with parking allowed only in designated parking areas. 
(17)  Any bike lane as provided by section 22-294, any bike path and any bicycle parking facility. 
(Ord. No. 13-1992, § I, 5-5-1992; Ord. of 1-23-2007; Ord. of 9-30-2008(01); Ord. of 5-10-2011; Ord. of 7-26-2011(01); Ord. of 5-28-2013(111))  
Sec. 22-243. - Release of vehicles; fees. 
(a)  Removed or immobilized vehicles. Upon removal or immobilization of a vehicle, the police department shall promptly determine the owner of the vehicle and shall send to the owner, by certified mail, a notice listing the whereabouts of the vehicle, the alleged offense and the means of securing the release of the vehicle. The notice also shall contain a warning that if unclaimed within ten days following receipt of such notice, the vehicle shall be subject to disposal in accordance with the procedures of M.G.L. c. 135, § 8. Storage fees assessed under section 22-244 shall be calculated from the time such notice is sent. 
(b)  Payment of outstanding notices of violation. In addition to the deposits, fees and charges required by subsection (a) of this section, no vehicle which has been immobilized, removed or towed away under the provisions of this division shall be released unless due notice has been received that the fines provided in any outstanding notices of violation of any of the parking prohibitions of this article have been paid or security for the payment thereof has been deposited. Such notice shall be on a form provided by the parking clerk dated and signed by the clerk, which form shall indicate that all such payments have been made or deposits received. As used in this subsection the term "notice of violation" shall include all citations or notices of violation issued with regard to the vehicle in question in the immediate calendar year and the calendar year preceding the immediate calendar year. 
(Ord. of 5-18-1982, § 3; Ord. of 2-28-1984)  
Sec. 22-244. - Fees. 
The city council hereby imposes, upon the owner of any vehicle moved or towed to a convenient place, under the provisions of this article, an administrative assessment on the towed motor vehicle of $25.00, paid to the city. 
(Code 1970, § 21-193; Ord. of 12-7-1976, § 1; Ord. of 6-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-245. - Liability for damage during removal or storage. 
(a)  The towing contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage to a vehicle in the course of removal or storage. 
(b)  Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section, except those specifically exempt by M.G.L. c. 40, § 22D, shall be subject to citation and to removal or immobilization. Removal shall be to a convenient place under the direction of an officer of the police department. The owner of a vehicle so removed or towed away shall be liable for the storage and removal fees set forth in this division in addition to the penalties provided in section 22-176. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section relative to citation and removal of vehicles violating the parking prohibitions enumerated in section 22-176(a)(10) through (12) shall be effective only during such time as a sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend "Tow-Away Zone" are installed, erected, maintained and located so as to be visible to approaching drivers, such signs to be appended above or incorporated into the legend of parking prohibition signs. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section relative to citation and removal of vehicles violating the general parking prohibitions enumerated in sections 22-176(a)(1) through (9) shall be effective without the posting of any such signs. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-195—21-197; Ord. of 5-18-1982, § I; Ord. of 5-18-1982, § 6)  
Sec. 22-246. - Police to keep records of towed vehicles. 
The police department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed, immobilized or removed under the provisions of this division. Such record shall be retained for one year and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The registration of the vehicle; 
(2)  The location from which it was towed, and the time and date of the order or, where applicable, the location at which it was immobilized; 
(3)  The location to which it was moved; 
(4)  The fee charged for towing; 
(5)  The name of the towing contractor, if any; 
(6)  The name and rank of the officer who authorized towing or immobilization. 
(Code 1970, § 21-198; Ord. of 5-18-1982, § 7) 
Cross reference— Police department, § 17-15 et seq.  
Secs. 22-247—22-264. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 22-265. - Turning movements—Generally. 
Turning movements at the following locations are hereby restricted in the manner indicated below when official signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-75: 
Addison Street, at its intersection with School Street, right turn only. 
Amero Court, at its intersection with East Main Street, left turn only. 
Chapel Street, at its intersection with Davis Street Extension ascending from East Main Street, right turn only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 2:45 p.m. on school days when school is in session. Chapel Street, at its intersection with Davis Street Extension descending from Mt. Pleasant Avenue, left turn only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 2:45 p.m. on school days when school is in session. 
Concord Street , no left turn onto the West Parish School property from 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., and on early release days from 11:45 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. while school is in session. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Main Street, right turn only. 
Hancock Street, northbound into Main Street, left turn only. 
Hancock Street, southbound into Main Street, right turn only. 
Liberty Street, at its intersection with Pleasant Street, right turn only. 
Old County Road, near rear property entrance of 168 Eastern Avenue onto Old County Road. 
Smith Street, at its intersection with Pleasant Street, left turn only. 
Washington Street, at Grant Circle, for vehicles leaving shopping center, right turn only. 
Washington Street, southerly direction, at its intersection with Wheeler Street, right turn prohibited. 
West Parish School property , no left turn onto Concord Street from 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., and on early release days from 11:45 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. while school is in session. 
(Code 1970, § 21-155(a); Ord. of 9-19-1978, § 1; Ord. of 11-13-1979, § II; Ord. of 1-22-1980, § II; Ord. of 3-23-1982, § I; Ord. of 4-3-1984, § I; Ord. of 1-28-1986, § I; Ord. of 10-12-2010(02); Ord. of 7-10-2012(01); Ord. No. 2014-264, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2016-152, 7-26-2016; Ord. No. 2018-117, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 2018-138, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 22-266. - Same—U-turns. 
U-turns are prohibited at the following locations when official signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-76: 
Western Avenue, westerly direction, at a point 72 feet easterly of Centennial Avenue, from April 1 to November 1, of each year. 
Willow Street, at its intersection with Cedar Street. 
(Code 1970, § 21-55(b); Ord. No. 2-1992, § I, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 14-1997, § I, 1-21-1997)  
Sec. 22-267. - One-way streets—Generally. 
In accordance with section 22-110, the following are designated as one-way streets and traffic thereon shall move only in the direction required by official signs for such streets, as indicated below: 
Amero Court, from East Main Street to Bass Avenue, in a northerly direction. 
Angle Street, for its entire distance, in an easterly direction. 
Arlington Street , for its entire length, in a northeasterly direction. 
Barberry Lane, from Gerring Road to Mt. Pleasant Ave. 
Bass Rocks Road, in a westerly direction from its intersection with Nautilus Road to its intersection with Atlantic Road. 
Blynman Avenue, from Granite Street for a distance of 405 feet, in a westerly direction. 
Chapel Street, in an easterly direction, from the intersection of East Main Street to Davis Street Extension during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 2:45 p.m. on school days when school is in session. Chapel Street, in a westerly direction, from Mt. Pleasant Avenue to Davis Street Extension during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 2:45 p.m. on school days when school is in session. Davis Street in a southerly direction, from its intersection with Davis Street Extension to Highland Street during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 2:45 p.m. on school days when school is in session. 
Chestnut Street, from Prospect Street to Main Street, in a southerly direction. 
Church Street, from Middle Street to Proctor Street, in a northerly direction. 
Cliff Avenue from Lexington Avenue in an easterly direction to Shore Road. 
Concord Street moving into Essex Avenue, in a westerly direction, vehicles to pass to the right of the traffic island at or near the intersection of Concord Street with Essex Avenue. 
Concord Street , while school is in session on weekdays, from the entrance of West Parish School southwest to Essex Avenue (approximately 285 feet) from 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., and on early release days from 11:45 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. effective to June 30, 2018. 
Cross Street, from East Main Street to Eastern Avenue, in a northerly direction. 
Curtis Square, for its entire distance, from Whittemore Street to Centennial Avenue in an ENE direction. 
Dale Avenue, for its entire distance from Prospect Street to Middle Street in a southerly direction. 
Derby Court , from the intersection of Maplewood Avenue to Derby Court and Derby Court to Derby Street, in a northwesterly direction. 
Duncan Street, from Main Street to Rogers Street, in a southerly direction. 
East Main Street, from Bass Avenue to Sayward Street, in an easterly direction. 
Elm Street, between Federal Street and Prospect Street, in a northerly direction. 
Englewood Road, yearround, 150 feet up Englewood Road from Lowe Drive from the intersection with Magnolia Avenue to Ocean Avenue. 
Essex Avenue moving into Concord Street, in an easterly direction, vehicles to pass to the right of the traffic island at or near the intersection of Essex Avenue with Concord Street. 
Fair Street, from Friend Street to Eastern Avenue, in a southeasterly direction. 
Federal Street, from Pleasant Street to Elm Street, in an easterly direction. 
Fort Square, from that part of Fort Square, which is about 300 feet southeasterly from Commercial Court and proceeding westerly, southerly, easterly, and northerly to the end of the street at Commercial Street, which point is about 500 feet southeasterly of Commercial Court. 
Foster Street, from Summer Street to Washington Street, in an easterly direction. 
Fremont Street, from its intersection with Rocky Neck Avenue, in a westerly direction, to its intersection with Rackliffe Street. 
Granite Street, from Blynman Avenue for a distance of 420 feet, in an easterly direction. 
Granite Street, from Washington Street to Summer Street, in a westerly direction. 
Hancock Street, from Middle Street to Main Street in a southerly direction. 
Haskell Street, from the junction of Hammond Street, Traverse Street and Haskell Street with Blake Court to East Main Street, in a westerly direction. 
High Street, from Washington Street to its intersection with Hickory Street, in an easterly direction. 
Kent Circle for its entire length from its intersection with Essex Avenue in a southwesterly direction to its intersection with Western Avenue. 
Main Street, from Flannagan Square to Manuel Lewis Street, from east to west. 
Main Street, from Pleasant Street to Manual F. Lewis Street, in a westerly direction. 
Mansfield Street, from its intersection with Western Avenue to its intersection with Riggs Street in a northerly direction. 
Mansfield Way, from its intersection with Western Avenue for a distance of 420 feet, in a northerly direction. 
Maple Street, from Warner Street to Mt. Vernon Street, in an easterly direction. 
Marchant Street, from Prospect Street to Spring Street, in a southerly direction. 
Mason Street, from School Street to Prospect Street, in a northerly direction. 
Middle Street, easterly direction from its intersection with Center Street to its intersection with Hancock Street. 
Middle Street, from Dale Avenue to Pleasant Street, in an easterly direction. 
Middle Street, from School Street to Washington Street in a westerly direction. 
Nautilus Road, for its entire distance, in a southerly direction. 
Oak Street, from Mt. Vernon Street to Warner Street, in a westerly direction. 
Orchard Street, from Washington Street to Summer Street, in a westerly direction. 
Park Lane , from Norman Avenue, in a southerly direction to Linden Road. 
Perkins Road, from Western Avenue to Centennial Avenue, in a northerly direction. 
Pleasant Street, from its intersection with Prospect Street to its intersection with Shepherd Street, in a northerly direction. 
Porter Street, from Main Street to Rogers Street, in a northerly direction. 
Proctor Street, from Church Street to School Street, in an easterly direction. 
Prospect Square, running southerly from Prospect Street, vehicles to enter Prospect Square from the westerly end or opposite Allen Street, and to leave Prospect Square from the easterly end thereof nearest Warner Street and Winchester Court. 
Rackliffe Street, from its intersection with Fremont Street, in a northerly direction, for its entire length from March 15 to November 15 annually. 
River Road, from Bridgewater Street for its entire length in a southerly and westerly direction. 
Riverview Road, beginning at a point on the easterly side of the Riverview Road Rotary and post a sign on the opposite end of the Rotary reading "No Vehicles Shall Enter." 
Rocky Neck Avenue, from its intersection with Wonson Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Stevens Lane. 
Sayward Street, easterly direction from its intersection with East Main Street to its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
School Street, from its intersection with Railroad Avenue to its intersection with Prospect Street. 
School Street, from its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Proctor Street. 
Shore Road, from its intersection with Magnolia Avenue in its entirety. 
Short Street, from Main Street to Middle Street, in a northerly direction. 
Spring Street, for its entire length from Prospect Street to Main Street, in a southerly direction. 
Stevens Lane, for its entire length, in a westerly direction. 
Summer Street, from its intersection with Granite Street, in a southerly direction to its intersection with Riggs Street. 
Taylor Street, from Staten Street to Elwell Street, in a easterly direction. 
Warren Street, from Pleasant Street to Dale Avenue, in a westerly direction. 
Washington Square , from its intersection with Granite Street to a point 55 feet, in a westerly direction, from its intersection with Washington Street. 
Washington Street, from Main Street to Middle Street, in a northerly direction. 
Wells Street, from Commonwealth Avenue to Beacon Street. 
Western Avenue, southerly lane, from the Blynman Bridge to the Tavern, in an easterly direction and Western Avenue, northerly lane, from the Tavern to Blynman Bridge, in a westerly direction. 
Wonson Street, from Stevens Lane to Rocky Neck Avenue, in a southerly direction. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-90, 21-92; Ord. of 1-22-1976, § 1; Ord. of 7-22-1976, § 1; Ord. of 11-19-1976, § 1; Ord. of 3-28-1978, § 1; Ord. of 9-19-1978; Ord. of 6-12-1979, § I; Ord. of 11-13-1979, § I; Ord. of 1-22-1980, § I; Ord. of 3-23-1980, § I; Ord. of 6-16-1981, § I; Ord. of 12-20-1983, § I; Ord. of 5-22-1984, § I; Ord. of 1-8-1985, § I; Ord. of 10-15-1985, § I; Ord. of 7-7-1987, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1988, § I; Ord. No. 22-1991, § I, 6-18-1991; Ord. No. 37-1991, § I, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 1-1994, § I, 3-15-1994; Ord. No. 5-1994, § I, 4-5-1994; Ord. No. 15-1995, § I, 2-7-1995; Ord. No. 22-1995, § I, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 5-1996, § I, 3-19-1996; Ord. No. 47-1996, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 53-1997, § I, 7-22-1997; Ord. of 4-16-2002(07), § I; Ord. of 7-9-2002(02), § I; Ord. of 11-12-2002(04), § I; Ord. of 1-21-2003(07), § I; Ord. of 9-7-2004(05), § I; Ord. of 8-21-2007(05); Ord. of 10-12-2010(03); Ord. of 7-10-2012(01); Ord. No. 2015-254, 12-15-2015; Ord. No. 2016-092, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2017-005, 1-10-2017; 2017-165, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 2017-224, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 2018-021, 2-13-2018; Ord. No. 2018-081, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 22-268. - Same—From May 1 to September 15. 
In accordance with section 22-111, the following streets are designated as one-way streets from May 1 to September 15 and traffic thereon shall move only in the direction indicated below: 
Beach Road, Bass Rocks, from Atlantic Road to Nautilus Road, in an easterly direction. 
Harbor Road, Bass Rocks, from Atlantic Road to Nautilus Road, annually. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-92, 21-92.1; Ord. of 22-1991, § I, 6-18-1991; Ord. No. 10-1996, § I, 4-2-1996; Ord. No. 15-97, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 2017-005, 1-10-2017)  
Sec. 22-269. - Stop intersections. 
In accordance with section 22-128, the following are stop intersections with official stop sign or flashing red signal thereon facing traffic proceeding in the direction indicated below: 
Alper Road. Eastbound traffic on Alper Road at its intersection with Main Street. 
Andrews Street. Eastbound drivers on Andrews Street at its intersection with Langsford Street. 
Angle Street. Southbound drivers on Angle Street at its intersection with Western Avenue. 
Apple Street, both directions, at its intersection with Juniper Road. 
Atlantic Road. Northbound drivers on Atlantic Road at its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
Atlantic Street. Westbound drivers on Atlantic Street at its intersection with Concord Street. 
Barn Lane. At its intersection with Thatcher Road. 
Bass Avenue. In a southerly direction at its intersection with Thatcher Road. 
Bass Rocks Road. At its intersection with Atlantic Road, northerly end. 
Beach Road. Eastbound drivers on Beach Road at its intersection with Atlantic Road. 
Beach Road. Northerly side in a westerly direction at the intersection of Atlantic Road. 
Beach Road. Southwestbound drivers on Beach Road at its intersection with Haskell Street. 
Beacon Street . At its intersection with Washington Street. 
Beauport Avenue. Southeastbound drivers on Beauport Avenue at Madison Avenue. 
Birch Grove Heights. At its intersection with Bond Street. 
Blynman Avenue. Eastbound and westbound drivers on Blynman Avenue at its intersection with Centennial Avenue. 
Bray Street. At its intersection with Atlantic Road; and that a sign be erected (marked by the traffic commission) and printed "STOP" on the pavement of Bray Street. 
Brightside Avenue. Northbound drivers on Brightside Avenue at its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
Brightside Avenue. At its intersection with Beach Road. 
Castle Hill Road. Southeastbound drivers on Castle Hill Road, at its intersection with Hesperus Avenue. 
Castle View Drive. At its intersection with Sea Fox Lane; sign to be placed in the southwest corner of Castle View Drive in a southerly direction. 
Causeway Street. Southbound traffic at its intersection with Concord Street. 
Cedarwood Road. Eastbound traffic on Cedarwood Road at its intersection with Concord Street. 
Centennial Avenue. Northbound drivers on Centennial Avenue at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Centennial Avenue. Southbound drivers on Centennial Avenue at its intersection with Western Avenue. 
Center Street. Northbound traffic on Center Street at the intersection with Middle Street. 
Center Street. Southbound traffic on Center Street at Main Street. 
Chapel Street. Northwestbound drivers on Chapel Street at its intersection with East Main Street. 
Chapel Street. Southwestbound drivers on Chapel Street at its intersection with Mt. Pleasant Avenue. 
Chapel Street. At its intersection with Davis Street/Davis Street extension from both directions (two stop signs). 
Cherry Hill Road. At its intersection with Cherry Street. 
Cherry Street. Northbound traffic on Cherry Street at its intersection with Gee Avenue. 
Cherry Street. Southbound traffic on Cherry Street at its intersection with Poplar Street. 
Chestnut Street. Southbound drivers on Chestnut Street at its intersection with Main Street. 
Church Street. Northbound and southbound drivers on Church Street at its intersection with Pine Street. 
Church Street. Northbound and southbound drivers on Church Street at its intersection with Proctor Street. 
Church Street . Northbound traffic at the intersection with Prospect Street. 
Cleveland Street. Westbound drivers on Cleveland Street at its intersection with Maplewood Avenue. 
Cleveland Street. All drivers on Cleveland Street at its intersection with Sargent Street. 
Commercial Street. Northbound drivers on Commercial Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Commonwealth Avenue. Westbound drivers on Commonwealth Avenue at its intersection with Centennial Avenue. 
Concord Street. Southbound drivers on Concord Street at its intersection with Atlantic Street. 
Crafts Road. Southbound drivers on Crafts Road at its intersection with Causeway Street. 
Crafts Road . Crafts Road at the intersection with Ye Old County Road. 
Cross Street. Northbound and westbound drivers on Cross Street at its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Dale Avenue. At its intersection with Middle Street. 
Davis Street. Northeast and southwestbound drivers on Davis Street at its intersection with Chapel Street. 
Dr. Osman Babson Road. Southbound traffic on Dr. Osman Babson Road at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Duncan Street. Northbound and southbound drivers on Duncan Street at its intersection with Rogers Street. 
East Main Street. Northwestbound drivers on East Main Street at its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
Elm Street. Southbound drivers on Elm Street at its intersection with Main Street. 
Elwell Street. Southeastbound drivers on Elwell Street at its intersection with Friend Street. 
Emmerson Avenue. Eastbound drivers on Emerson Avenue at its intersection with Centennial Avenue. 
Field Road. At its intersection with Flume Road. 
Finch Lane. At its intersection with Cherry Street. 
Flannagan Square. At the northern end of the traffic island facing Prospect Street. 
Flume Road. Eastbound and westbound drivers on Flume Road at its intersection with Lexington Avenue. 
Flume Road . Flume Road at its intersection with Fuller Street. 
Friend Street. Northeastbound drivers on Friend Street at its intersection with Webster Street. 
Fuller Street. Northeast corner where it meets Norman Avenue. 
Gaffney Street. Eastbound drivers on Gaffney Street at its intersection with Hampden Street. 
Gee Avenue. At its intersection with Washington Street. 
Gloucester Avenue. At its intersection with Maplewood Avenue in a westerly direction. 
Gloucester Avenue. Eastbound drivers on Gloucester Avenue at its intersection with Maplewood Avenue. 
Gloucester Avenue. Southwestbound and northeastbound drivers on Gloucester Avenue at Washington Street. 
Granite Street. At its intersection with Summer Street. 
Grape Vine Road. Westbound drivers on Grape Vine Road at its intersection with Eastern Point Road. 
Green Street. At the exit point of Ganine Doucette Playground. 
Green Street. Eastbound drivers on Green Street at its intersection with Perkins Street. 
Grove Street. Eastbound and westbound drivers on Grove Street at its intersection with Maplewood Avenue. 
Hancock Street. Northbound and southbound traffic at its intersection with Main Street. 
Hancock Street. Southbound drivers on Hancock Street at its intersection with Rogers Street. 
Hartz Street. Northbound drivers on Hartz Street at its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Harvey Place. Eastbound traffic on Harvey Place at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Haskell Street. Northwestbound drivers on Haskell Street at its intersection with East Main Street. 
Haskell Street. Westbound drivers on Haskell Street at its intersection with Traverse Street. 
Haywood Road. At its intersection with Gloucester Avenue. 
Haywood Road. At its intersection with Riverside Avenue. 
Herrick Court. Eastbound traffic at its intersection with Main Street. 
Hesperus Avenue. At its intersection with Fuller Street. 
Hesperus Avenue. At its intersection with Norman Avenue from both directions. 
Hesperus Avenue. Southwest corner at its intersection with Lexington Avenue. 
Hickory Street. At its intersection with High Street. 
High Popples Road. At its intersection with Grapevine Road. 
Highland Street. At its intersection with East Main Street. 
Highland Street. At its intersection with Mt. Pleasant Avenue. 
Holly Street. Southbound traffic on Holly Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Hough Avenue. Northbound and southwestbound traffic on Hough Avenue at the intersection of Western Avenue. 
Knowlton Square. Northwestbound drivers on Knowlton Square at Madison Avenue. 
Kondelin Road. Eastbound drivers on Kondelin Road at its intersection with Magnolia Avenue. 
Leonard Street. Northeastbound drivers on Leonard Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Leonard Street. From its intersection with Rogers Lane. 
Leslie O. Johnson Road. Northwestbound drivers on Leslie O. Johnson Road at Blynman Avenue. 
Leslie O. Johnson Road. Southeastbound drivers on Leslie O. Johnson Road at Centennial Avenue. 
Lexington Avenue. Northbound and southbound drivers on Lexington Avenue at its intersection with Hesperus Avenue. 
Lexington Avenue. Northeast corner at its intersection with Hesperus Avenue. 
Lexington Avenue. Northbound drivers on Lexington Avenue at its intersection with Norman Avenue. 
Lincoln Avenue. Southwestbound drivers on Lincoln Avenue at Blynman Avenue. 
Lincoln Avenue. At its intersection with Emerson Avenue. 
Long Beach Road. At its intersection with Rockport Road. 
Lookout Street. At its intersection with Commonwealth Avenue 
Lookout Street. At its intersection with Beacon Street. 
Madison Avenue. Northeastbound traffic on Madison Avenue at its intersection with Acacia Street. 
Madison Avenue. Southwestbound drivers on Madison Avenue at Washington Street. 
Madison Court. Northbound traffic on Madison Court at its intersection with Gloucester Avenue. 
Madison Court. Southbound traffic on Madison Court at its intersection with Madison Avenue. 
Madison Court , at its intersection with Rockland Street. 
Madison Court , on its northerly side at the intersection with Gloucester Avenue. 
Magnolia Avenue. Eastbound drivers on Magnolia Avenue at its intersection with Raymond Street. 
Magnolia Avenue. Northbound and southbound drivers on Magnolia Avenue at its intersection with Western Avenue. 
Main Street. At its intersection with Washington Street. 
Mansfield Street. Westbound drivers on Mansfield Street at its intersection with Riggs Street. 
Manuel F. Lewis Street. Northbound drivers on Manuel F. Lewis Street at its intersection with Main Street. 
Magnolia Avenue, At its intersection with Essex Avenue. 
Mansfield Street. Eastbound, at its intersection with Riggs Street. 
Marble Road. Easterly and westerly bound traffic at its intersection with Harriet Road. 
Marina Drive. Northwestbound drivers on Marina Drive at Eastern Avenue. 
Middle Street. Westbound drivers on Middle Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Middle Street. Westbound drivers on Middle Street at its intersection with Western Avenue. 
Millett Street. At its intersection with Sargent Street. 
Moorland Road. At its intersection with Atlantic Road with stop sign to be placed before the crosswalk. 
Mt. Pleasant Avenue. At its intersection with Moorland Road. 
Mt. Vernon Street. Southbound drivers on Mt. Vernon Street at its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Mt. Vernon Street. Eastbound and westbound drivers on Mt. Vernon Street at its intersection with Perkins Street. 
Nally Avenue. At its intersection with Hodgkins Street. 
Nally Avenue. Westbound drivers on Nally Avenue at its intersection with Wheeler Street. 
Nautilus Road. Southbound traffic on Nautilus Road at its intersection with Atlantic Road. 
Norman Avenue. Westbound drivers on Norman Avenue at its intersection with Fuller Street. 
Norman Avenue. Westbound drivers on Norman Avenue at its intersection with Magnolia Avenue. 
Ocean Avenue. Southbound and northbound drivers on Ocean Avenue at its intersection with Norman Avenue. 
Orchard Street. At its intersection with Summer Street. 
Oxford Road. At its intersection with Starknaught Heights Road and at its intersection with Starknaught Road. 
Palfrey Road. At its intersection with Rockport Road. 
Pleasant Street. Northbound traffic at its intersection with Main Street. 
Pleasant Street. Northbound and southbound drivers on Pleasant Street at its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Pleasant Street. At its fork in the southeast corner intersecting with Prospect Street just before the driveway at 79 Prospect Street. 
Pleasant Street. Both sides at its intersection with Shepherd Street. 
Pond Road. At its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Poplar Street. At its intersection with Washington Street. 
Porter Street. Northbound traffic on Porter Street at its intersection with Main Street. 
Proctor Street. At its intersection with School Street. 
Prospect Street. Southbound drivers on Prospect Street at its intersection with Main Street. 
Prospect Street. Westbound drivers on Prospect Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Railroad Avenue. Westbound drivers on Railroad Avenue at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Railroad Avenue. Westerly side at its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Reservoir Road. Southbound traffic on Reservoir Road at its intersection with Cherry Street. 
Reynard Street. Westbound traffic on Reynard Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Reynard Street. Eastbound drivers on Reynard Street at its intersection with Cherry Street. 
Riggs Point Road. At the intersection with Vine Street. 
River Road. At its intersection with Leonard Street. 
Riverdale Park. At a point from their intersection with #31—#32 and #60—#61. 
Riverside Avenue. Northerly side, adjacent to the easterly side of the driveway at #31 Riverside Avenue just prior to its intersection with Whittemore Street. 
Riverside Avenue. At its intersection with Washington Street. 
Rockport Road. At its intersection with Thatcher Road. 
Rocky Neck Avenue. Eastbound drivers on Rocky Neck Avenue at its intersection with East Main Street. 
Rogers Lane. Eastbound drivers on Rogers Lane at its intersection with Leonard Street. 
School Street. Northbound and southbound drivers on School Street at its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Sadler Street. At its intersection with Webster Street. 
Sayward Street. Southerly lane at its intersection with Brightside Avenue, and Northerly lane at its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
School Street. Northbound drivers on School Street at its intersection with Railroad Avenue. 
Scott Street. Southeastbound traffic on Scott Street at its intersection with Main Street. 
Sea Fox Lane. At its intersection with Castle View Drive; sign to be placed at the northeast corner of Sea Fox Lane in a northerly direction. 
Shepherd Street. At the intersection of Maplewood. 
Shepherd Street . Shepherd Street at its intersection with Pleasant Street with a stop sign facing traffic proceeding in the eastbound direction. 
Shepherd Street. Westbound drivers on Shepherd Street at its intersection with Pleasant Street. 
Shore Hill Road. At its intersection with Wheeler Street. 
Short Street. Southbound traffic at its intersection with Middle Street. 
Skywood Terrace. At its intersection with Harrison Avenue. 
Smith Street. At its intersection with Maplewood. 
South Kilby Street. Northbound drivers on South Kilby Street at its intersection with Quarry Street. 
Souther Road. Southbound traffic on Souther Road at its intersection with Moorland Road. 
Souther Road. Northbound traffic on Souther Road at its intersection with Atlantic Road. 
Spring Street. Eastbound traffic at its intersection with Main Street. 
Stanwood Street. Eastbound traffic on Stanwood Street at its intersection with Gee Avenue. 
Starknaught Road. At its intersection with Starknaught Heights. 
Starknaught Heights. At its intersection with Witham Street. 
Staten Street. Southbound drivers on Staten Street at its intersection with Taylor Street. 
Steven's Lane. Southbound traffic on Steven's Lane at its intersection with Wonson Street. 
Summer Street. Northbound and southbound drivers on Summer Street at its intersection with Granite Street. 
Summer Street. Southbound drivers on Summer Street at its intersection with Essex Avenue. 
Summer Street. At its intersection with Beacon Street. 
Summer Street. At its intersection with Granite Street. 
Sumner Street. At its intersection with Concord Street. 
Taylor Street, at its intersection with Elwell Street. 
Thatcher Road. Southbound drivers on Thatcher Road at its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
Thornhill Way. At its intersection with Seeall Street. 
Thurston Road. At its intersection with Wheeler Street. 
Traverse Street . At its intersection with Haskell Street. 
Twilight Avenue. Locate a Stop Sign on Twilight Avenue, easterly side, at its intersection with Cliff Road. 
Vulcan Street . At its intersection with Emerald Street. 
Walnut Street. Southwesterly at its intersection with Leonard Street and Walnut Street at its eastern most intersection with Leonard Street (located at approximately 83 Leonard Street). 
Warner Street. Southbound drivers on Warner Street at its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Warner Street. Westbound traffic on Warner Street at its intersection with Millet Street. 
Warwick Road, at its intersection with Rockport Road on the easterly side. 
Washington Street. Northeastbound drivers on Washington Street at its intersection with Langsford Street. 
Washington Street. Westbound traffic on Washington Street at its intersection with Andrews Street. 
Webster Street. Southeastbound drivers on Webster Street at its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Wesley Street. Eastbound traffic on Wesley Street at its intersection with Hodgkins Street. 
Wesley Street. Eastbound traffic at its intersection with Wheeler Street. 
Wheeler Street. Southbound drivers on Wheeler Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Whittemore Street. Southeast corner, at intersection with the road leading to the former Cape Ann Forge property. 
Whittemore Street. At its intersection with Washington Street. 
Witham Street. Northbound and southbound traffic at its intersections with Thatcher Road. 
Witham Street. Northbound traffic at its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Woodbury Street. Northbound traffic on Woodbury Street at its intersection with Washington Street. 
Young Avenue. At its intersection with High Street. 
(Code 1970, § 21-57; Ord. of 3-4-1976, § 1; Ord. of 4-22-1976, § I; Ord. of 7-12-1977, § 1; Ord. of 3-14-1978, § 1; Ord. of 6-20-1978, § I; Ord. of 8-30-1978, § I; Ord. of 11-14-1978, § I; Ord. of 1-9-1979, § I; Ord. of 2-6-1979, § I; Ord. of 3-20-1979, § I; Ord. of 9-11-1979, § I; Ord. of 10-2-1979, § I; Ord. of 1-22-1980, § I; Ord. of 5-20-1980, § I; Ord. of 7-1-1980, § I; Ord. of 10-14-1980, § I; Ord. of 2-24-1981, § I; Ord. of 9-15-1981, § I; Ord. of 7-6-1982, § I; Ord. of 6-21-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1983, § I; Ord. of 5-22-1984, § I; Ord. of 11-13-1984, § I; Ord. of 3-26-1985, § I; Ord. of 11-19-1985, § I; Ord. of 4-1-1986, § I; Ord. of 3-10-1987, § I; Ord. of 7-7-1987, § I; Ord. of 12-22-1987, § III; Ord. of 4-12-1988, § I; Ord. of 5-10-1988, § I; Ord. of 8-16-1988, § I; Ord. of 11-29-1988, § II; Ord. of 4-11-1989, § I; Ord. of 9-5-1989, § I; Ord. of 11-14-1989, § I; Ord. of 12-19-1989, § I; Ord. No. 8-1990, § I, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 24-1990, § I, 11-13-1990; Ord. No. 2-1991, § I, 1-8-1991; 26-1991, § I, 7-16-1991; Ord. No. 32-1991, § I, 9-10-1991; Ord. No. 3-1992, § I, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 17-1992, § I, 5-19-1992; Ord. No. 39-1991, § I, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 38-1991, § I, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 3-1996, § I, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 15-1996, § I, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 44-1996, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 45-1996, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 7-1997, § I, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 46-1997, § I, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 57-1997, § I, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 72-1997, § I, 12-9-1997; Ord. No. 81-1998, § I, 3-17-1998; Ord. No. 83-1998, § I, 3-17-1998; Ord. No. 84-1998, § I, 3-17-1998; Ord. No. 87-1998, § I, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 104-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 127-1998, § I, 9-29-1998; Ord. No. 10-1999, § I, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 22-1999, § I, 8-31-1999; Ord. No. 23-1999, § I, 8-31-1999; Ord. No. 28-1999, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 29-1999, § I, 10-12-1999; Ord. No. 31-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 32-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 71-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 80-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 111-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 113-2000, § I, 12-12-2000; Ord. of 3-13-2001(07), § I; Ord. of 6-5-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 7-24-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 10-23-2001(01), (02) § I; Ord. of 3-19-2002(01), (02) §I; Ord. of 4-16-2002(05), § I; Ord. of 4-16-2002(06), § I; Ord. of 9-24-2002(06), (07) § I; Ord. of 10-22-2002(03), (04) § I; Ord. of 12-17-2002, § I; Ord. of 2-4-2003(03), § I; Ord. of 10-28-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 2-1-2005(02), § I; Ord. of 10-11-2005(02), § I; Ord. of 5-16-2006(02) ; Ord. of 2-20-2007(03); Ord. of 3-20-2007(02); Ord. of 11-13-2007(01); Ord. of 9-2-2008(02); Ord. of 6-8-2010(02), (03); Ord. of 7-20-2010; Ord. of 12-7-2010(02); Ord. of 6-14-2011(01); Ord. of 11-29-2011(02); Ord. of 4-10-2012(02); Ord. of 12-10-2013(277); Ord. No. 2014-110, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2014-229, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2015-016, 1-13-2015; Ord. No. 2015-017, 1-13-2015; Ord. No. 2015-227, 11-17-2015; Ord. No. 2016-092, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2017-202, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-140, 8-14-2018; Ord. No. 2018-204, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-010, 1-8-2019; Ord. No. 2019-011, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 22-269.1. - Yield intersections. 
In accordance with section 22-90, "Stopping and yielding at intersections," the following are yield intersections with official "Yield" sign facing traffic proceeding in the direction as indicated: 
Hesperus Circle, northerly side, at the intersection with Hesperus Avenue. 
Main Street, at the easterly end of the traffic island at the east end of Main Street at the junction of Eastern Avenue and East Main Street. 
Middle Street , at its intersection with Washington Street in an easterly direction, two yield signs. One at the north corner on the Joan of Arc Island and one on the south corner on the sidewalk by the American Legion building. 
Prospect Street, at the monument, facing east, as you enter Pleasant Street from Prospect Street on the "Y" connector. 
Raymond Street, on the southwest corner at its intersection with Shore Road. 
Rockland Street , near its intersection with Gloucester Avenue. 
(Ord. No. 37-96, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. of 3-19-2002(04), § I; Ord. of 6-14-2011(01); Ord. of 11-29-2011(02); Ord. No. 2017-202, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-080, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 22-270. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof or locations, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof, in accordance with section 22-156: 
Addison Street, southerly side, beginning at its intersection with the easterly side of Leighton Court for a distance of ten feet in an easterly direction. 
Addison Street, southerly side, beginning at its intersection with the westerly side of Leighton Court for a distance of ten feet in a westerly direction. 
Allen Street, easterly side from Burnham's Field for a distance of 36 feet in a southerly direction. 
Allen Street, northerly side where it abuts Burnham's Field for its entire length. 
Allen Street, westerly side, from Prospect Street to Burnham's Field. 
Allen Street, westerly side in the turnaround area abutting Burnham's Field. 
Amero Court, beginning at a point from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a southerly direction for a distance of 160 feet on the easterly side and 170 feet on the westerly side. 
Andrews Street, westerly side from its intersection with Langsford Street, in a northerly direction to its intersection with Lanes Cove Road. 
Angle Street, both sides, from Western Avenue to Middle Street. 
Arlington Street, southwesterly side, for its entire length. 
Ashland Place, both sides, from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 120 feet in a westerly direction. 
Atlantic Road , on the waterside from Moorland Road to Farrington Avenue. 
Atlantic Street (county layout, extended), both sides, for its entire length. 
Bass Avenue, both sides, from Amero Court to East Main Street. 
Bass Avenue, northerly side from Amero Court to Hartz Street. 
Bass Avenue, southerly side, from Amero Court to Sayward Street. 
Beacon Street, southerly side, from Washington Street to the pole on which fire alarm box 58 is located, opposite Lookout Street. 
Bent Street, easterly side, for its entire length. 
Blynman Avenue, 100 feet northerly from its intersection with Lincoln Avenue on Mondays through Fridays from 7:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. during the school year. 
Bond Street, both sides, from a point 220 feet from its intersection with Western Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 150 feet. 
Bray Street, located off of Atlantic Street become "No Parking Either Side" for its entire length. 
Bridgewater Street, southerly side, from the intersection of Leonard Street, east, to the bridge. 
Brightside Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with Beach Road to its intersection with Decatur Street. 
Brightside Avenue, easterly or oddnumbered side, from its intersection with Bass Avenue, in a northerly direction for its entire length. 
Brightside Avenue, westerly or evennumbered side, for distance of 140 feet from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a northerly direction. 
Brightside Avenue, westerly or evennumbered side, from a distance of 486 feet from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a northerly direction for a distance of 238 feet. 
Brightside Avenue, westerly or evennumbered side, from its intersection with Hinckley Road for a distance of 395 feet in a northerly direction. 
Cedar Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Sargent Street in a westerly direction to the Boston and Main Railroad tracks. 
Centennial Avenue, both sides, from Curtis Square to Harold Avenue. 
Centennial Avenue, easterly side, from Western Avenue for 50 feet to number 3 Centennial Avenue. 
Centennial Avenue, easterly side, from Blynman Avenue to Beacon Street. 
Centennial Avenue, easterly side, from Western Avenue to Perkins Road. 
Centennial Avenue, easterly side, from Harold Avenue to a point opposite number 94½ Centennial Avenue. 
Centennial Avenue, easterly side, 20 feet from each end of the intersection between Commonwealth Avenue and Beacon Street. 
Centennial Avenue, westerly side, from Washington Street to Curtis Square. 
Centennial Avenue, westerly side, from its intersection with Western Avenue for a distance of 100 feet in a northerly direction. 
Centennial Avenue, westerly side, in a northerly direction from Perkins Road to Leslie O. Johnson Road. 
Center Street, both sides, for its entire length. 
Chapel Street, southerly side, from its intersection with East Main Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 75 feet. 
Chapel Street, northerly side, from its intersection with East Main Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 60 feet. 
Chestnut Street, easterly side, from Main Street to Prospect Street. 
Chestnut Street , westerly side, from its intersection with Main Street for 150 feet in a northerly direction (to #6 Chestnut Street). 
Church Street, easterly side, from Proctor Street to Prospect Street. 
Church Street, westerly side, beginning at a point with its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction for 143 feet. 
Church Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 240 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 32 feet in a southerly direction. 
Clarendon Street, even side of street, from Terrace Lane to Horton Street. 
Clarendon Street, odd side of street, from Horton Street down to Terrace Lane. 
Clarendon Street, southerly side, from Horton Street to Valatie Street. 
Colburn Street, southerly side, from its intersection with North Kilby Street, for a distance of 50 feet in a westerly direction. 
Colburn Street, from its intersection with Washington Street in a southeasterly direction for a distance of 350 feet. 
Columbia Street, southerly side, at its intersection with Church Street, in an easterly direction for a distance of 140 feet (left of the gate to house #7) and northerly side, for its entire length. 
Columbia Street, southerly side, at its intersection with School Street, in a westerly direction for a distance of 195 feet (to pole #3278 which would be to move the existing sign in an easterly direction 25 feet). 
Commercial Street, easterly side, from Washington Street to Fort Square. 
Commercial Street, westerly side, from the northerly corner of the Seafoods Building to Fort Square. 
Commercial Street, westerly side, from the southerly side line of Beach Court to the northerly property line of the General Seafoods Corporation, numbered 47 Commercial Street. 
Commonwealth Avenue, southerly side, from Alpine Court to Lookout Street. 
Concord Street, both sides at its intersection with Harlow Street for a distance of 100 feet in a southerly direction. 
Cross Street, southerly side, for its entire length. 
Dale Avenue, easterly side, between Middle Street and the post office property. 
Dennison Street, on the southerly (water) side for a distance of 200 feet in an easterly direction from its intersection with Washington Street (to pole #1412). 
Duncan Street, easterly side, from Rogers Street to Main Street. 
Duncan Street, westerly side beginning at its intersection with Main Street for a distance of 55 feet in a southerly direction. 
East Main Street, both sides, from Bass Avenue to 159 East Main Street (Americold Building) across from Chapel Street with the exception of East Main Street, westerly side from Wall Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 360 feet (Pole #3671). 
East Main Street, both sides, from the private way entering the Slade Gorton plant of the Gorton Pew Fisheries, southerly to Hammond Street. 
East Main Street, easterly side, from Blue Roof Restaurant to Hammond Street. 
East Main Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with Sayward Street. 
East Main Street, easterly side, beginning from the building numbered 152 East Main Street and extending to Chapel Street. 
East Main Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Mt. Pleasant Avenue in a northerly direction for a distance of 80 feet. 
East Main Street, northerly side, from Cross Street to Eastern Avenue. 
East Main Street, northerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Montgomery Place for a distance of 480 feet in a westerly direction. 
East Main Street, northerly side, from the driveway at number 149, in a westerly direction to the electric and telephone companies' pole number 42. 
East Main Street, southerly side, beginning at a point from the intersection opposite Montgomery Place for a distance of 460 feet in a westerly direction. 
East Main Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Chapel Street to a point 345 feet easterly thereof. 
East Main Street, southerly side, from Plum Street to Gerring Road. 
East Main Street, water side, from the beginning of city property at the corner of the pumping station for a distance of approximately 86 feet in the direction of Rocky Neck to the loading door in front of number 233 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from a point opposite number 99 East Main Street to a point opposite number 109 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from 185 East Main Street, southerly and westerly, to the edge of the driveway of the dwelling numbered 189 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from its intersection with the northern end of Parker Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Wall Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from the southerly edge of the driveway leading to the Rocky Bay Fisheries Company wharf in the rear of 159 East Main Street, southerly to the driveway leading to Arnolds' Wharf, located just beyond 167 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side for a distance of 20 feet from each edge of the paved portion of Pirates Lane. 
Eastern Avenue, northerly side, from its intersection with Webster Street for a distance of 65 feet in an easterly direction. 
Eastern Avenue, southerly side, from Elizabeth Road to the premises numbered 107 Eastern Avenue. 
Eastern Avenue, southerly side, in an easterly direction, from the intersection of Route 128 to the intersection of Williams Court. 
Eastern Point Road, easterly side, from its intersection with Rocky Neck Avenue to a point opposite the northerly end of Niles Beach. 
Eastern Point Road, northerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Rocky Neck Avenue, for a distance of 60 feet in a westerly direction. 
Eastern Point Road, westerly side, from the beginning of the white fence at Flat Wonson Cove (near pole #2651) to the end of the white fence (near pole #2648) approximately 220 feet in a southerly direction. 
Elm Street , easterly side, from a point beginning 260 feet in a northerly direction from its intersection with Main Street for a distance of 135 feet. 
Elm Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Federal Street to its intersection with Main Street. 
Elm Street, westerly side, from Federal Street to Prospect Street. 
Emerson Avenue, northerly side from westerly corner of the intersection of Griffin Court and Emerson Avenue. 
Emerson Avenue, from the westerly end of driveway at 28 Emerson Avenue, to the beginning of the way to the City Boat Ramp past 30 Emerson Avenue and including the end of Emerson Avenue. 
Exchange Street, southerly side, for its entire length. 
Federal Street, both sides, Pleasant Street to Elm Street. 
Ferry Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 475 feet. 
Ferry Street, southerly side beginning at a point 165 feet from its intersection with Washington Street, for a distance of 270 feet in a southerly direction. 
Fort Square, from a point 40 feet from the southwestern boundary of #10, southwesterly and southeasterly and easterly to the westerly boundary of number 26. 
Fort Square, from the western boundary of #46 to the eastern boundary of number 46 to a point 22 feet southerly from the northern boundary of number 46, being the southerly side and westerly side. 
Fort Square, from a point 22 feet from the southern boundary or #51, on the easterly side, to Commercial Street. 
Fort Square, from a point 60 feet from the catchbasin at the northeast corner of the Cape Ann Fisheries property, easterly to a point ten feet westerly of the southwest corner of #51 on the southerly side. 
Fort Square, beginning at its intersection with Commercial Street, on the westerly side, for a distance of 476 feet to the Southeast corner of the Fort Square Playground. 
Fort Square, eastern side, from the entrance at Commercial Street to the eastern boundary of #10 Fort Square. 
Foster Street, southerly side, for its entire length. 
Fremont Street, 20 feet, both sides, from its intersection with Wiley Street in a westerly direction. 
Fremont Street, northerly side, 40 feet in an easterly direction from its direction from its intersection with Rackliffe Street. 
Fremont Street, northerly side, for a distance of 40 feet from its intersection with Rocky Neck Avenue. 
Fremont Street, northerly side, 60 feet in an easterly direction from its intersection with Wiley Street. 
Fremont Street, southerly side, for its entire length. 
Friend Street, northerly side, from Prospect Street to Bent Street. 
Friend Street, northerly side, at its intersection with Silva Court for a distance of 18 feet in an easterly direction and for a distance of 18 feet in a westerly direction. 
Friend Street, southerly side, from Brent Street to Webster Street. 
Fuller Street, easterly side, from a point 133 feet from its intersection with Flume Road, in a northerly direction. 
Fuller Street, westerly side, from Magnolia Street to Magnolia Fire Station. 
Gee Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with Stanwood Street to its intersection with Washington Street. 
Gloucester Avenue, easterly side at its intersection with Washington Street to Madison Court. 
Gloucester Avenue, northerly side, from Washington Street, westerly for a distance of 92 feet. 
Gloucester High School, fire lanes in the parking lot, outside the entrance to the gymnasium, the Blynman Avenue side of the gymnasium, the parking lot adjacent to Newell Stadium. 
Gould Court, southerly side, for its entire length. 
Granite Street , northerly side, from its intersection with Blynman Avenue, in an easterly direction to the westerly intersection of Hampden Street. 
Granite Street, southerly side, from Washington Street to Blynman Avenue. 
Granite Street, southerly side, 50 feet easterly from Hampden Street. 
Grapevine Road, evennumbered side, from its intersection with Eastern Point Road for a distance of 58 feet. 
Green Street, northeasterly side, beginning at a point 113 feet from its intersection with Perkins Street for a distance of 100 feet. 
Green Street, northeasterly side, beginning at its intersection with Perkins Street in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 45 feet. 
Green Street, southwesterly side beginning at its intersection with Perkins Street in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 30 feet. 
Green Street, southwesterly side, beginning at a point 163 feet from its intersection with Perkins in a northwesterly direction thence in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 90 feet. 
Hammond Street, southerly side from its intersection with Haskell Street to its intersection with East Main Street. 
Hancock Street, both sides, from Middle Street to Rogers Street. 
Harold Avenue, no parking on the southerly side. 
Harrison Avenue, from its intersection with Eastern Avenue, westerly side, for a distance of 38 feet and easterly side for a distance of 40 feet in a northerly direction. 
Hartz Street, easterly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Eastern Avenue, for a distance of 130 feet in a southerly direction. 
Hartz Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Bass Avenue for a distance of 300 feet in a northerly direction. 
Haskell Street, northerly side, for its entire length. 
Herrick Court , on the concrete entrance to the public stairs, a five-foot wide pathway, from the railing on the westerly side in a northerly direction for a distance of 15 feet. 
Hesperus Avenue, at Rafe's Chasm: 
(1)  Southerly side, beginning at a point 515 feet from its intersection with Ocean Highlands, in a westerly direction, for a distance of 400 feet to its intersection with Strawberry Cove. 
(2)  Northerly side, from a point opposite its intersection with Ocean Highlands, for a distance of 900 feet in a westerly direction, opposite Strawberry Cove. 
(3)  Southerly side, from its intersection with Ocean Highlands, in a westerly direction, for a distance of 420 feet. 
(4)  Tow-away zone from 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. each day; southerly side, beginning at a point 420 feet from its intersection with Ocean Highlands, in a westerly direction for a distance of 95 feet. 
Hesperus Avenue, westerly side, from the westerly intersection of Castle Hill Road in a southerly direction for a distance of 1,100 feet. 
Hickory Street, both sides, beginning at its intersection with Sawyer Avenue to the end of the street. 
High Popples Road, from its intersection at Atlantic Road in a westerly direction for a distance of 225 feet. 
High Street, both sides, from a point 470 feet southerly of Vulcan Street to a point 1820 feet southerly from the first point. 
High Street, at both side, from its intersection with Washington Street in a southerly direction to a point at which it intersects with Hickory Street. 
Highland Street, in front of #5 Highland Street. 
Highland Street, westerly side, from #3 Highland Street to Highland Court. 
Holly Street, both sides from its intersection with Dennison Street in a southerly direction to pole #1095. 
Horton Street, westerly side, from Rocky Neck Avenue to Clarendon Street. 
Hough Avenue, entire length, both sides. 
Kondelin Road, both sides from its intersection with Magnolia Avenue for its entire length from 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. 
Langsford Street, northerly side, from Andrews Street to number 10 Langsford Street. 
Leonard Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Rogers Lane in an easterly direction for 40 feet. 
Leonard Street westerly side from its intersection with Nashua Avenue opposite the Village Church north to its intersection with Dennis Court and from a distance of 100 feet from Dennis Court to its intersection with Bridgewater Street. 
Leverett Street, easterly side for its entire length. 
Lexington Avenue , #44 (at the entrance to the building). 
Liberty Street, southerly side, from Pleasant Street to Allen Street. 
Lincoln Avenue, from its intersection with Blynman Avenue for a distance of 385 feet (Pole #394) on the westerly side. 
Madison Avenue, southerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 50 feet in an easterly direction. 
Magnolia Avenue, southerly side, from its intersection with Western Avenue to its intersection with Long Hill Road. 
Magnolia Avenue from under the train bridge to its intersection with Essex Avenue, both sides. 
Magnolia Avenue , on both sides for a distance of 2,500 feet from the MBTA Train Station Bridge in a southeasterly direction towards Magnolia. 
Main Street, beginning at a point 11.5 feet westerly from the easterly corner of number 275 Main Street, thence running westerly 41.0 feet, being parking meter spaces numbered 149 and 150. 
Main Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Duncan Street for a distance of 180 feet in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, easterly side, from Rowe Square to 373 Main Street. 
Main Street, northerly side, between the building numbered 252 Main Street and the building numbered 256 Main Street, and in front of what apparently is 254 Main Street. 
Main Street, northerly side, from a point 116 feet from its intersection with Pleasant Street for a distance of 20 feet in a westerly direction. 
Main Street, northerly side, beginning at the entrance to Scott Street and running westerly to the building numbered 358 Main Street. 
Main Street, northerly side, from the westerly boundary of number 370 Main Street and extending to a point 233 feet easterly from such westerly boundary of such number of Main Street. 
Main Street, northerly side, in an easterly direction from Chestnut Street for a distance of three car lengths. 
Main Street, southerly side, in front of the premises numbered 245 Main Street and extending from the easterly corner of Pearce Street at its intersection with Main Street and proceeding in a northeasterly direction to the property line of the property owned by Grosberg and others, as shown by a sketch made by the city engineer and dated August, 1954. 
Main Street, southerly side, in front of the premises numbered 417-421. 
Main Street, southerly side, beginning at the east side of the present entrance to 437 Main Street and extending easterly to the westerly driveway forming the entrance to 441 Main Street. 
Main Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Duncan Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 87 feet. 
Main Street, southerly side, in an easterly direction from Pearce Street to the entrance of the municipal parking lot. 
Main Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 295 feet east of its intersection with Rowe Square for a distance of 77 feet in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Rowe Square for a distance of 330 feet in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, easterly side, from a point 545 feet from its intersection with Rowe Square in an easterly direction for a distance of 530 feet. 
Main Street , northerly side from a point beginning 77 feet from its intersection with Scott Street, in a westerly direction for a distance of 30 feet. 
Mansfield Street, northerly side, from its intersection from Washington Street to a point 100 feet westerly thereof. 
Mansfield Street, right side, beginning at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Western Avenue, for a distance of 80 feet. 
Maple Street, northerly side from Warner Street to Mt. Vernon Street. 
Maplewood Avenue, easterly side, 75 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a northerly direction for a distance of approximately 100 feet in a northerly direction. 
Maplewood Avenue, westerly side, from Poplar Street to #8 Maplewood Avenue. 
Maplewood Avenue , easterly side, from its intersection with Gloucester Avenue, in a southerly direction, for a distance of 100 feet (pole #1371). 
Marchant Street, westerly side, from Prospect Street to Spring Street. 
Marsh Street, beginning at a point from the easterly end of Cherry Hill Cemetery, Northerly side, to Route 128 Overpass. 
Mason Street, easterly side, between #3 and #17 Mason Street, inclusive. 
Mason Street, easterly side, at a point 273 feet from the intersection of Prospect Street in a southerly direction. 
Middle Street, both sides, from Center Street to Hancock Street; provided, however, that the loading zone in front of 67 Middle Street is to remain. 
Middle Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 120 feet north of its intersection with Angle Street, then 35 feet in a northerly direction. 
Middle Street, northerly side, from Pleasant Street to Washington Street. 
Middle Street, northerly side, from Washington Street in a westerly direction to the westerly property line of the house numbered 28 Middle Street. 
Middle Street, northerly side, from the easterly side line of Riggs Street to the westerly property line of the property numbered 20 Middle Street. 
Middle Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 150 feet from its intersection with Hancock Street, for a distance of 30 feet in an easterly direction. 
Middle Street, southerly side, within 15 feet of the intersection of Pleasant Street, Hancock Street and Center Street. 
Middle Street (Legion Plaza), beginning at a point on Middle Street at the intersection with the easterly side of the way that goes in back of the Legion Building for a distance of 56 feet as the curve goes, then easterly for a distance of ten feet. 
Middle Street (Legion Plaza), beginning at its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of ten feet. 
Millett Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Sargent Street to its intersection with Warner Street. 
Mt. Pleasant Avenue, easterly side, starting from a point 20 feet from its intersection with Page Street to a point 20 feet from its intersection with Moorland Road. 
Mt. Pleasant Avenue , southerly side, beginning at a point 168 feet from its intersection with Gerring Road for a distance of 151 feet in a westerly direction. 
Mt. Vernon Street, easterly side, from a point 220 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street, for a distance of 180 feet in a northerly direction. 
Mt. Vernon Street, northerly side, from Prospect Street to Perkins Street. 
Mt. Vernon Street, northerly side, from Perkins Street to Elwell Street, allowing parking on southerly side from Perkins Street to Elwell Street. 
Mt. Vernon Street, southerly side, from Perkins Street to Elwell Street. 
Naomi Drive. 
Oak Street, southerly side from Warner Street to Mt. Vernon Street. 
Old Salem Road, easterly side, from its intersection with Western Avenue for a distance of 100 feet in a westerly direction. 
Orchard Street, both sides, from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 40 feet in a westerly direction. 
Parker Court, southerly side for its entire length. 
Parker Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 99 feet from its intersection with Wall Street in a northerly thence northeasterly direction for a distance of 67 feet. (This being the area in front of the sewer pumping station.) 
Parker Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 20 feet from the entrance to the State Fish Pier, in a southerly direction for a distance of 99 feet. 
Parker Street, westerly side, beginning at the entrance to the State Fish Pier, in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Parsons Street, both sides, from Main Street to Rogers Street. 
Perkins Street, 40 feet from storm drain (across from fire hydrant) in a southerly direction. 
Pearl Street, northerly side, for its entire length from its intersection with Washington Street to its intersection with Railroad Avenue. 
Perkins Street, northerly side beginning at its intersection with Staten Street for a distance of 120 feet in an easterly direction. 
Perkins Street, southerly side beginning at its intersection with Staten Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Mount Vernon Street. 
Perkins Street, westerly side beginning at its intersection Staten Street in a northerly direction of its intersection with Perkins Peak. 
Pleasant Street, easterly side, within 20 feet southwesterly of the crosswalk located at or near the southeasterly intersection of Pleasant Street and Prospect Street adjacent to the property numbered 79 Prospect Street. 
Pleasant Street , westerly side beginning at a point 130 feet from its intersection with Warren Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 25 feet. 
Pleasant Street, easterly side, between Main Street and Warren Street. 
Pleasant Street, westerly side, between Main Street and a point approximately 87 feet north of Warren Street. 
Pleasant Street, westerly side, between Franklin Square and Prospect Street. 
Pond Road , northerly side from its intersection with Eastern Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 250 feet. 
Poplar Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Maplewood Avenue for a distance of 290 feet in a northeasterly direction. 
Poplar Street, southerly side, at its intersection with Washington Street from a point 480 feet in an easterly direction. 
Poplar Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street to its intersection with Maplewood Avenue, in its entirety. 
Porter Street, easterly side, 50 feet from Rogers Street in a northerly direction. 
Porter Street, westerly side, from Main Street to Rogers Street. 
Proctor Street, southerly side, from a point 20 feet from its intersection with School Street for a distance of 40 feet in a westerly direction (sign to read "No Parking—Fire Personnel Only"). 
Prospect Square, the left side, for its entire length. 
Prospect Square, westerly side (right side) beginning at a point 198 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Prospect Square, westerly side (right side) beginning at a point 228 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Prospect Street, both sides, between Pleasant Street and Mason Street. 
Prospect Street, easterly side, from Fears Court southerly to Main Street. 
Prospect Street, northerly side, beginning 80 feet from its intersection with Allen Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 32 feet. 
Prospect Street, parking prohibited on the northerly side from its intersection with Friend Street for a distance of 125 feet in a westerly direction Monday through Friday. 
Prospect Street, northerly side, from Mt. Vernon Street to Warner Street. 
Prospect Street, northerly side, beginning at its intersection with Railroad Avenue for a distance of 115 feet in a westerly direction ending at the parking lot entrance behind #2-6 Railroad Avenue. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Elm Street in a westerly direction for the entire distance on which number 81 Prospect Street abuts, presently owned by Ruth P. Wonson. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Elm Street to its intersection with Winchester Court. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, beginning 55 feet from its intersection with Marchant Street for a distance of 37 feet in an Easterly direction. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, within 20 feet northeasterly of the crosswalk located at or near the southeasterly intersection of Prospect Street and Pleasant Street in front of the property numbered 79 Prospect Street. 
Prospect Square, southerly side (right side), beginning at a point 266 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 54 feet. 
Prospect Square, southerly side (right side), beginning at a point 378 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 60 feet in an easterly direction. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, from Washington Street in an easterly direction to the westerly property line of the shop numbered 55 Prospect Street. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, from the edge of the crosswalk extending northerly by the Spanish War Monument, in an easterly direction to the driveway leading to number 79 Prospect Street. 
Prospect Street, westerly side, from the intersection with Spring Street to Main Street. 
Prospect Street, westerly side, beginning at its intersection with Spring Street, in a northerly direction for a distance of 200 feet. 
Quarry Street (Bay View), both sides, beginning at a point from the private gate for a distance of 200 feet from the gate in a westerly directly. 
Railroad Avenue, northerly side, for such a distance as such avenue abuts the open space or park situated across the street from 28 Railroad Avenue. 
Railroad Avenue, northerly side, for the entire length of the Cape Ann Market property. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from its intersection with School Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 84 feet. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street easterly to 28 Railroad Avenue. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from a point 20 feet from its intersection with Washington Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 38 feet. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street to the first alley located between number 119 Washington Street and 34 Railroad Avenue. 
Railroad Avenue, southwesterly side, from the northwesterly line of 10 Railroad Avenue to the northwesterly property line of 6B Railroad Avenue. 
Riverdale Park, both sides, for its entire length. 
Riverside Avenue, westerly end, southerly side from a point where the curb begins for 45 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, between signs in the area of Bickford Way. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, southerly side in an easterly direction from its intersection with Bickford's Way to its intersection with East Main Street. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, westerly side, from Wonson Street to Stevens Lane. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, within 20 feet of the intersection. 
Rocky Pasture Road, westerly side, from its intersection with Mount Pleasant Avenue for a distance of 350 feet, except during funeral services. 
Rogers Street, both sides, from Parsons Street to Hancock Street, with the exception of the southerly side of Rogers Street from a point opposite the intersection of Hancock Street to the westerly side of the entrance to the cold storage building. 
Rogers Street, northerly side, from Duncan Street to the driveway in the rear of the police station. 
Rogers Street, northwesterly side, from Porter Street to Mansfield Way with the exception of the loading zone at the rear of Sears and Roebuck Company building on the northwesterly corner of Rogers Street and Porter Street. 
Rogers Street, 20 feet on either side of the entrance to the Massachusetts Electric Company property. 
Rowe Square, easterly (even numbered) side, from its intersection with Main Street in a southerly direction for its entire length. 
St. Peter's Park, the lane located at the easterly side of the Seafarer's International Building. 
Salt Island Road, beginning after #5, from Witham Street to Barberry Way both sides, for a distance of approximately 600 feet or for the entire public portion of the roadway. Salt Island Road #1 through #5 are excluded. 
Sargent Street, easterly side, from Millett Street to a point opposite the southerly side line of Cleveland Street. 
Sargent Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Shepherd Street to its intersection with Millett Street. 
Sargent Street, westerly side, beginning at its intersection with Cedar Street (pole #5395) and in a southerly direction to the intersection with Shepherd Street (pole #3440) and a second sign indicating "No Parking here to corner" be placed on pole #3440. 
Sayward Street, southeast side (righthand) for a distance of approximately 150 feet (to utility pole #2283) from its intersection with Bass Avenue. 
Sayward Street, westerly side, for its entire length. 
School Street, from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of approximately 110 feet in a southerly direction on both sides to a point opposite the property line between #30 and #32 School Street. 
School Street, easterly side, between Middle Street and Prospect Street. 
School Street, westerly side, from a point 95 feet from its intersection with Middle Street for a distance of 40 feet in a northerly direction (removing Meters 1 and 2 and sign to read "No Parking—Fire Personnel Only"). 
Shepherd Street, northerly side, from Pleasant Street to Sargent Street. 
Shepherd and Pleasant Streets Intersection, 30 feet from the Apex of the curve, both sides. 
Short Street, both sides, from Main Street to Middle Street. 
Smith Street, northerly side, from Maplewood Avenue to Pleasant Street. 
Spring Street, northerly side, from Prospect Street to Marchant Street. 
Spring Street, southerly side, from it intersection with Prospect Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
Stanley Court, both sides, for its entire length. 
Staten Street, both sides, for its entire length. 
Stevens Lane, both sides, for its entire length. 
Sumac Lane, within 20 feet of the intersection. 
Summer Street, westerly side from Granite Street in a northerly direction to Orchard Street. 
Taylor Street, from a point 220 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 22 feet in a northerly direction. 
Taylor Street, northerly side, from Staten Street to the westerly boundary of the property numbered 38 Taylor Street. 
Taylor Street, northerly side, from Staten Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 165 feet. 
Thatcher Road, both sides, Witham Street to Long Beach Road. 
Thatcher Road, both sides, from its intersection with Witham Street to its intersection with Bass Avenue with the following exception: At a point 165 feet south of its intersection with Marina Drive in a northerly direction for a distance of 800 feet. 
Tolman Avenue, both sides, from Western Avenue, easterly for a distance of 144 feet. 
Town Landing at Palm Cove, in the Bay View section of the city. 
Tucker Street, easterly side. 
Tucker Street, western side, from its intersection with Washington Street, beginning at its intersection with Washington Street for its entire length in a southerly direction to the point at which it intersects with High Street. 
Warner Street, easterly side for a distance of 245 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Warner Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Prospect Street to its intersection with Burnham Street. 
Warren Street, southerly side, for its entire length. 
Washington Square, from a point 75 feet from its intersection with Granite Street, westerly side, for a distance of 45 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Square, southerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 175 feet from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily. 
Washington Square, southerly side, from a point 425 feet from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Washington Square, easterly side for a distance of 90 feet from the point where Washington Square turns 90 degrees in a northerly direction. 
Washington Square, southerly side, beginning at a point in line with the westerly corner of #18 (as defined on Assessor's Map 6 Lot 46) to its intersection with Washington Street. 
Washington Street, both sides, from Derby Street to the Boston and Maine Railroad Crossing. 
Washington Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Grove Street for a distance of 65 feet in an easterly direction. 
Washington Street, northerly side, from a point 65 feet from its intersection with Grove Street for a distance of 100 feet in a westerly direction. 
Washington Street, southerly side, from a point 45 feet from its intersection with Whittemore Street for a distance of 100 feet in an easterly direction. 
Washington Street, southerly side from Andrews Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Langsford Street. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 200 feet from its intersection with Wheeler Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 150 feet. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Exchange Street in a southerly direction for 157 feet with two signs installed, one at 157-foot mark and other at 122-foot mark from the same intersection. 
Washington Street, easterly side, beginning at its intersection with Hillside Court in a northerly direction to a point 30 feet north of its intersection with Linwood Place. 
Washington Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 430 feet north of its intersection with Linwood Place in a northerly direction to its intersection with Young Avenue. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point opposite its intersection with Young Avenue for a distance of 652 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at the southerly end of Plum Cove Beach to its intersection with Plum Court. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 470 feet from its intersection with Wheeler Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 120 feet. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from a point 105 feet south of Gould Court to a point 180 feet south of Gould Court. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from a point opposite Harvey Place in a northerly direction for a distance of 3,300 feet. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from Poplar Street to Ferry Street. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from Knowlton Square to the Chester H. Grant Memorial Circle. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from a point opposite the northerly boundary of Minnesota Street to Dennison Street, and westerly side, from a point opposite the southerly side of Dennison Street for a distance of 600 feet southerly. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Middle Street for a distance of 40 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Pine Street for a distance of 170 feet in a southerly direction with the exception of a 15-minute parking meter at 75 Washington Street. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Pine Street to its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Addison Street for a distance of 110 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from a point 120 feet north of its intersection with Madison Avenue for a distance of 260 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from its intersection with "A" of Riverdale Park for a distance of 460 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Railroad Avenue for a distance of 110 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from a point 130 feet north of its intersection with Seeall Street for a distance of 100 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side starting at the intersection of Albion Court for a distance of 20 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from its intersections with Duley Street for a distance of 70 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from a point 180 feet north of the centerline intersection with Seeall Street for a distance of 150 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from a point 670 feet south of the centerline intersecting with Gee Avenue for a distance of 75 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from a point opposite the centerline of Gee Avenue for a distance of 160 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from a point 595 feet from its intersection with Hodgkins Street for a distance of 180 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning from a point 755 feet from its intersection with Hodgkins Street for a distance of 165 feet in a northerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at the bus stop which is nearly opposite the Joan of Arc monument and extending in a southerly direction to Middle Street. 
Washington Street, westerly side, between Middle Street and Mansfield Street. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Exchange Street for a distance of 80 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Mansfield Street for a distance of 430 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Orchard Street for a distance of 165 feet in a southerly direction. 
Webster Street, easterly side, from a point opposite the entrance to the Ward II Veterans Memorial School to a point opposite the intersection of Webster Street and Friend Street. 
Webster Street, easterly side at its intersection with Eastern Avenue in a northerly direction for a distance of 600 feet. 
Wells Street, with "no parking either side" signs, where appropriate, for both sides of the street. 
Western Avenue, at the nubbin in front of the Fisherman's Memorial. 
Western Avenue, on the lefthand side of the eastbound lane, commencing at the end of the grass plot, or center lane, nearest Blynman Bridge and extending in an easterly direction a distance of 24 feet to a point opposite the residence #93 Western Avenue. 
Western Avenue, southerly side, from a point beginning at Blynman Bridge, for a distance of 165 feet in an easterly direction. 
Western Avenue, southerly side (water side) beginning 33 feet from the crosswalk at the public landing in an easterly direction and continuing for a distance of 114 feet in an easterly direction. 
Western Avenue, southerly side in the westerly direction from its intersection with Mansfield Street for a distance of 50 feet in an easterly direction, starting across from the northwest corner of Mansfield Street. 
Western Avenue, westerly and northwesterly side, from its intersection with Angle Street at the Gilbert Home to the easterly boundary of #21 Western Avenue. 
Wheeler Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 700 feet in a northerly direction. 
Wheeler Street, westerly side, for a distance of 139 feet from its intersection with Riverside Road, and on the easterly side for a distance of 239 feet. 
Wheeler Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 280 feet from its intersection with Riverview Road for a distance of 225 feet in a southerly direction. 
Wheeler Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 54 feet south of the southerly intersection of Riverview for a distance of 210 feet in a southerly direction. 
Wheeler Street, westerly side, beginning at a point at its intersection with Washington Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 700 feet. 
Whittemore Street, northerly side from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of approximately 50 feet. 
Williams Court, the northerly side for 73 feet in an easterly direction to its intersection with Hartz Street. 
Williams Court, southerly side, beginning at the east corner of Marion Way and in an easterly direction for 73 feet to its intersection with Hartz Street. 
Willow Street, on the easterly side, from Shepherd Street to the railroad tracks. 
Witham Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Starknaught Heights to its intersection with Salt Island Road in a southerly direction. 
Whittemore Street, southerly side, at its intersection with Washington Street from a point 30 feet in a westerly direction. 
Winchester Court, both sides, for its entire length. 
Wonson Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Stevens Lane in a southerly direction to its intersection with Rocky Neck Avenue. 
Woodbury Street, both sides, beginning at its intersection with Washington Street and Mason Square for a distance of 60 feet in a southerly direction. 
(Code 1970, § 21-125; Ord. of 3-6-1975, § 1; Ord. of 7-10-1975, § 1; Ord. of 12-18-1975, § 1; Ord. of 4-22-1976, § 1; Ord. of 6-17-1976, § 1; Ord. of 10-14-1976, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 1; Ord. of 3-14-1978, § 1; Ord. of 6-20-1978, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-1979, § I; Ord. of 3-20-1979, § I; Ord. of 7-10-1979, § I; Ord. of 11-13-1978, § I; Ord. of 1-22-1980, § I; Ord. of 5-20-1980, § I; Ord. of 7-1-1980, § I; Ord. of 8-19-1980, § 1; Ord. of 10-28-1980, § I; Ord. of 5-26-1981, § I; Ord. of 7-7-1981, § I; Ord. of 7-21-1981, § I; Ord. of 10-26-1982, § I; Ord. of 2-15-1983, § I; Ord. of 2-22-1983, § I; Ord. of 6-7-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1983, § I; Ord. of 2-14-1984, § I; Ord. of 9-11-1984, § I; Ord. of 2-10-1987, § I; Ord. of 5-19-1987, § I; Ord. of 9-1-1987, § I; Ord. of 12-22-1987, §§ I, II; Ord. of 12-22-1987, § III; Ord. of 1-19-1988, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1988, § II; Ord. of 9-6-1988, § I; Ord. of 5-9-1989, § I; Ord. of 11-14-1989, § I; Ord. No. 1-1990, § I, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 5-1990, § I, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 17-1990, § I, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 18-1990, § I, 9-4-1990; Ord. No. 19-1990, § I, 9-11-1990; Ord. No. 22-1990, § I, 10-2-1990; Ord. No. 25-1990, § I, 11-20-1990; Ord. No. 1-1991, § I, 1-8-1991; Ord. No. 11-1991, § I, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 14-1991, § I, 4-16-1991; Ord. No. 18-1991, § I, 6-4-1991; Ord. No. 20-1991, § I, 6-4-1991; Ord. No. 25-1991, § I, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 25-1991, § I, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 40-1991, § I, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 1-1992, § I, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 20-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 21-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 24-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 31-1992, § I, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 4-1993, § II, 3-16-1993; Ord. No. 39-1995, § I, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 1-1996, § I, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 36-1996, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 43-1996, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 48-1996, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 4-1997, § I, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 35-1997, § I, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 37-1997, § I, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 65-1997, § I, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 68-1997, § I, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 71-1997, § I, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 100-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 108-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 110-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 119-1998, § I, 9-1-1998; Ord. No. 132-1998, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 135-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 137-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 139-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 1-1999, § I, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 5-1999, § I, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 12-1999, § I, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 33-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 36-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 43-1999, § I, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 64-2000, § I, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 68-2000, § I, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 82-2000, § I, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 103-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 105-2000, § I, 11-28-2000, Ord. No. 107-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 115-2000, § I, 12-12-2000; Ord. of 1-16-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 3-13-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 5-8-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 9-18-2001(04), § I; Ord. of 5-28-2002(02), (05), § I; Ord. of 6-25-2002(04), § I; Ord. of 9-24-2002(03), (04), § I; Ord. of 11-12-2002(05), § I; Ord. of 1-21-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 4-15-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 4-29-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 4-29-2003(05); Ord. of 5-25-2004(02), § I; Ord. of 8-24-2004(03), (04), (05), § I; Ord. of 1-1-2005(03), § I; Ord. of 1-24-2005(02), § I; Ord. of 2-21-2006(02), § I; Ord. of 5-30-2006(01), § I; Ord. of 6-27-2006; Ord. of 11-1-2006(01); Ord. of 3-20-2007(04); Ord. of 11-13-2007(02); Ord. of 5-27-2008(03); Ord. of 7-23-2008; Ord. of 1-13-2009(04); Ord. of 11-17-2009(01); Ord. of 3-30-2010(02); Ord. of 7-6-2010(02), (03); Ord. of 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 9-28-2010(02); Ord. of 10-12-2010(03); Ord. of 10-12-2010(04); Ord. of 10-12-2010(05); Ord. of 11-9-2010(02); Ord. of 11-9-2010(03); Ord. of 11-9-2010(04); Ord. of 11-9-2010(05); Ord. of 11-9-2010(06); Ord. of 4-12-2011(02); Ord. of 7-26-2011(02); Ord. of 8-23-2011(02); Ord. of 10-11-2011(02); Ord. of 11-29-2011(03); Ord. of 8-14-2012(02); Ord. of 11-27-2012(02); Ord. of 11-27-2012(03); Ord. of 10-8-2013(237); Ord. No. 2014-143, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2014-230, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2014-263, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2014-264, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2014-316A, 10-28-2014; Ord. No. 2014-317, 11-18-2014; Ord. No. 2014-341, 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-041, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2015-080, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2015-176, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 2015-198, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 2016-093, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2016-094, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2016-153, 7-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-198, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-159, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2017-192, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-193, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-194, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-201, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-041, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2018-155, 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 2019-009, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 22-270.1. - Resident sticker parking only. 
The following parking areas require either a resident beach sticker or a resident parking sticker with a nominal fee associated with the purchase of a resident parking sticker: good for a period of five years beginning in 2012 and every five years thereafter. 
Beach Court, for its entire length. 
Commercial Street, #17—#21, westerly side, in a southerly direction to its intersection with Beach Court. 
Day Avenue, both sides beginning at its intersection with High Street for its entire length in a southerly direction. 
Eastern Point Boulevard, Niles Beach area, westerly side, (Niles Beach Area) from its boundary with Eastern Point Road in a southerly direction to its intersection with Farrington Avenue, from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily. 
Farrington Avenue, southerly side from its intersection with Eastern Point Boulevard to its intersection with St. Louis Avenue from May 1 to September 15 during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Fort Square, for its entire length (from #2 to #59). 
Haskell Street, on the southerly side from its intersection with Rocky Pasture Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with Mt. Pleasant Avenue, May 1—September 15; 9:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m.; Saturdays Sundays, holidays. 
High Street, both sides, from its intersection with Hickory Street in a southerly direction to the point at which it intersects with Tucker Street. 
High Street Place, both sides, from its intersection with High Street, beginning at its intersection with High Street for its entire length in a southerly direction. 
Lexington Avenue, both sides from its intersections with Cliff Avenue and Oaks Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with Shore Road. 
Kent Circle , for its entire length on the westerly side (houses) from May 1—September 15 only. 
Middle Street , westerly side (even numbers) from the intersection of Riggs Street in a northeasterly direction to the westerly property line of #28 Middle Street. 
Plum Cove Beach parking lot, off Washington Street, adjacent to the ball field. 
Resident beach sticker shall mean a parking sticker for persons who demonstrate proof of Gloucester residency and ownership of the vehicle on which the sticker is to be displayed. Resident beach stickers shall be valid for a period of one year and permit entry into Good Harbor Beach, Stage Fort Park and Wingaersheek Beach in accordance with beach and Stage Fort Park Regulations of the department of public works. 
Resident parking sticker shall mean a parking sticker for persons who demonstrate proof of Gloucester residency and ownership of the vehicle on which the sticker is to be displayed. Resident parking stickers shall be valid for parking on any of the streets or areas listed in section 22-270.1. Resident parking stickers shall be good for a period of five years beginning in 2012 and every five years thereafter. 
Further, resident beach stickers and resident parking stickers shall be different in size, shape or color so as to make them easily distinguishable. 
Washington Street, easterly side beginning at a point 30 feet north of its intersection with Linwood Place for a distance of 400 feet. 
Washington Street, westerly side from the northerly property line of #152, in a southerly direction to the railroad tracks. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 1,342 feet opposite its intersection with Young Avenue for a distance of 348 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street—Folly Cove Beach, between Poles #356 and #357, eight parking spaces. 
Washington Street , southerly side, at a point beginning 135 feet in a westerly direction for a distance of 125 feet, May 1-September 15. 
Witham Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 103 feet from its intersection with Thatcher Road for a distance of 300 feet in a southerly direction. 
Whittemore Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of approximately 30 feet. 
Young Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with Washington Street, beginning at its intersection with Washington Street for its entire length in a southerly direction to the point at which it intersects with High Street. 
(Ord. of 9-14-1989, §§ I, II; Ord. of 9-26-1989, §§ I, II; Ord. No. 24-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 30-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 111-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. of 4-16-2002(04), § I; Ord. of 8-24-2005(03); Ord. of 12-13-2005(02), (03), § I; Ord. of 7-6-2010(02), (04)—(06); Ord. of 10-12-2010(06); Ord. of 11-9-2010(07); Ord. of 9-13-2011(01); Ord. of 4-10-2012(03); Ord. of 6-26-2012; Ord. of 4-23-2013(080); Ord. of 4-23-2013(081); Ord. of 4-23-2013(082); Ord. No. 2014-343, 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-214, 10-27-2015; Ord. No. 2015-254, 12-15-2015; Ord. No. 2016-097, 6-7-2016)  
Sec. 22-271. - Parking prohibited from May 1 to September 15—Generally. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-157: 
Atlantic Road, both sides, from its intersection with Bass Avenue to its intersection with Nautilus and Bass Rocks Roads. 
Atlantic Street. 
Bass Avenue, northerly side, from a point 300 feet distant from the easterly boundary of Brightside Avenue Extended, to the easterly boundary of Nautilus Road. 
Bass Avenue, southerly side, from a point 450 feet distant from the easterly boundary of Brightside Avenue Extended, to the westerly boundary of Nautilus Road. 
Bass Rocks Road, from its intersection with Nautilus Road to its intersection with Atlantic Road, both sides. 
Beach Road, both sides, from its intersection with Brightside Avenue to its intersection with Nautilus Road. 
Butman Avenue, northerly side, from Washington Street to Langsford Street. 
Eastern Point Boulevard, easterly side, southerly from the Gate Lodge to Farrington Avenue. 
Eastern Point Road, from Rocky Neck Avenue to Eastern Point Boulevard. 
Harbor Road, at Bass Rocks, both sides, from Nautilus Road to Atlantic Road. 
Haskell Street, on the southerly side, from its intersection with Rocky Pasture Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with Mt. Pleasant Avenue, May 1—September 15, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Hickory Street, both sides, beginning at its intersection with High Street for its entire length in a southerly direction. Signs should state "No Parking May 1 to September 15 Tow Away Zone." 
Locust Grove Cemetery. 
Nautilus Road, both sides, for its entire length. 
Main Street, both sides, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m., except from its intersection with Spring Street to its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Moorland Road, both sides beginning at a point 278 feet in a northwesterly direction from its intersection with Atlantic Road to its intersection with Souther Road. 
River Road, easterly side, from Bridgewater Street to and including number 29 River Road. 
River Road, northerly side, from a point opposite the store of Chard and Wilkerson, westerly to Leonard Street, except for the space in front of property numbered 32, 34 and 36 River Road. 
Rocky Neck, easterly side, beginning at a point 137 feet from its intersection with Horton Street for a distance of 181 feet in a northerly direction. 
Salt Island Road, both sides, from Witham Street to Barberry Way. 
Sawyer Avenue, from its intersection with Hickory Street, both sides for its entire length in a westerly direction. Signs should state "No Parking May 1 to September 15 Tow Away Zone." 
Seaside Cemetery. 
Shore Road, at Magnolia, on the town landing, except for residents of Gloucester and Manchester. 
Thatcher Road, easterly side, between numbers 15 and 33. 
Washington Street, both sides, from Mason Square to the Rockport line at Folly Cove. 
Washington Street, both sides, from Langsford Street to the Rockport Line. 
Western Avenue, northerly side of the northerly lane, from Middle Street to Centennial Avenue. 
Witham Street, northerly side, from Thatcher Road to Salt Island Road. 
Witham Street, westerly side, from the entrance to Good Harbor Beach to a point 75 feet in a northerly direction on Witham Street. 
Witham Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 103 feet from its intersection with Thatcher Road for a distance of 300 feet from 8:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Witham Street and Cliff Road, at the intersection, 640 feet on Cliff Road in an easterly direction where the road intersects with Brier Neck Road on the northerly and southerly sides. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-125, 21-126, 21-128, 21-129; Ord. of 7-10-1979, § I; Ord. of 5-20-1980, § I; Ord. of 6-16-1981, § I; Ord. No. 36-1995, § I, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 101-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 142-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 16-1999, § I, 8-10-1999; Ord. of 5-8-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 5-25-2010(01), (02); Ord. of 10-12-2010(03); Ord. of 10-12-2010(06); Ord. of 4-23-2013(081); Ord. of 4-23-2013(082))  
Sec. 22-272. - Same—Saturdays, Sundays, holidays. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, or portions of such days, as indicated herein, during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, when signs are in place giving notice thereof, in accordance with section 22-158: 
Atlantic Road , landward side between Nautilus Road and Farrington Avenue on Saturday, Sundays, and holidays except for an observation area located on the landward (northwest) side of Atlantic Road beginning at a point 940 feet northeast of the intersection with High Popples Road and extending southwest to a point 830 feet northeast from that intersection. 
Atlantic Road, both sides, between Farrington Avenue and the stone posts on the boundary of the Prentiss Estate at Braces Cove, Eastern Point, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Atlantic Road, Bass Rocks, both sides, from Bass Avenue to Nautilus Road, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Beach Road, Bass Rocks, both sides, from Atlantic Road to Brightside Avenue, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Beach Road, Bass Rocks, northerly side, from Brightside Avenue to Haskell Street, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Cabo Drive, both sides, for its entire length. 
Farrington Avenue, both sides, from a point 100 yards easterly from St. Louis Avenue, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Farrington Avenue, north side, from St. Louis Avenue to Eastern Point Boulevard, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Shore Road, both sides, for its entire length, on Saturday afternoons, Sundays, and holidays. 
Tragabigzanda Road, Bass Rocks, both sides, for its entire length, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Western Avenue, southerly side, from a point beginning at Blynman Bridge, for a distance of 165 feet in an easterly direction on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Witham Street, westerly side from Starknaught Heights to Thatcher Road. 
(Code 1970, § 21-127; Ord. of 5-22-1979, § I; Ord. of 1-17-1984, § I; Ord. No. 10-1992, § I, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 16-1997, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 102-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 112-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 120-1998, § I, 9-1-1998; Ord. of 11-1-2006(02); Ord. No. 2015-256, 12-15-2015)  
Sec. 22-273. - Parking prohibited between certain hours on certain days. 
(a)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days in accordance with section 22-159: 
Webster Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 95 feet north of its intersection with Eastern Avenue and continuing north for 125 feet. 
(b)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, as follows in accordance with section 22-159: 
Middle Street, southerly side, at its intersection with Hancock Street for a distance of 60 feet in an easterly direction. 
Middle Street, southerly side, from a point 96 feet from its intersection with Hancock Street for a distance of 20 feet in an easterly direction. 
Orchard Street, southerly side, at a point from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
(c)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any business day, except Sundays and holidays in accordance with section 22-159: 
Middle Street, southerly side, from a point 75 feet from its intersection with Center Street, for a distance of 44 feet in a westerly direction. 
Pleasant Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 175 feet from its intersection with Warren Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
(d)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays or at any time on Saturdays and Sundays in accordance with section 22-159: 
Langsford Street, both sides, from its intersection with Washington Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 835 feet. 
(e)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., except on Sundays and holidays, in accordance with section 22-159: 
Main Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 670 feet easterly from its intersection with Rowe Square for a distance of 100 feet in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 180 feet from its intersection with Rowe Square for a distance of 390 feet in an easterly direction. 
(f)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof during the days and hours specified below in accordance with section 22-159: 
Emerald Street, easterly side from its intersection with Washington Street, in a southerly direction for a distance of 150 feet every Sunday between the hours of 9:30 a.m. to 12:00 noon. 
Good Harbor Beach Parking Lot, from 8:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Goose Cove Reservoir at Fire Gate at end of Gee Avenue 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Haskell Street, on the southerly side, from its intersection with Rocky Pasture Road, in an easterly direction to its intersection with Mount Pleasant Avenue, May 1—September 15, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. 
Loma Drive, both sides, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15, for its entire length. 
Mt. Pleasant Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with Rocky Pasture Road, in a southwesterly direction for a distance of 545 feet, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15 annually. 
Puerto Drive, both sides, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15, for its entire length. 
Rio Drive, both sides, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15, for its entire length. 
Wingaersheek Beach Parking Lot, from 8:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(g)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the following streets or parts thereof, on Tuesdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m., from April 1 through October 31 in order to conduct street sweeping operations, in accordance with section 22-159: 
(1)  Main Street; 
(2)  Middle Street; 
(3)  Rogers Street; 
(4)  Harbor Loop; 
(5)  Manuel F. Lewis Street; 
(6)  Duncan Street; 
(7)  Hancock Street; 
(8)  Porter Street; 
(9)  Center Street; 
(10)  Short Street; 
(11)  Pleasant Street; 
(12)  Flannagan Square; 
(13)  Dale Avenue; 
(14)  Warren Street; 
(15)  Prospect Street; 
(16)  Railroad Avenue; 
(17)  Western Avenue from its intersection with Washington Street to its intersection with Centennial Avenue; 
(18)  Maplewood Avenue; and 
(19)  Washington Street from its intersection with Gloucester Avenue to its intersection with Main Street. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-130, 21-132, 21-133; Ord. of 6-16-1981, § I; Ord. of 10-13-1981, § I; Ord. No. 13-1992, § I, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 32-1995, § I, 5-30-1995; Ord. No. 35-1995, § I, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 47-1997, § I, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 103-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 38-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. of 11-28-2006(05); Ord. of 10-12-2010(06); Ord. No. 2015-041, 3-10-2015)  
Sec. 22-274. - Two-hour-parking—Between certain hours. 
(a)  Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday in accordance with section 22-160: 
Pleasant Street, westerly side, at its intersection with Cedar and Shepherd Streets. 
(b)  Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on any business day except Friday, and on Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and specifically excepting Sundays and holidays in accordance with section 22-160: 
Cedar Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Sargent Street in a westerly direction to the Boston & Maine Railroad tracks. 
Chestnut Street, westerly side, for its entire length. 
Cleveland Street, both sides, from its intersection with Sargent Street, in a westerly direction to the Boston & Maine Railroad tracks. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from Parker Court to Stanley Court for a distance of 125 feet in a northerly direction. 
Mason Street, westerly side, from a point 31 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 152 feet. 
Millett Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Sargent Street to its intersection with Warner Street. 
Millett Street, westerly side, from a point 20 feet from its intersection with Sargent Street, in a northerly direction for a distance of 72 feet. 
Sargent Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Cedar Street to its intersection with Cleveland Street. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from Ashland Place to Marsh Street. 
(c)  Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in accordance with section 22-160: 
Railroad Avenue, northerly side, beginning at a point 80 feet from its intersection with Washington Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 65 feet from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. daily. 
Washington Street, #98—#102, westerly side from its intersection with Beacon Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 18 feet. 
(Code 1970, § 21-134; Ord. of 3-6-1975, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 2; Ord. of 5-19-1987, § I; Ord. of 9-6-1994, § I; Ord. of 2-6-2007(07); Ord. No. 2015-041, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2016-197, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-237, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-274.1. - Same—At all times. 
The following areas are to be two-hour parking at all times: 
133 Washington Street, from the railroad track side, beginning 20 feet from pole #2984 on the easterly side of Washington Street, in a southerly direction for a distance of 46 feet (approximately two spaces). 
Washington Street, beginning at a point 127 feet from Railroad Avenue, in a northerly direction on the easterly side, for a distance of 66 feet (approximately three spaces). 
Washington Street, from its intersection with Railroad Avenue, easterly side, in a northerly direction for a distance of 173 feet and from a point 195 feet, easterly side, in a northerly direction, a distance of 105 feet to the MBTA train tracks. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2009(01); Ord. of 7-10-2012(03); Ord. of 4-9-2013(068))  
Sec. 22-275. - Same—Between certain hours, from May 1 to September 15. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on any business day except Friday, and on Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and specifically excepting Sundays and holidays in accordance with section 22-161: 
Middle Street, southerly side, from Short Street to Pleasant Street. 
(Code 1970, § 21-135; Ord. No. 17-1997, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 73-2000, § I, 7-18-2000)  
Sec. 22-275.1. - Same—Between certain hours, from May 1 to September 15 and certain days. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours at any one time, during the period from May 1 to September 15 of each year, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. on any business day, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays in accordance with section 22-161.1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-097, 6-7-2016)  
Sec. 22-276. - One and one-half hour parking on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 1½ hours on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-162: 
(Code 1970, § 21-136; Ord. of 9-26-1989, § III)  
Sec. 22-277. - One-hour parking—Generally. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour at any time, when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-163: 
Church Street, easterly side, from Middle Street to Proctor Street. 
Commercial Street, westerly side, from the intersection with Beach Court, in a southerly direction, 53 feet to the intersection of Pascucci Court. 
Commercial Street , for a distance of 27 feet from its southerly intersection with Beach Court. 
East Main Street, easterly side, from the driveway at the building numbered 150 East Main Street to the driveway of the building near the junction of East Main Street and Highland Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from the driveway leading to 160 East Main Street, southerly to 185 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side from 191 East Main Street southerly and westerly to a point 20 feet from the paved portion of Pirates Lane. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from the driveway at the premises numbered 273 East Main Street, to the driveway east of the premises numbered 281 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from a point 295 feet from the intersection of Wall Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 44 feet. 
Exchange Street, northerly side, for a distance of 50 feet from a point 20 feet westerly from Washington Street. 
Holly Street , westerly side (easterly side of the traffic island) from its intersection with Washington Street, beginning at a distance of 35 feet in a northerly direction for a distance of 50 feet. Hours of restriction to be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). 
Main Street, both sides, from Prospect Street to its intersection with East Main Street and Eastern Avenue. 
Main Street, in front of #263 Main Street. 
Main Street, in front of #322, one space. 
Main Street, northerly side, in front of #382, beginning in a westerly direction for the entire length of the building. 
Main Street , northerly side, from Haven Terrace for a distance of 40 feet in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, southerly side, from Vincent Street and Spring Street to Prospect Street. 
Middle Street, up to six one-hour parking meters, southerly side, from the Cooperation Bank parking lot to the corner of Pleasant Street. 
Pleasant Street, easterly side, from Shepherd Street, 348 feet in southerly direction, except Saturdays and Sundays. 
Prospect Street, northerly side, from Railroad Avenue to School Street, excluding the service zone. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from a point 58 feet from its intersection with Washington Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 37 feet. 
Washington Street, at its intersection with Centennial Avenue from its southeasterly corner to the first utility pole. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from Malen's Gas Station at the corner of Railroad Avenue, northerly to the bus stop established next southerly to the Boston & Maine Railroad's tracks where Washington Street crosses such railroad's right-of-way. 
Washington Street, westerly side, starting at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Beacon Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 39 feet. 
Washington Street , northerly side from its intersection with Grove Street for a distance of approximately 150 feet in an easterly direction to the entrance of Oak Grove Cemetery. 
(Code 1970, § 21-137; Ord. of 4-1-1986, § I; Ord. of 7-7-1987, § I; Ord. of 12-22-1987, § I; Ord. of 1-10-1989, § I; Ord. of 2-28-1989, § I; Ord. of 5-9-1989, § I; Ord. No. 8-1991, § I, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 10-1991, § I, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 12-1992, § I, 4-12-1992; Ord. No. 4-1993, § I, 3-16-1993; Ord. No. 40-1995, § II, 11-29-1995; Ord. No. 77-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. of 3-13-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 8-21-2001, § I; Ord. of 4-1-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 8-21-2007(04); Ord. of 1-8-2013(016); Ord. No. 2014-285, 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 2017-063, 3-28-2017; Ord. No. 2017-200, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 2017-237, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-278. - Same—Between certain hours. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour, between the hours specifically designated for each such area, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-164: 
Lexington Avenue, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, easterly side, beginning at a point at its intersection with Norman Avenue thence running 474.77 feet in a southerly direction to its intersection with Flume Road. 
Lexington Avenue, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, westerly side, beginning at a point at its intersection with Norman Avenue thence running 464 feet in a southerly direction to its intersection with Flume Road. 
Main Street, both sides, from number 370 Main Street and extending easterly for a distance of 233 feet to Patrican's Restaurant, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and specifically exempting Sundays and holidays. 
Western Avenue, no parking yearround southerly side from "Way to County Landing," westerly for a distance of 1,190 feet between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1970, § 21-138; Ord. No. 13-1992, § I, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 18-1997, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 2014-230, 6-24-2014)  
Sec. 22-279. - Thirty-minute parking. 
(a)  Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 30 minutes, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. any business day except Friday, and on Fridays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and specifically excepting Sundays and holidays in accordance with section 22-165: 
Atlantic Road , landward side between Nautilus Road and Farrington Avenue on Saturday, Sundays, and holidays except for an observation area located at Atlantic Road (northwest) landward side at a point from High Popples Road heading southwest starting at 830 feet and ending 940 feet. 
Commercial Street, easterly side, from number 13 Commercial Street to number 15 Commercial Street, to a point 45 feet southerly thereof. 
Dale Avenue, two 30-minutes parking meters in front of the Post Office Building. 
East Main Street, northerly side, from a point opposite the southwesterly corner of the property numbered 227 East Main Street to a point 20 feet easterly therefrom. 
East Main Street, northerly side, beginning at a point 47 feet west from the entrance to the pumping station for a distance of 40 feet in a westerly direction. 
East Main Street, southerly side from Ledge Road to the driveway at 164 Mt. Pleasant Avenue, two spaces, between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from a point opposite the northern boundary of property numbered 201 East Main Street to a point 32 feet southerly therefrom. 
Eastern Avenue, in front of #2, one space. 
Eastern Avenue, in front of #18 between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. in the area beginning at pole #2741 on the westerly side in a southerly direction for 36 feet, two 30-minute parking spaces, clearly delineated. 
Emerson Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point 240 feet from its intersection with Lincoln Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 241 feet for a period of 6 months. 
Friend Street, Establish two 30-minute parking zones in front of 50—52 Friend Street. 
Main Street, beginning at a point 80 feet from its intersection with Herrick Court in a westerly direction, for a distance of 44 feet. 
Main Street, southerly side, 22 feet from a point 162 feet from Vincent Street in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, two 30-minute parking meters in front of #278 Main Street. 
River Road, easterly side, beginning at a point 870 feet from its intersection with Bridgewater Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 130 feet. 
Washington Street, northerly side, beginning at its intersection with Hodgkins Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 440 feet. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from Whittemore Street to Baker Street. 
(b)  Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 30 minutes, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday, and on Fridays between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. in accordance with section 22-165: 
City hall yard, southerly side, from its intersection with Dale Avenue for a distance of 90 feet in an easterly direction. 
(c)  Upon the following streets or parts thereof, and when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 30 minutes, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday in accordance with section 22-165: 
Prospect Street, northerly side, from a point 345 feet from its intersection with Allen Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 22 feet. 
(Code 1970, § 21-139; Ord. of 4-22-1976, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-1977, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-1979, § I; Ord. of 10-28-1980, § I; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § I; Ord. of 2-22-1983, § II; Ord. of 8-12-1986, § I; Ord. of 11-17-1987, § I; Ord. of 2-16-1988, § I; Ord. of 7-12-1988, § I; Ord. of 8-16-1988, § I; Ord. of 7-11-1989, § I; Ord. No. 27-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 7-1993, § I, 4-13-1993; Ord. No. 20-1994, § I, 10-18-1994; Ord. No. 75-1998, § I, 1-20-1998; Ord. No. 78-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. of 4-16-2002(03), § I; Ord. of 6-25-2002(07), § I; Ord. of 8-7-2007(01); Ord. of 1-8-2013(016); Ord. No. 2015-252, 12-15-2015; Ord. No. 2017-238, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-118, 6-26-2018)  
Sec. 22-280. - Fifteen-minute parking. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 15 minutes when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-166: 
Duncan Street , two 15-minute parking spaces (with proper signage). 
East Main Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 435 feet from its intersection with Chapel Street for a distance of 22 feet in a southerly direction. 
East Main Street, four spaces in the area of 273 and 275. 
Fuller Street, beginning at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Norman Avenue, two spaces in a southerly direction. 
Fuller Street, junction with Shore Road in the Square, two spaces. 
Lexington Avenue, westerly side between #21 and Flume Road. 
Main Street, northerly side, from a point 215 feet from its intersection with Eastern Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 22 feet. 
Main Street, northerly side, one space in front of #274 Main Street (replacing meter #68). 
Main Street, southerly side, at its intersection with Manual F. Lewis Street beginning at a point 145 feet in an easterly direction for a distance of 22 feet. 
Main Street, northerly side, from a point 80 feet from its intersection with Herrick Court for a distance of 22 feet in a westerly direction. 
Main Street, from a point 22 feet from its intersection with Herrick Court in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, in front of #37 Main Street. 
Main Street , southerly side, beginning at its intersection with Mansfield Way for a distance of 22 feet in an easterly direction. 
Maplewood Avenue, easterly side, 20 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 46 feet. 
Orchard Street, in front of #4, one space. 
Pleasant Street, easterly side, 20 feet from the northerly corner of Liberty Street. 
Pleasant Street, easterly side at a point 155 feet from its intersection with Liberty Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 23 feet, except for Sundays. 
Pleasant Street, westerly side, starting 20 feet from its intersection with Smith Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 22 feet. 
Prospect Street, easterly side, from a distance of 15 feet from its intersection with Friend Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 33 feet. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from a point 85 feet from its intersection with Washington Street, for a distance 25 feet in an easterly direction at 38 Railroad Avenue in front of Audrey's Flower Shop. The time frame for the 15-minute zone is to read: Monday through Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, from a point 105 feet from its intersection with Washington Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
Railroad Avenue, westerly side, extending northwesterly from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 80 feet. 
Rogers Street , northerly side, one parking space located at meter #190 in front of Electric Pole #266. 
Sargent Street, 20 feet from the corner of Sargent Street and Cedar Street on the west side of Sargent Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 57 feet (this will required two signs). 
Washington Street, at #49 Washington Street, easterly side, from a point 20 feet from its intersection with Gould Court in a northerly direction, between 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays. 
Washington Street, one space in front of #63. 
Washington Street, easterly side, in front of #279 Washington Street, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Washington Street, easterly side, from a point 20 feet from the intersection of Addison Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 84 feet, Monday through Saturday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Washington Street, easterly side, starting 55 feet from its intersection with Addison Street for a distance of 55 feet to its intersection with Prospect Street. 
Washington Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Grove Street, in a northerly direction, one space. 
Washington Street, easterly side, at a point 30 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 36 feet, Mondays through Saturdays 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Washington Street , northerly side in a westerly direction, ten feet from the fire hydrant for a distance of 17 feet, one parking space. 
Washington Street, northerly side, from a point 140 feet from its intersection with Duley Street for a distance of 32 feet in a northerly direction from: 
(1)  8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Monday—Saturday; and 
(2)  12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. on Sundays and Holidays. 
Washington Street, northerly side, from a point 177 feet from Tucker Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 50 feet, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
Washington Street, northerly side from a point 227 feet (Pole 296) from Tucker Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 40 feet between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. in front of 1064 Washington Street, (One sign on Pole 296 with a left pointing arrow and a sign mounted on existing sign pole with a right pointing arrow). 
Washington Street, 35 feet in a northerly direction from pole #295 and that hours of enforcement be from 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. daily. 
Washington Street, westerly side at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Beacon Street, in a northerly direction for a distance of 18 feet. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from a point 46 feet from its intersection with Washington Square for a distance of 24 feet in a southerly direction. 
Western Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point 50 feet westerly of the Fisherman's Monument in an easterly direction for a distance of 100 feet. 
Western Avenue, southerly side, two 50-foot, 15-minute parking spaces east and west of the two handicapped parking spaces with the 70-foot area in front of the Fisherman's Monument left as public, unrestricted parking. 
Western Avenue , beginning at a point 20 feet from the intersection with Middle Street for a distance of 90 feet in an easterly direction. 
Western Avenue, northerly side, from its intersection with Centennial Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 30 feet. 
(Code 1970, § 21-140; Ord. of 6-12-1975, § 1: Ord. of 4-22-1976, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-1977, § 3; Ord. of 7-1-1980, § I; Ord. of 2-24-1981, § I; Ord. of 10-13-1981, § I; Ord. of 9-7-1982, § I; Ord. of 8-2-1983, § I; Ord. of 9-26-1986, § I; Ord. of 10-14-1986, § I; Ord. of 10-14-1986, § I; Ord. of 5-10-1988, § I; Ord. of 2-28-1989, § I; Ord. No. 9-1991, § 1, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 10-1991, § I, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 30-1991, 9-3-1991; Ord. No. 20-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 21-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 22-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 8-1993, § I, 4-13-1993; Ord. No. 2-1994, § I, 4-5-1994; Ord. No. 16-1994, § I, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 14-1995, § I, 2-7-1995; Ord. No. 40-1995, § II, 10-30-1995; Ord. No. 9-1996, § I, 4-2-1996; Ord. No. 31-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 41-1996, § I, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 82-1998, § I, 3-17-1998; Ord. No. 109-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 129-1998, § I, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 150-1999, § I, 2-16-1999; Ord. No. 37-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 40-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 76-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 79-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 93-2000, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 99-2000, § I, 11-6-2000; Ord. of 3-13-2001(05), § I; Ord. of 3-13-2001(06), § I; Ord. of 12-11-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 5-11-2004(01), § I; Ord. of 11-9-2004(01), § I; Ord. of 2-15-2005, § I; Ord. of 2-6-2007(01), § I; Ord. of 2-6-2007(02); Ord. of 8-7-2007(01); Ord. of 5-13-2008(01); Ord. of 10-20-2009(02), (03); Ord. No. 2014-145, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2014-285, 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 2015-081, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2016-128, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-199, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-239, 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-118, 6-26-2018; Ord. No. 2018-202, 11-27-2018; Ord. No. 2018-203, 11-27-2018)  
Sec. 22-280.1. - Twenty-minute parking. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than 20 minutes: 
Stage Fort Park Visitor's Center, eight spaces, from May 1 to November 1, 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 94-2000, § I, 9-26-2000)  
Sec. 22-281. - Ten-minute parking. 
Upon the following streets or parts thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than ten minutes when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-167: 
Angle Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 42 feet from its intersection with Middle Street for a distance of 22 feet in an easterly direction. 
Main Street, easterly side, in front of number 191 Main Street. 
(Code 1970, § 21-141; Ord. of 12-8-1981, § II; Ord. of 4-1-1986, § I)  
Sec. 22-282. - Angle parking. 
Upon the following streets or parts of streets, which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12 inches of the curb, at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or official signs, and wholly within the painted lanes provided in accordance with section 22-169: 
Commercial Street, for a distance of 27 feet from its southerly intersection with Beach Court, in a southerly direction three nine-foot angle parking spaces. 
East Main Street, establish four angle parking spaces at #64—66 East Main Street. 
Main Street, southerly side, from its intersection with Manuel F. Lewis Road to 199 Main Street (Goldman's Department Store). 
Main Street, beginning on the southerly side approximately 34 feet from its intersection with Duncan Street in an easterly direction, locate 14 metered angle parking spaces and two unmetered crime reporting parking spaces. 
Parker Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 20 feet from the entrance to the State Fish Pier, in a southerly direction for a distance of 99 feet. 
Railroad Avenue, northeasterly side, in front of #27—#33, ten spaces. (Referenced by plan, dated 5-7-2003, as revised and on file in city clerk's office.) 
Riverdale Park, on the westerly side of that portion of the street designated as "B Street" on a plan entitled "Proposed Layout and Acceptance of Road at Riverdale Park, Gloucester, Mass.," dated August 15, 1951, made by Maurice T. Dench, Jr., acting city engineer, and recorded in Essex South District Registry, Book 3844, page 534, between units numbered 11 to 18, inclusive. 
Warren Street, northerly side, from a point 20 feet from the intersection of the northerly line of Warren Street with the westerly line of Pleasant Street, to a point seven feet from the intersection of the northerly line of Warren Street with the easterly line of Dale Avenue. 
(Code 1970, § 21-105; Ord. of 9-8-1987, § I; Ord. of 9-26-1989, § I); Ord. No. 31-1991, § I, 9-10-1991; Ord. No. 36-1997, § I, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 55-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. of 10-28-2003(03), § I; Ord. of 12-10-2013(278))  
Sec. 22-283. - Bus stops and taxi stands. 
(a)  The following locations are hereby designated as bus stops in accordance with section 22-170: 
Harbor Loop, easterly end, easterly side from Rogers Street in a southerly direction for 94 feet. 
Lincoln Avenue , westerly side in a southerly direction from a point 150 feet from Emerson Avenue for a distance of 40 feet. 
Manuel F. Lewis Road, locate one 40-foot bus stop on the easterly side of said road, starting at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Rogers Street in a northerly direction. 
Manuel F. Lewis Road, two 25-foot minibus stops on the easterly side of Manuel F. Lewis Road, beginning at a point 20 feet from its intersection with Rogers Street in a northerly direction. 
Main Street, northerly side, 170 feet from the intersection with Pleasant Street for a distance of 40 feet. Note: One bus to be allowed at this location at any one time. Parking of vehicles other than buses will be allowed when buses are not in service after 6:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and all day on Sundays and holidays. 
Maplewood Avenue, easterly side, in a northerly direction from a point 154 feet from Derby Street for a distance of 62 feet, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
Railroad Avenue, northerly side, three spaces at a point beginning at the east entrance to 33 Railroad Avenue, for a distance of 80 feet and one space at a point 200 feet in an easterly direction for a distance of 30 feet adjacent to the MBTA train platform. 
Rogers Street, northerly side, from a point 50 feet from its intersection with Manuel F. Lewis Road in an easterly direction. Note: Two 40-foot bus stops at this location. 
(b)  The following locations are hereby designated as taxicab stands in accordance with section 22-171: 
Rogers Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 20 feet from the westerly corner of the entrance to the parking lot at #25 Rogers Street in a westerly direction for 52 feet from the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily. 
Rogers Street, approximately 30 feet from its intersection with Harbor Loop in a westerly direction for a distance of 18 feet. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-112, 21-113; Ord. of 5-8-1979, § I; Ord. of 9-7-1982, § I; Ord. of 2-15-1983, § I; Ord. of 2-14-1984, § I; Ord. No. 3-1990, § I, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 6-1990, § I, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 34-1991, § I, 9-10-1991; Ord. No. 16-1992, § I, 5-19-1992; Ord. No. 3-1993, § I, 2-23-1993; Ord. No. 41-1995, § I, 11-29-1995; Ord. No. 13-1996, § I, 4-30-1996; Ord. No. 32-1996, § I, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 49-1996, § I, 10-29-1996; Ord. of 7-24-2001(02); Ord. of 12-11-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 4-15-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 7-22-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 5-27-2008(01); Ord. of 6-2-2009; Ord. of 6-16-2009; Ord. of 4-27-2010(01); Ord. of 6-14-2011(02); Ord. No. 2014-264, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2019-008, 1-8-2019)  
Sec. 22-284. - Service or loading zones. 
(a)  The following locations are hereby designated as service or loading zones in accordance with section 22-172: 
Beacon Street, northerly side, 20 feet from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 45 feet. 
Commercial Street, from a point 20 feet from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 22 feet. 
Elm Street, at its intersection with Main Street (across from #6 Elm Street) approximately 20 feet from the intersection of Main Street on the easterly side, northerly direction, for a distance of 40 feet (to the entrance of Cameron's rear lot). 
Holly Street , easterly side from its intersection with Washington Street, beginning at a distance of 60 feet, in a northerly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
Lexington Avenue, westerly side, from a point 44 feet from the intersection of Flume Road in a northerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Main Street, northerly side, at a point 55 feet from its intersection with Hancock Street for a distance of 22 feet in a westerly direction. 
Main Street, northerly side, from a point 132 feet from the intersection of Short Street, for a distance of 25 feet in an easterly direction in front of 62—64 Main Street with a time limit of 60-minute parking to be placed on the sign. 
Main Street, northerly side, in front of #134, one space, 30-minute limit. 
Main Street #289, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. daily (except Sundays and Holidays). 
Middle Street, southerly side, starting at a point 34 feet from the easterly side line of Center Street at its intersection with Middle Street and running easterly a distance of 44 feet. 
Pearl Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 327 feet from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 81 feet in an easterly direction. 
Prospect Street, westerly side beginning 60 feet from the southerly corner of the building at 139A Prospect Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 18 feet between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Mondays through Saturdays. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, easterly side, from a point 58 feet opposite the northerly entrance of Sumac Lane in a southwesterly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
Rogers Street, one space in front of #16. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 30 feet from the westerly corner of the entrance to the parking lot at #25 Rogers Street in a westerly direction for 48 feet from the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily. 
St. Peter's Park, the land located at the easterly side of the Seafarer's International Building. 
Veteran Clinic Loading Zone Only , Mon.-Fri. 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., two spaces at 199—201 Main Street, southerly side, 17 feet wide each from a point beginning on the easterly side of the existing side of the existing sidewalk. 
(b)  Overnight parking shall be allowed from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. daily in all loading zones designated in this section. 
(Code 1970, § 21-115; Ord. of 8-11-1981, § I; Ord. of 6-1-1982, § I; Ord. of 6-7-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-16-1988, § I; Ord. of 9-6-1988, § I; Ord. of 11-14-1989, § I; Ord. No. 10-1990, § I, 4-30-1990; Ord. No. 35-1991, § I, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 42-1995, § I, 10-30-1995; Ord. No. 33-1996, § I, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 45-1997, § I, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 117-1998, § I, 9-1-1998; Ord. of 10-23-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § I; Ord. of 9-24-2002(11), § I; Ord. of 1-4-2005, § I; Ord. of 2-26-2008; Ord. of 1-5-2010(01); Ord. of 10-12-2010(07); Ord. of 1-8-2013(016); Ord. No. 2014-012, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-262, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2014-283, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2016-091, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2016-221, 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-038, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 2017-239, 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-285. - Parking of trucks, trailer trucks and other commercial vehicles. 
(a)  Over 2½ tons. Trucks, trailer trucks and other commercial vehicles having a carrying capacity over 2½ tons are hereby prohibited from parking on the following streets or parts of streets when signs are in place giving notice thereof, in accordance with section 22-173: 
Main Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Prospect Street to its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Main Street, trailer truck parking prohibited at 375 Main Street 90 feet either side of entrance. 
Riverside Avenue, for its entire length, at all times. 
Rogers Street, westerly side, between Manuel F. Lewis and Duncan Streets. 
(b)  Over three tons. Trucks, trailer trucks land other commercial vehicles having a carrying capacity over three tons are hereby prohibited from parking on the following streets or parts of streets when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-173: 
Rogers Street, both sides, from a point 530 feet from its intersection with Manuel F. Lewis Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with Washington Street for its entire length from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
Manuel F. Lewis Street, both sides at all times, for its entire length. 
(c)  Refrigeration units in operation. Trucks are prohibited from parking on the following streets or parts of streets with their refrigeration units in operation from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Mondays through Fridays and prohibited entirely on weekends: 
Main Street, both sides for its entire length. 
Violators will be towed in accordance with section 22-242(12). 
(d)  Permitted parking of trailer trucks. Trailer trucks shall be allowed to park on the following streets or parts of streets: 
Harbor Loop, easterly side, space shall be provided for the parking of one trailer truck from a point beginning 392 feet from its intersection with Rogers Street in a southerly direction for 142 feet. 
Harbor Loop, westerly side, from a point 265 feet from its intersection with Rogers Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 200 feet at all times. 
Parker Street, both sides, beginning at a point 25 feet from the pumping station for a distance of 230 feet in an easterly direction. 
(e)  Over three-quarter tons. Trucks, trailer trucks, and other commercial vehicles, having a carrying capacity over three-quarter tons are hereby prohibited from parking on Stacy Boulevard (Western Avenue) both sides from the Blynman Bridge, in an easterly direction to the public landing at the eastern end of the Boulevard except for special events, holidays and by vehicles used by authorized fixed-site vendors. 
(Code 1970, § 21-64; Ord. of 4-15-1976, § I; Ord. of 9-16-1976, § 1; Ord. of 10-14-1976, § 1; Ord. of 1-17-1978, § I; Ord. of 10-28-1980, § I; Ord. of 1-24-1984, § I; Ord. No. 26-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 48-1997, § I, 7-8-1997; Ord. of 11-13-2007(03))  
Sec. 22-286. - Parking of trailers, semitrailer and tour buses. 
(a)  Prohibited on certain streets generally. Except for the parts of streets listed in subsection (b) of this section, semitrailers and semitrailer units are prohibited from parking on the following streets except to load and unload when signs are installed giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-174: 
Alper Road 	Marchant Street 
Beach Court 	Mason Court 
Blackburn Place 	Mason Street 
Center Street 	Middle Street 
Chestnut Street 	Parker Street 
Chisholm Court 	Parsons Street 
Church Street 	Pine Street 
Columbia Street 	Pleasant Street 
Commercial Court 	Porter Street 
Commercial Street 	Proctor Street 
Cross Street 	Prospect Square 
Dale Avenue 	Prospect Street 
Elm Street 	Rogers Street 
Federal Street 	Rowe Square 
Fort Square 	Scott Street 
Gould Court 	Short Street 
Hancock Street 	Spring Court 
Harbor Loop 	Spring Street 
Loring Court 	Warren Street 
Main Street 	Washington Street 
Mansfield Street 	Winchester Court 
Manuel F. Lewis Street 	Whittemore Street 
 
(b)  Allowed; exception. Except between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. from December 15 to March 15, parking of semitrailers and semitrailer units are hereby allowed on the following parts of streets in accordance with section 22-174: 
Rogers Street, northerly side, at a point 260 feet from its intersection with Manuel F. Lewis Street, for a distance of 250 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rogers Street, northerly side, from a point 195 feet from its intersection with Manuel F. Lewis Street for a distance of 150 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, from a point 60 feet from its intersection with Rowe Square for a distance of 160 feet in a westerly direction. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, from a point 425 feet from its intersection with Rowe Square for a distance of 80 feet in a westerly direction. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 30 feet easterly from its intersection with the entrance to Quincy Market, for a distance of 140 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 260 feet easterly from its intersection with the entrance to Quincy Market for a distance of 140 feet in an easterly direction. 
(c)  Parking allowed for trailer trucks and tour buses only. The section of Rogers Street, in the vicinity of Flannagan Square that is currently marked as "trailer truck parking only," includes both trailer trucks and tour buses. 
(Code 1970, §§ 21-121, 21-155; Ord. of 6-8-1977, § I; Ord. of 9-5-1978, § I; Ord. of 11-13-1979, § I; Ord. of 6-16-1981, § I; Ord. of 12-1-1981, § I; Ord. of 3-24-1987, § I; Ord. No. 33-1991, § I, 9-10-1991; Ord. of 1-13-2008(02))  
Sec. 22-287. - Disabled veteran, handicapped parking. 
The locations reserved as parking areas for handicapped persons and disabled veterans shall be those approved by the traffic commission in accordance with sections 22-37 and 22-175 and published as the "List of Parking Areas Reserved for Handicapped Persons and Disabled Veterans in the City of Gloucester" and those locations listed herein, and shall be enforced when official signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
All disabled veteran and handicapped person parking spaces listed and designated by address or location in this section shall be deleted from this section and from this Code of Ordinances effective with the 2014 code supplement and shall be added to the City of Gloucester Traffic Commission Regulations known as the "List of Parking Areas Reserved for Handicapped Persons and Disabled Veterans in the City of Gloucester." 
(Ord. of 8-11-1981, § I; Ord. of 8-18-1981, § I; Ord. of 10-13-1981, § I; Ord. of 3-23-1982, § I; Ord. of 2-12-1985, § I; Ord. of 8-13-1985, § I; Ord. of 2-17-1985, § I; Ord. of 4-14-1987, § I; Ord. of 7-7-1987, § I; Ord. of 4-5-1988, § I; Ord. of 5-17-1988, § I; Ord. of 9-13-1988, § I; Ord. of 10-11-1988, § I; Ord. of 5-9-1989, § I; Ord. No. 16-1990, § I, 8-7-1990; Ord. No. 8-1991, § I, 3-19-1991; Ord. No. 27-1991, § I, 7-16-1991; Ord. No. 29-1991, § I, 8-7-1991; Ord. No. 30-1992, § I, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 32-1992, § I, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 5-1993, § I, 4-6-1993; Ord. of 10-12-1993, § I; Ord. No. 4-1994, § I, 4-5-1994; Ord. No. 21-1994, § I, 10-18-1994; Ord. No. 10-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 11-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 16-1995, § I, 2-7-1995; Ord. No. 17-1995, § I, 2-7-1995; Ord. No. 18-1995, § I, 3-2-1995; Ord. No. 23-1995, § I, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 24-1995, § I, 4-4-1995; Ord. No. 29-1995, § I, 5-30-1995; Ord. No. 30-1995, § I, 5-30-1995; Ord. No. 33-1995, § I, 5-30-1995; Ord. No. 28-1995, § I, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 14-1996, § I, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 23-1996, § I, 7-9-1996; Ord. No. 25-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 26-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 27-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 27-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 28-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 34-1996, § I, 8-20-1996; Ord. No. 1-1997, § I, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 6-1997, § I, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 8-1997, § I, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 23-1997, § I, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 28-1997, § I, 2-18-1997; Ord. No. 39-1997, § I, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 40-1997, § I, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 54-1997, § I, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 55-1997, § I, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 56-1997, § I, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 67-1997, § I, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 80-1998, § I, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 90-1998, § I, 4-29-1998; Ord. No. 91-1998, § I, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 105-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 130-1998, § I, 10-27-1998; Ord. No. 144-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 145-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 146-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 148-1999, § I, 2-16-1999; Ord. No. 149-1999, § I, 2-16-1999; Ord. No. 152-1999, § I, 3-16-1999; Ord. No. 3-1999, § I, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 7-1999, § I, 6-8-1999; Ord. No. 14-1999, § I, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 15-1999, § I, 8-3-1999; Ord. No. 19-1999, § I, 8-10-1999; Ord. No. 24-1999, § I, 9-14-1999; Ord. No. 25-1999, § I, 9-14-1999; Ord. No. 45-1999, § I, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 46-2000, § I, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 47-2000, § I, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 48-2000, § I, 1-18-2000; Ord. No. 49-2000, § I, 2-1-2000; Ord. No. 52-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 53-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 56-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 61-2000, § I, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 62-2000, § I, 5-9-2000; Ord. No. 67-2000, § I, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 72-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 74-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 75-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 85-2000, § I, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 86-2000, § I, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 87-2000, § I, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 88-2000, § I, 8-29-2000; Ord. No. 90-2000, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 95-2000, § I, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 96-2000, § I, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 97-2000, § I, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 98-2000, § I, 10-24-2000; Ord. No. 100-2000, § I, 11-6-2000; Ord. No. 109-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 110-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. of 01-16-2001(03), (04) § I; Ord. of 6-19-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 7-10-2001(04), (05) § I; Ord. of 7-24-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 12-11-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 2-19-2002, § I; Ord. of 3-19-2002(03), § I; Ord. of 4-16-2002(08), § I; Ord. of 5-14-2002(01), (02) § I; Ord. of 6-25-2002(06), § I; Ord. of 9-24-2002(08), § I; Ord. of 5-30-2006(02); Ord. of 10-8-2002, § I; Ord. of 10-29-2002, § I; Ord. of 11-12-2002(02), (03) § I; Ord. of 11-19-2002, § I; Ord. of 1-8-2002, § I; Ord. of 1-21-2003(02)—(04), (06) § I; Ord. of 2-4-2003(01), (02), § I; Ord. of 4-1-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 5-13-2003(03), § I; Ord. of 6-10-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 6-24-2003, § I; Ord. of 7-8-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 9-2-2003(01), (02), § I; Ord. of 9-16-2003 § I; Ord. of 12-2-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 12-16-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 3-9-2004(01), (02), § I; Ord. of 8-10-2004(01), (02), (04), § I; Ord. of 9-7-2004(01)—(04), § I; Ord. of 11-9-2004(02), § I; Ord. of 12-4-2004(01), § I; Ord. of 12-14-2004(01), (02), § I; Ord. of 1-18-2005(01), § I; Ord. of 3-29-2005(01), (02), § I; Ord. of 4-26-2005(01), (02), § I; Ord. of 5-10-2005, § I; Ord. of 5-24-2005(01), § I; Ord. of 10-11-2005(03), (04), § I; Ord. of 2-21-2006(03), § I; Ord. of 5-30-2006(02), § I; Ord. of 3-20-2007(01), (03); Ord. of 8-7-2007(03); Ord. of 8-21-2007(01), (02); Ord. of 5-27-2008(01), (02); Ord. of 9-2-2008(01), (03); Ord. of 5-5-2009(01), (02); Ord. of 7-28-2009; Ord. of 8-25-2009(02); Ord. of 10-20-2009(01); Ord. of 11-17-2009(02), (03); Ord. of 12-1-2009; Ord. of 3-30-2010(03); Ord. of 5-25-2010(03); Ord. of 7-6-2010(01); Ord. of 9-28-2010(03); Ord. of 9-28-2010(04); Ord. of 10-12-2010(08); Ord. of 11-9-2010(08); Ord. of 11-9-2010(09); Ord. of 11-9-2010(010); Ord. of 12-7-2010(03); Ord. of 12-7-2010(04); Ord. of 12-7-2010(05); Ord. of 4-12-2011(03); Ord. of 6-14-2011(03); Ord. of 6-14-2011(04); Ord. of 9-13-2011(02); Ord. of 10-11-2011(03); Ord. of 10-11-2011(04); Ord. of 11-29-2011(04); Ord. of 5-22-2012(02); Ord. of 7-10-2012(02); Ord. of 7-10-2012(03); Ord. of 7-24-2012(04); Ord. of 8-14-2012(03); Ord. of 10-9-2012(02); Ord. of 10-9-2012(03); Ord. of 10-9-2012(04); Ord. of 11-27-2012(04); Ord. of 3-26-2013(062); Ord. of 3-26-2013(063); Ord. of 4-9-2013(068); Ord. of 4-23-2013(079); Ord. of 8-13-2013(189); Ord. of 8-27-2013(191); Ord. of 12-10-2013(274); Ord. of 12-10-2013(275); Ord. of 12-10-2013(276); Ord. No. 2014-012, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-077, 2-25-2014; Ord. No. 2014-109, 3-25-2014; Ord. No. 2014-135, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2014-144, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2014-166, 5-27-2014; Ord. No. 2014-284, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2015-074, 4-28-2015)  
Sec. 22-288. - Off-street parking areas. 
The following are off-street parking areas, established in accordance with section 22-191. All parking lot plans shall be filed with the city engineer and the office of the city clerk. 
Fitz Hugh Lane parking lot, situated on the southerly side of Rogers Street and containing the following: 
(1)  48 angled parking spaces; 
(2)  Three parallel parking spaces; 
(3)  Two handicapped parking spaces; 
as shown on a plan on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Harbor parking lot, situated on the southerly side of Rogers Street and containing 99 parking spaces as shown on Drawing No. 30005, dated August, 1957, Whitman & Howard, Engineers, the original of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and, as amended to 71 parking spaces on January 7, 1997, as further amended to 68 parking spaces as shown on the drawing entitled "Harbor Lot" prepared by Cambridge Seven Associates, Inc. dated August 1, 2011, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Lanes Cove Lot , (situated at the end of Andrews Street) northerly side (seawall side) to be designated "vehicle parking only" with the southerly side (seawall side) to be designated "vehicle boat and/or trailer parking." 
Main Street parking lot, 15 spaces including two handicapped spaces with two-hour parking limit, no fee, and hours of operation 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. with vehicles violating the hours of operation to be ticketed and towed. 
Manuel F. Lewis parking lot, situated on the northerly side of Rogers Street and the easterly side of Manuel F. Lewis Road and containing 59 spaces as shown on a plan on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Pleasant Street parking lot, located on Pleasant Street between Warren and Middle Streets, containing 34 spaces as shown on the plan by Whitman & Howard, dated August 1, 1966, the original of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Proctor Street Parking Lot , at #7 Proctor Street, Map 15, Lot 109, 18 parking spaces and 2 handicapped parking spaces for a total of 20 parking spaces. 
Rogers Street parking lot, at #65 Rogers Street, 74 parking spaces and four handicapped parking spaces for a total of 78 parking spaces, as shown on the plan submitted by the department of public works for the 65 Rogers Street parking lot dated July 29, 2013, to expire five years from the date of approval, and after the five years, subject to annual city council review and approval up to ten years. 
Town Landing parking lot (St. Peter's Square), by designating an additional handicap parking space (one) on the Commercial Street (westerly) side of that lot for a total of three handicapped parking spaces. 
Town Landing parking lot, situated on the easterly side of Commercial Street and containing 73 parking spaces as shown on Drawing No. 30003 revised and dated January 15, 1979, the original of which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1970, § 21-149; Ord. of 1-11-1983, § I; Ord. No. 30-1991, § 5, 9-3-1991; Ord. No. 2-1997, § I, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 24-1997, § I, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 50-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. 51-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. of 10-12-2010(04); Ord. of 8-23-2011(03); Ord. of 8-14-2012(04); Ord. of 8-27-2013(194); Ord. No. 2016-208, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 2017-110, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-153, 7-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-040, 3-27-2018)  
Sec. 22-289. - Parking meter zones—On streets. 
The following described streets or parts of streets in the city are hereby established as parking meter zones, with parking restrictions as specifically indicated for each such zone in accordance with section 22-211: 
Location 	Maximum Time 	Fee 
Boynton Way 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Dale Avenue 	½ hour 	$0.10 per ½ hour 
Dale Avenue 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Dale Avenue (certain meters) 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Dale Avenue, westerly side, from Central Grammar 
Apartments to the library 	2 hours 	
Duncan Street 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Harbor Loop 	10 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Main Street 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Manual F. Lewis Rd. 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Manual F. Lewis Road 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Manuel F. Lewis Street, six are free to vehicles with current city senior resident beach parking stickers effective Monday through Friday on a first-come/first-served basis. No signs are required. 		
Middle Street, two one-hour parking meters in front of the YMCA Building 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Middle Street, three one-hour parking meters, southerly side, starting 20 feet from its intersection with Hancock Street in an easterly direction 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Middle Street, southerly side, three two-hour parking, 
between Hancock and Center Streets 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Middle Street, between Hancock Street and Pleasant Street 	2 hours 	
Pleasant Street 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Pleasant Street, in front of #36—#38 two parking meters 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Porter Street 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Railroad Avenue, in front of #27—#33, ten metered angle parking spaces on the northeasterly side 		
Rogers Street, both sides from its intersection with 
Washington Street to Manuel F. Lewis Road 	10 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
School Street 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Warren Street 	½ hour 	$0.10 per ½ hour 
Warren Street 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Warren Street, meter #1—#8 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Washington Street 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
Washington Street, easterly side approximately 110 feet from its intersection with Middle St., in a northerly 
direction, three 30-minute meters 	½ hour 	
	Meters #12 and #13 		
	Adjacent meter to #13 		
Washington Street, two meters at 22—40 Washington Street 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Washington Street, two meters, easterly side, starting 144 feet from its intersection with Pine Street in a southerly direction. 	1 hour 	$0.25 per hour 
Washington Street, easterly side from Main to Middle Streets 		
	Meters W1—W4 	10 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
	Meters W5—W10 	2 hours 	$0.25 per hour 
 
(Code 1970, § 21-164; Ord. of 12-8-1981, § I; Ord. of 1-11-1983, § II; Ord. of 2-5-1983, § I; Ord. of 4-19-1983, § I; Ord. of 6-7-1983, § I; Ord. of 9-6-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-12-1986, § II; Ord. of 9-8-1987, § I; Ord. of 2-2-1988, § I; Ord. of 4-5-1988, § I; Ord. of 9-6-1988, § I; Ord. of 2-28-1989, § I; Ord. of 4-11-1989, § I; Ord. of 4-18-1989, § I; Ord. of 5-9-1989, § I; Ord. of 9-5-1989, § I; Ord. of 9-26-1989, § I; Ord. No. 2-1990, § I, 1-9-1990; Ord. No. 9-1990, § I, 3-20-1990; Ord. No. 12-1990, § I, 5-8-1990; Ord. No. 30-1991, § I, 9-3-1991; Ord. No. 36-1991, § I, 10-22-1991; Ord. No. 33-1992, § I, 11-10-1992; Ord. No. 10-1993, § I, 8-3-1993; Ord. No. 12-1993, § I, 9-7-1993; Ord. No. 52-1996, § I, 11-12-1996; Ord. No. 21-1997, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 44-1999, § I, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 101-2000, § I, 11-6-2000; Ord. of 12-2-2003(01), § I; Ord. of 12-16-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 9-28-2010(04))  
Sec. 22-290. - Same—Off-street parking areas. 
The following numbered parking spaces as shown on plans for each individual off-street parking area are hereby established as parking meter zones, with parking meter restrictions as specifically indicated for each zone in accordance with section 22-212: 
Duncan Street parking lot, two-hour, public metered use. 
Elm Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Federal Street to its intersection with Main Street. 
Fitz Hugh Lane lot, ten-hour meters. 
Harbor parking lot, as follows: 
(1)  Spaces one through 62, ten hours; 
(2)  Spaces 63 through 68, disabled/handicapped. 
Pleasant Street parking lot, from one to two hours. 
Rogers Street parking lot, spaces one through 115 which includes five handicapped parking spaces. 
(Code 1970, § 21-165; Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I; Ord. of 1-11-1983, § III; Ord. No. 37-1995, § I, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 3-1997, § I, 1-7-1997; Ord. No. 19-1997, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 20-1997, § I, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 54-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. of 10-28-2003(02), § I; Ord. of 5-11-2004(02), § I; Ord. of 5-27-2008(03); Ord. of 8-23-2011(03); Ord. of 8-14-2012(04); Ord. No. 2017-195, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 22-291. - Tow-away zones. 
(a)  The following is a nonexclusive list of locations which are designated as tow-away zones when signs are in place giving notice thereof in accordance with section 22-242: 
Addison Street, southerly side, beginning at its intersection with the easterly side of Leighton Court for a distance of ten feet in an easterly direction. 
Addison Street, southerly side, beginning at its intersection with the westerly side of Leighton Court for a distance of ten feet in a westerly direction. 
Allen Street, easterly side from Burnham's Field for a distance of 36 feet in a southerly direction. 
Allen Street, westerly side in the turn-around area abutting Burnham's Field. 
Allen Street, northerly side where it abuts Burnham's Field for its entire length. 
Alper Road, southerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with itself, for a distance of 58 feet in a westerly direction and at its intersection with itself for a distance of 75 feet in an easterly direction. 
Alper Road, westerly side, beginning at its intersection with Main Street for a distance of 160 feet in a northerly direction. 
Andrews Street, both sides, from its intersection with Lanes Cove Road, in a northeasterly direction, to its end, at a point 95 feet in a northeasterly direction from pole #511. 
Andrews Street, westerly side from its intersection with Langsford Street in a northerly direction to its intersection with Lanes Cove Road. 
Angle Street, both sides, from its intersection with Middle Street to its intersection with Western Avenue (with the exception of an area on the southerly side which allows ten-minute parking). 
Arlington Street, southwesterly side, for its entire length. 
Atlantic Road. 
Atlantic Road on the waterside from Moorland Road to Farrington Avenue. 
Bass Avenue, northerly side, from a point 300 feet distant from the easterly boundary of Brightside Avenue Extended, to the easterly boundary of Nautilus Road. 
Bass Avenue, southerly side, from a point 450 feet distant from the easterly boundary of Brightside Avenue Extended to the westerly boundary of Nautilus Road. 
Bass Rocks Road, from its intersection with Nautilus Road to its intersection with Atlantic Road, both sides from May 1 to September 15, annually. 
Beach Court, starting at #10, both sides, in a southwesterly direction to the beach for approximately 44 feet. 
Beach district: No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park at any time on any of the ways or parts of ways hereinafter described: 
(1)  Atlantic Street. 
(2)  Good Harbor Beach parking area, from 8:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Hough Avenue. 
(4)  Wingaersheek parking area, from 8:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Beach Road, both sides, from its intersection with Brightside Avenue to its intersection with Nautilus Road. 
Blynman Avenue, both sides from Lincoln Avenue to the high school yard from 7:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Mondays through Fridays during the school year. 
Bray Street, located off of Atlantic Street become "No Parking Either Side" for its entire length. 
Bray Street, from a point 50 feet north of Atlantic Street on the easterly side to its intersection with Concord Street and on the westerly side for its entire length. 
Bridgewater Street, southerly side, from the intersection of Leonard Street, east, to the bridge. 
Brightside Avenue, easterly or oddnumbered side, from its intersection with Bass Avenue, in a northerly direction, for its entire length. 
Brightside Avenue, westerly or evennumbered side, for distance of 140 feet from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a northerly direction. 
Brightside Avenue, westerly or evennumbered side, from a distance of 486 feet from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a northerly direction for a distance of 238 feet. 
Brightside Avenue, westerly or evennumbered side, from its intersection with Hinckley Road for a distance of 395 feet in a northerly direction. 
Cedarwood Road, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the period of May 15 to September 15 annually. 
Centennial Avenue, westerly side, from its intersection with Harvard Street for a distance of approximately 75 feet in the area of the existing "No Parking" zone in a northerly direction. 
Centennial Avenue, westerly side, in a northerly direction from Perkins Road to Leslie O. Johnson Road. 
Clarendon Street, even side of street, from Terrace Lane down to Horton Street. 
Clarendon Street, odd side of street, from Horton Street down to Terrace Lane. 
Columbia Street, southerly side, at its intersection with Church Street, in an easterly direction for a distance of 140 feet (left of the gate to house #7) and northerly side, for its entire length. 
Columbia Street, southerly side, at its intersection with School Street, in a westerly direction for a distance of 195 feet (to pole #3278 which would be to move the existing sign in an easterly direction 25 feet). 
Commercial Street, #17—#21, westerly side, in a southerly direction to its intersection with Beach Court and beach Court, both sides for its entire length. 
Commercial Street, northerly side, beginning at a point 570 feet from its intersection with Washington Street, for a distance of 185 feet in an easterly direction. 
Commercial Street, southerly side, from a point at its intersection with Fort Square, in an easterly, southerly, and westerly direction for a distance of 335 feet. 
Commercial Street, northerly side, beginning at St. Peter's Park in a southerly direction for a distance of 1,000 feet. 
Davis Street Extension, both sides starting at its intersection with Chapel Street for a distance of 31 feet in a northerly direction and Davis Street, both sides starting at its intersection with Chapel Street for a distance of 34 feet in a southerly direction and Chapel Street, both sides starting at its intersection with Davis Street and Davis Street Extension for a distance of 36 feet in an easterly direction as delineated between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on school days. 
Day Avenue, both sides beginning at its intersection with High Street for its entire length in a southerly direction. 
Decatur Street, both sides from its intersection with Brightside Avenue to its intersection with Beach Road. 
Dennison Street, on the southerly (water) side of for a distance of 200 feet in an easterly direction from its intersection with Washington Street (to pole #1412). 
Derby Street, northerly side, for a distance of 100 feet from its intersection with Maplewood Avenue, and beginning at a point across from its intersection with Myrtle Square to Washington Street. 
Duncan Street, westerly side beginning at its intersection with Main Street for a distance of 55 feet in a southerly direction. 
East Main Street, on water side, from the beginning of city property at the corner of the pumping station for a distance of approximately 86 feet in the direction of Rocky Neck to the loading door in front of number 233 East Main Street. 
East Main Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Bass Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with Sayward Street. 
East Main Street, westerly side, from its intersection with the northern end of Parker Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with Wall Street. 
Eastern Avenue, southerly side, from Hartz Street, westerly for a distance of 40 feet. 
Eastern Avenue, southerly side, in an easterly direction, from the intersection of Route 128 to the intersection of Williams Court. 
Eastern Point Road, from Rocky Neck Avenue to Eastern Point Boulevard. 
Eastern Point Road, westerly side, from its intersection with Locust Lane, in a northerly direction, to the northwest corner of Niles Beach. 
Eastern Point Road, westerly side, from the beginning of the white fence at Flat Wonson Cove (near pole #2651) to the end of the white fence (near pole #2648) approximately 220 feet in a southerly direction. 
Elm Street , easterly side from a point beginning 260 feet in a northerly direction from its intersection with Main Street for a distance of 135 feet. 
Fair Street, No Parking/Tow Away Zone, in front of #7 and #9, Fair Street. 
Fair Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Friend Street, to its intersection with Eastern Avenue. 
Farrington Avenue, both sides, from a point 100 yards easterly from St. Louis Avenue, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Farrington Avenue, north side from St. Louis Avenue to Eastern Point Boulevard on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
Fears Court, westerly side, beginning 86 feet from the intersection of Prospect Street, up Fears Court in a northerly direction for a distance of 57 feet, to the end of the Court, at utility pole #2273. 
Fenley Road, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the period of May 15 to September 15 annually. 
Ferry Street, 20 feet from its intersection with Washington Street, on both the northerly and southerly sides, to Sunset Hill Road. 
Forest Lane, for its entire length. 
Fort Square, both sides, from its intersection with Commercial Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 50 feet. 
Fort Square, beginning at a point from its intersection with Commercial Street, northerly side, for a distance of 57 feet. 
Fort Square, beginning at a point 41.5 feet from the southeast corner of the Fort Square Playground, southerly side of Fort Square, for a distance of 500 feet in an easterly direction. 
Fort Square , from the western boundary of #46 to the eastern boundary of number 46 to a point 22 feet southerly from the northern boundary of number 46, being the southerly side and the westerly side. 
Friend Street, northerly side, from Prospect Street to Bent Street. 
Goose Cove Reservoir at Fire Gate at end of Gee Avenue 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Granite Street , northerly side, from its intersection with Blynman Avenue, in an easterly direction, to the westerly intersection of Hampden Street. 
Grapevine Road, even numbered side, from its intersection with Eastern Point Road for a distance of 58 feet. 
Green Street, southwesterly side beginning at its intersection with Perkins Street in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 30 feet. 
Green Street, northeasterly side, beginning at its intersection with Perkins Street in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 45 feet. 
Green Street, southwesterly side, beginning at a point 163 feet from its intersection with Perkins in a northwesterly direction thence in a northwesterly direction for a distance of 90 feet. 
Green Street, northeasterly side, beginning at a point 113 feet from its intersection with Perkins Street for a distance of 100 feet. 
Harbor Road, at Bass Rocks, both sides, from Nautilus Road to Atlantic Road. 
Haven Terrace, extending the fire lane east side from utility pole #5610 north, to utility pole #2896. 
Haven Terrace, west side, north 170 feet from the intersection of Haven Terrace and Main Street along and in front of numbers 4, 6, 8 and 10 Haven Terrace to the corner. 
Haven Terrace, east side, proceeding north 60 feet from the intersection of Haven Terrace with Main Street to utility pole #5610. 
Haven Terrace, east side, proceeding north 25 feet from the north side to the entrance of the parking lot to the corner, and then east 25 feet to the Handicapped Ramp leading to unit #11. 
Haven Terrace, west side, north 170 feet from the intersection of Haven Terrace and Main Street along and in front of numbers 4, 6, 8 and 10 Haven Terrace to the corner. 
Herrick Court, both sides, beginning at its intersection with Main Street, north for a distance of 100 feet. 
Herrick Court on the concrete entrance to the public stairs, a five-foot wide pathway, from the railing on the westerly side in a northerly direction for a distance of 15 feet. 
Hesperus Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Shore Road, for a distance of 250 feet in an easterly direction. 
Hesperus Avenue, at Rafe's Chasm: 
(1)  Southerly side, beginning at a point 515 feet from its intersection with Ocean Highlands, in a westerly direction, for a distance of 400 feet to its intersection with Strawberry Cove. 
(2)  Northerly side, from a point opposite its intersection with Ocean Highlands, for a distance of 900 feet in a westerly direction, opposite Strawberry Cove. 
(3)  Southerly side, from its intersection with Ocean Highlands, in a westerly direction, for a distance of 420 feet. 
(4)  Tow-away zone from 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. each day; southerly side, beginning at a point 420 feet from its intersection with Ocean Highlands, in a westerly direction for a distance of 95 feet. 
Hickory Street, both sides, beginning at its intersection with High Street for its entire length in a southerly direction. Signs should state "No Parking May 1 to September 15 Tow Away Zone." 
Hickory Street, both sides, beginning at its intersection with Sawyer Avenue to the end of the street. 
High Popples Road, from its intersection at Atlantic Road in a westerly direction for a distance of 225 feet. 
High Rock Terrace, northerly side from Utility Pole #52 to intersection with Twilight Avenue (previously referred to as Long Beach Road) from May 15 to September 15 of each year and that signs be erected in accordance with section 22-242, parking prohibitions; towing; immobilization; signs. 
High Street, both sides, from its intersection with Hickory Street in a southerly direction to the point at which it intersects with Tucker Street. 
High Street Place, both sides, from its intersection with High Street, beginning at its intersection with High Street for its entire length in a southerly direction. 
Holly Street, northerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Washington Street for a distance of 200 feet in an easterly direction. 
Holly Street, both sides from its intersection with Dennison Street in a southerly direction to pole #1095. 
Hovey/Summer , street sign in front of #53 Summer Street back to the corner of Riggs Street. 
Kondelin Road, both sides from its intersection with Magnolia Avenue for its entire length from 10:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. 
Langsford Street, both sides, from its intersection with Andrews Street for a distance of 825 feet in an easterly direction. 
Ledge Road , on the northerly side in an easterly direction from its intersection with East Main Street for a distance of 296 feet. 
Leighton Court (off Addison Street), both sides. 
Leonard Street, westerly side from its intersection with Nashua Avenue opposite the Village Church north to its intersection with Dennis Court and from a distance of 100 feet from Dennis Court to its intersection with Bridgewater Street. 
Lewis Court, both sides for its entire length. 
Lexington Avenue, both sides from its intersections with Cliff Avenue and Oakes Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with Shore Road. 
Lexington Avenue , #44 (at the entrance to the building). 
Lincoln Avenue, from its intersection with Blynman Avenue for a distance of 385 feet (Pole #394) on the westerly side. 
Locust Grove Cemetery, entire cemetery. 
Loma Drive, both sides, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Long Wharf (off Atlantic Street), both sides and the entire area of the Causeway, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays, from May 15 to September 15 annually. 
Magnolia Avenue, southerly side, from its intersection with Western Avenue to its intersection with Long Hill Road. 
Magnolia Avenue, from under the train bridge to its intersection with Essex Avenue, both sides. 
Magnolia Avenue on both sides for a distance of 2,500 feet from the MBTA Train Station Bridge in a southeasterly direction towards Magnolia. 
Main Street, northerly side, from a point at its intersection with Center Street in an easterly direction for a distance of 105 feet. 
Main Street , northerly side from a point beginning 77 feet from its intersection with Scott Street, in a westerly direction for a distance of 30 feet. 
Mansfield Street, both sides from its intersection with Western Avenue to the end of the private section at numbers 31 and 34. 
Maplewood Avenue, easterly side, 75 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a northerly direction for a distance of approximately 100 feet in a northerly direction. 
Maplewood Avenue , easterly side, from its intersection with Gloucester Avenue, in a southerly direction, for a distance of 100 feet (pole #1371). 
Marina Drive, southwest side (even numbers) from corner of Puerto Drive and Marina Drive to property line between numbers 10 and 12; and northeast side (odd numbers) from Thatcher Road to Eastern Avenue, Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Middle Street (Legion Plaza), beginning at a point on Middle Street at the intersection with the easterly side of the way that goes in back of the Legion Building for a distance of 56 feet as the curve goes, then easterly for a distance of ten feet. 
Middle Street (Legion Plaza), beginning at its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of ten feet. 
Mt. Pleasant Avenue , southerly side, beginning at a point 168 feet from its intersection with Gerring Road for a distance of 151 feet, in a westerly direction. 
Naomi Drive. 
Nautilus Road, both sides, for its entire length. 
Parker Street, westerly side, beginning at the entrance to the State Fish Pier, in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Parker Street, easterly side beginning at a point 99 feet from its intersection with Wall Street in a northerly thence northeasterly direction for a distance of 67 feet. (This being the area in front of the sewer pumping station.) 
Perkins Street, 40 feet from storm drain (across from fire hydrant) in a southerly direction. 
Perkins Street, northerly side beginning at its intersection with Staten Street for a distance of 120 feet in an easterly direction. 
Perkins Street, southerly side beginning at its intersection with Staten Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with Mount Vernon Street. 
Perkins Street, westerly side beginning at its intersection Staten Street in a northerly direction of its intersection with Perkins Peak. 
Pleasant Street , westerly side beginning at a point 130 feet from its intersection with Warren Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 25 feet. 
Pond Road , northerly side from its intersection with Eastern Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 250 feet. 
Proctor Street, southerly side, from a point 20 feet from its intersection with School Street for a distance of 40 feet in a westerly direction (just before driveway at rear of station). 
Prospect Street, northerly side, beginning 80 feet from its intersection with Allen Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 32 feet. 
Prospect Street, northerly side, beginning at its intersection with Railroad Avenue for a distance of 115 feet in a westerly direction ending at the parking lot entrance behind #2-6 Railroad Avenue. 
Prospect Square, southerly side (right side) beginning at a point 266 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 54 feet. 
Prospect Square, southerly side (right side) beginning at a point 378 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 60 feet in an easterly direction. 
Prospect Street (vicinity of city armory), southerly side, from its intersection with Chestnut Street to its intersection with Prospect Square. 
Prospect Square, westerly side (right side) beginning at a point 198 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Prospect Square, westerly side (right side) beginning at a point 228 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet. 
Prospect Street, southerly side, beginning 55 feet from its intersection with Marchant Street for a distance of 37 feet in an Easterly direction. 
Prospect Street, westerly side, beginning at its intersection with Spring Street, in a northerly direction for a distance of 200 feet. 
Public landings, a 12-foot lane at the center of each landing recognized by the public landings advisory committee. 
Puerto Drive, both sides, daily from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Quarry Street (Bay View), both sides, beginning at a point from the private gate for a distance of 200 feet from such gate in a westerly direction. 
Railroad Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Washington Street, for a distance of 66 feet in an easterly direction. 
River Road, easterly side from Bridgewater Street to and including number 29 River Road. 
River Road, northerly side from a point opposite the store of Chard and Wilkerson, westerly to Leonard Street, except for the space in front of properties numbered 32, 34, and 36 River Road. 
Riverside Avenue, westerly end, southerly side from a point where the curb begins for 45 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rio Drive, both sides, daily from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, between signs in the area of Bickford Way. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, northerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with East Main Street for a distance of 35 feet in a westerly direction. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, southerly side in an easterly direction from its intersection with Bickford's Way to its intersection with East Main Street. 
Rocky Neck Avenue, southerly side, beginning at a point from its intersection with Eastern Point Road for a distance of 35 feet in a westerly direction. 
Rocky Pasture Road, westerly side, from its intersection with Mount Pleasant Avenue for a distance of 350 feet, except during funeral services. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, the existing three-space CATA bus stop in front of the parcels known as I-4 C-2 beginning at a point 26 feet from its entrance to the Gloucester House Restaurant for a distance of 118 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rogers Street, southerly side, from a point 80 feet from its intersection with Duncan Street, for a distance of 20 feet in an easterly direction. 
Rowe Square, easterly (even numbered) side, from its intersection with Main Street in a southerly direction for its entire length. 
Salt Island Road, a 27-foot fire lane/tow away zone to be established on the northern end of Salt Island Road. 
Salt Island Road, beginning after #5, from Witham Street to Barberry Way both sides, for a distance of approximately 600 feet or for the entire public portion of the roadway. Salt Island Road #1 through #5 are excluded. 
Salt Island Road, both sides, from Witham Street to Barberry Way. 
Salt Island Road, both sides, on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, excepting on the northerly side from a point 15 feet from the corner of such road and Witham Street, easterly a distance of approximately 35 feet to a boulder extending into Salt Island Road. 
Sargent Street, westerly side, beginning at its intersection with Cedar Street (pole #5395) and in a southerly direction to the intersection with Shepherd Street (pole #3440) and a second sign indicating "No Parking here to corner" is placed on pole #3440. 
Sawyer Avenue, from its intersection with Hickory Street, both sides for its entire length in a westerly direction. Signs should state "No Parking May 1 to September 15 Tow Away Zone." 
School Street, westerly side, from a point 95 feet from its intersection with Middle Street for a distance of 40 feet in a northerly direction (just before driveway to Trinity Congregational Church). 
Seaside Cemetery, entire cemetery. 
Shore Road, both sides, at its intersection with Fuller Street for a distance of 530 feet in a northerly direction. 
Shore Road, both sides, beginning at a point from the southerly end of the Town Landing Parking Lot for a distance of 142 feet in a southerly direction. 
Souther Road, both sides starting 20 feet from its intersection with Atlantic Road in a southerly direction to a point 20 feet south of its intersection with Tragibigzanda Road. 
Spring Street, southerly side, from it intersection with Prospect Street in a westerly direction for a distance of 40 feet. 
St. Peter's Park, the lane located at the easterly side of the Seafarers' International Building. 
Stanwood Terrace, westerly side, from approximately 55 feet from the beginning of Stanwood Terrace for a distance of 72 feet in a northerly direction. 
Staten Street, both sides, beginning from a point 197 feet north of its intersection with Taylor Street for a distance of 95 feet. 
Staten Street, both sides for its entire length. 
Steven's Lane, both sides for its entire length. 
Stewart Avenue, for its entire length on both sides. 
Sumac Lane, within 20 feet of the intersection. 
Summer Street, easterly side, between Beacon and Foster Streets. 
Summer Street, westerly side from Granite Street in a northerly direction to Orchard Street. 
Thatcher Road, easterly side, between numbers 15 and 33. 
Thatcher Road, both sides from Witham Street to Long Beach Road. 
Thatcher Road, both sides, from its intersection with Witham Street to its intersection with Bass Avenue with the following exception: At a point 65 feet south of its intersection with Marina Drive in a northerly direction for a distance of 800 feet. 
Tucker Street, easterly side. 
Tucker Street, western side, from its intersection with Washington Street, beginning at its intersection with Washington Street for its entire length in a southerly direction to the point at which it intersects with High Street. 
Warner Street, easterly side from its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 78 feet. 
Washington Square, easterly side for a distance of 90 feet from the point where Washington Square turns 90 degrees in a northerly direction. 
Washington Square, southerly side, beginning at a point in line with the westerly corner of #18 (as defined on Assessor's Map 6 Lot 46) to its intersection with Washington Street. 
Washington Street, both sides, from Langsford Street to the Rockport Line. 
Washington Street, Folly Cove Beach, between Poles #356 and 357, eight parking spaces. 
Webster Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Eastern Avenue, in a northerly direction for a distance of 650 feet. 
Washington Street, easterly side at a point 90 feet from its intersection with Middle Street for a distance of 20 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, easterly side, beginning at its intersection with Hillside Court in a northerly direction to a point 30 feet north of its intersection with Linwood Place. 
Washington Street, easterly side, beginning at a point 430 feet north of its intersection with Linwood Place in a northerly direction to its intersection with Young Avenue. 
Washington Street, on the westerly side from the northerly property line of #152, in a southerly direction to the railroad tracks. 
Washington Street, westerly side, from a point 200 feet from its intersection with Mansfield Street for a distance of 200 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side beginning at the southerly end of Plum Cove Beach to its intersection with Plum Court. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point opposite its intersection with Young Avenue for a distance of 652 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 652 feet from its intersection with Young Avenue for a distance of 508 feet in a southerly direction, except for church service attendance. 
Washington Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 1,160 feet opposite its intersection with Young Avenue for a distance of 182 feet in a southerly direction. 
Washington Street , southerly side at the intersection of Tucker Street for a distance of 135 feet, in a westerly direction. 
Washington Street , southerly side from a point beginning 260 feet from Tucker Street for a distance of 100 feet. 
Washington Street , southerly side at the intersection of Tucker Street for a distance of 135 feet in a westerly direction for a distance of 125 feet, May 1-September 15. 
Wells Street, from #5 to its intersection with Beacon Street on both sides. 
Western Avenue, at the nubbin in front of the Fisherman's Memorial. 
Western Avenue, southerly side (water side) beginning 33 feet from the crosswalk at the public landing in an easterly direction and continuing for a distance of 114 feet in an easterly direction. 
Wheeler Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Riverside Road in a southerly direction for a distance of 525 feet. 
Williams Court, the northerly side for 73 feet in an easterly direction to its intersection with Hartz Street. 
Williams Court, southerly side, beginning at the east corner of Marion Way and in an easterly direction for 73 feet to its intersection with Hartz Street. 
Willow Street, on the easterly side, from Shepherd Street to the railroad tracks. 
Witham Street, westerly side, from its intersection with Thatcher Road to the leased parking area. 
Witham Street, easterly side, from its intersection with Thatcher Road in a southerly direction to its intersection with Salt Island Road. 
Witham Street, westerly side, beginning at a point 103 feet from its intersection with Thatcher Road for a distance of 300 feet from 8:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. from May 1 to September 15 of each year. 
Witham Street, westerly side, from Starknaught Heights to Thatcher Road. 
Witham Street and Cliff Road, at the intersection, 640 feet on Cliff Road in an easterly direction where the road intersects with Brier Neck Road on the northerly and southerly side. 
Whittemore Street, northerly side, from its intersection with Washington Street in a westerly direction for a distance of approximately 50 feet. 
Woodbury Street, both sides, beginning at its intersection with Washington Street and Mason Square for a distance of 60 feet in a southerly direction. 
Young Avenue, both sides, from its intersection with Washington Street, beginning at its intersection with Washington Street for its entire length in a southerly direction to the point at which it intersects with High Street. 
(b)  When signs are in place giving notice thereof, the following streets are designated tow-away zones for purposes of night time street sweeping of the downtown area: 
(1)  Main Street; 
(2)  Middle Street; 
(3)  Rogers Street; 
(4)  Harbor Loop; 
(5)  Manuel F. Lewis Street; 
(6)  Duncan Street; 
(7)  Hancock Street; 
(8)  Porter Street; 
(9)  Center Street; 
(10)  Short Street; 
(11)  Pleasant Street; 
(12)  Flannagan Square; 
(13)  Dale Avenue; 
(14)  Warren Street; 
(15)  Prospect Street; 
(16)  Railroad Avenue; 
(17)  Western Avenue from its intersection with Washington Street to its intersection with Centennial Avenue; 
(18)  Maplewood Avenue; and 
(19)  Washington Street from its intersection with Gloucester Avenue to its intersection with Main Street. 
(c)  During annual spring street sweeping operations conducted by the department of public works, when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any streets or parts thereof within the posted ward and precinct, between the hours posted on such signs and on the days posted on such signs, and as such, those streets are designated as tow-away zone during those times. 
(Code 1970, § 21-196; Ord. of 10-25-1977, § 1; Ord. of 5-16-1978, § 1; Ord. of 5-8-1979, § I; Ord. of 6-5-1979, § I; Ord. of 7-10-1979, § I; Ord. of 5-18-1980, § I; ord. of 7-1-1980, § I; Ord. of 10-7-1980, § I; Ord. of 12-16-1980, § I; Ord. of 8-18-1981, § I; Ord. of 10-13-1981, § I; Ord. of 12-8-1981, § I; Ord. of 2-23-1982, § I; Ord. of 3-23-1982, § I; Ord. of 4-13-1982, § I; Ord. of 5-18-1982, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-1982, § I; Ord. of 6-15-1982, § I; Ord. of 9-7-1982, § I; Ord. of 11-30-1982, § I; Ord. of 2-15-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-2-1983, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1983, § I; Ord. of 11-29-1983, § I; Ord. of 12-20-1983, § I; Ord. of 2-14-1984, § I; Ord. of 8-13-1985, § I; Ord. of 10-22-1985, § I; Ord. of 2-4-1986, § I; Ord. of 3-4-1986, § I; Ord. of 1-6-1987, § I; Ord. of 6-9-1987, § I; Ord. of 1-19-1988, § II; Ord. of 1-19-1988, § I; Ord. of 2-2-1988, § I; ord. of 4-5-1988, § I; Ord. of 6-7-1988, § I; Ord. of 8-9-1988, § I; Ord. of 8-16-1988, § I; Ord. of 11-29-1988, § I; Ord. of 1-10-1989, § I; Ord. No. 26-1990, § I, 11-20-1990; Ord. No. 10-1992, § I, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 13-1992, § I, 5-5-1992; Ord. No. 3-1994, § I, 4-5-1994; Ord. No. 9-1994, § I, 7-26-1994; Ord. No. 19-1994, § I, 10-4-1994; Ord. No. 9-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 23-1995, § II, 3-21-1995; Ord. No. 39-1995, § II, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 2-1996, § I, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 29-1996, § I, 7-23-1996; Ord. No. 36-1996, § I, 9-3-1996; Ord. No. 46-1996, § I, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 38-1997, § I, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 52-1997, § I, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 58-1997, § I, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 64-1997, § I, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 66-1997, § I, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 69-1997, § I, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 70-1997, § I, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 73-1997, § I, 12-9-1997; Ord. No. 106-1998, § I, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 108-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 110-1998, § I, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 119-1998, § I, 9-1-1998; Ord. No. 126-1998, § I, 9-29-1998; Ord. No. 131-1998, § I, 11-10-1998; Ord. No. 136-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 138-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 140-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 143-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 4-1999, § I, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 11-1999, § I, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 12-1999, § I, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 17-1999, § I, 8-10-1999; Ord. No. 27-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 34-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 35-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. 39-1999, § I, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 42-1999, § I, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 58-2000, § I, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 65-2000, § I, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 69-2000, § I, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 81-2000, § I, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 92-2000, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 104-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 106-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 108-2000, § I, 11-28-2000; Ord. No. 114-2000, § I, 12-12-2000; Ord. of 01-16-2001(01), § I; Ord. of 3-13-2001(04), § I; Ord. of 5-8-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 9-18-2001(01), (02) § I; Ord. of 5-28-2002(03), (04) § I; Ord. of 6-25-2002(05), § I; Ord. of 9-24-2002(02), (05), (10) § I; Ord. of 11-12-2002(06), § I; Ord. of 1-21-2003(05), § I; Ord. of 4-15-2003(03), § I; Ord. of 4-29-2003(02), § II;; Ord. of 4-29-2003(03); Ord. of 5-25-2004(03), § I; Ord. of 8-24-2004(01), (03), (06), (07) § I; Ord. of 2-1-2005(04), § I; Ord. of 5-24-2005(02), § I; Ord. of 12-13-2005(01), (05), § I; Ord. of 1-24-2006(01), § I; Ord. of 2-21-2006(04), § I; Ord. of 5-30-2006(01); Ord. of 1-23-2007; Ord. of 2-6-2007(06); Ord. of 3-20-2007(04); Ord. of 4-7-2007(01); Ord. of 11-13-2007(02); Ord. of 2-12-2008; Ord. of 7-23-2008; Ord. of 9-30-2008; Ord. of 1-13-2009(04); Ord. of 5-25-2010(01), (02); Ord. of 7-6-2010(02)—(06); Ord. of 7-20-2010; Ord. of 9-28-2010(02); Ord. of 10-12-2010(04); Ord. of 10-12-2010(05); Ord. of 11-9-2010(02); Ord. of 11-9-2010(03); Ord. of 11-9-2010(06); Ord. of 11-9-2010(07); Ord. of 4-12-2011(02); Ord. of 7-26-2011(02); Ord. of 9-13-2011(01); Ord. of 10-11-2011(05); Ord. of 11-29-2011(03); Ord. of 11-27-2012(02); Ord. of 11-27-2012(03); Ord. No. 2014-012, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 2014-143, 4-22-2014; Ord. No. 2014-230, 6-24-2014; Ord. No. 2014-262, 8-12-2014; Ord. No. 2014-282, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 2014-342, 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-041, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 2015-080, 5-12-2015; Ord. NO. 2015-176, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 2015-198, 9-22-2015; Ord. No. 2016-093, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2016-094, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 2016-097, 6-7-2016; Ord. No. 2016-152, 7-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-153, 7-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-198, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 2017-159, 7-25-2017; Ord. No. 2017-191, 10-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-201, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-041, 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2018-156, 8-28-2018)  
Sec. 22-292. - Fire lanes. 
The following fire lanes are hereby established: 
Andrews Street, both sides, from its intersection with Lanes Cove Road, in a northeasterly direction, to its end, at a point 95 feet in a northeasterly direction from pole #511. 
Beach Court, starting at #10, both sides, in a southwesterly direction to the beach for approximately 44 feet. 
Beachland Avenue, starting on the northeasterly side from its intersection with Old Rockport Road to the Rockport Line for a distance of 434 feet. 
Commercial Street , easterly side, from its southerly intersection with Fort Square beginning at the southeasterly corner (pole #3707) to a point 100 feet in a southerly direction (across from pole #5166). 
Cove Ledge Lane. 
Decatur Street, both sides from its intersection with Brightside Avenue to its intersection with Beach Road. 
Decatur Street, both sides from its intersection with Brightside Avenue in a westerly direction for a distance of 400 feet. 
Fenley Road, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. during the period of May 15 to September 15 annually. 
Folly Point Road, both sides, for a distance of 630 feet from its intersection with Washington Street. 
Forest Lane, for its entire length. 
Franklin Square, westerly side beginning at its intersection with Prospect Street for a distance of 170 feet in a southerly direction. 
Franklin Square, northerly side, beginning at its intersection with Pleasant Street to the northwest corner (inside corner) of Franklin Square. 
Franklin Square, beginning at its intersection with Pleasant Street on the southerly side for a distance of 180 feet. 
Franklin Square, easterly side, beginning at a point 73 feet from its intersection with Prospect Street, in a southerly direction, to the northwest corner (inside corner) of Franklin Square. 
Haven Terrace, west side, north 170 feet from the intersection of Haven Terrace and Main Street along and in front of [numbers] 4, 6, 8, and 10 Haven Terrace to the corner. 
Haven Terrace, east side, proceeding north 60 feet from the intersection of Haven Terrace with Main Street to utility pole #5610. 
Haven Terrace, east side, proceeding north 25 feet from the north side to the entrance of the parking lot to the corner, and then east 25 feet to the Handicapped Ramp leading to Unit #11. 
Herrick Court , both sides, from its intersection with Main Street in a northerly direction for a distance of 100 feet (to the bottom of the stairs). 
Horton Street, both sides from Lot #21 in a southwesterly direction to the dead end gate at the entrance to Rule Industries. 
Ledge Road , on the northerly side in an easterly direction from its intersection with East Main Street for a distance of 296 feet. 
Lewis Court, both sides for its entire length. 
Mansfield Street, both sides from its intersection with Western Avenue to the end of the private section at #31 and #34. 
Mason Square, between Woodbury Street and Washington Street. 
Munsey Lane, for its entire length. 
Parker Court, for its entire length. 
Rackliffe Street, easterly side for 40 feet in a northerly direction from the intersection with Fremont and 139 feet in a southerly direction from its intersection with Wonson Street. 
Rackliffe Street, westerly side for 144 feet in a northerly direction from its intersection with Fremont Street. 
Rackliffe Street, westerly side from its intersection with Fremont Street in a southerly direction for its entire length to dead end. 
Rocky Neck Avenue extension and Highland Place . 
Sadler Street, on Sadler Street Extension, southerly side, from Webster Street for a distance of 212 feet. 
Shapley Road, northerly side from its intersection with Decatur Street for its entire length. 
Souther Road, both sides, beginning at a point 20 feet south of Tragibigzanda to its intersection with Moorland Road. 
Squam Rock Road, both sides, parking prohibited. 
Stanwood Terrace, westerly side, from approximately 55 feet from the beginning of Stanwood Terrace for a distance of 72 feet in a northerly direction. 
Stewart Avenue, for its entire length on both sides. 
Wall Street, northerly side beginning at a point 140 feet from its intersection with Parker Street for a distance of 60 feet in an easterly direction. 
Wiley Street, easterly side, entire length. 
Wiley Street, westerly side 88 feet from its intersection with Fremont Street. 
(Ord. of 7-10-1979, § I; Ord. of 5-19-1981, § I; Ord. of 12-17-1985, § I; Ord. of 4-1-1986, § I; Ord. of 12-22-1987, § II; Ord. of 8-9-1988, § I; Ord. of 9-6-1988, § I; Ord. of 9-13-1988, § I; Ord. of 12-19-1989, § I; Ord. No. 13-1991, § I, 4-16-1991; Ord. No. 10-1992, § I, 3-24-1992; Ord. of 5-3-1994, § I; Ord. No. 9-1995, § II, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 43-1995, § I, 10-30-1995; Ord. No. 39-1996, § I, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 40-1996, § I, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 50-1996, § I, 10-29-1996; Ord. No. 5-1997, § I, 1-14-1997; Ord. No. 51-1997, § I, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 59-1997, § I, 8-5-1997; Ord. No. 74-1997, § I, 12-9-1997; Ord. No. 125-1998, § I, 9-29-1998; Ord. No. 141-1999, § I, 1-19-1999; Ord. No. 11-1999, § I, 8-20-1999; Ord. No. 59-2000, § I, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 91-2000, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. of 9-18-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 9-24-2002(09), § I; Ord. of 6-21-2005, §I; Ord. of 10-11-2005(01), § I; Ord. of 1-24-2006(01), § I; Ord. of 2-6-2007(04); Ord. of 3-30-2010(04); Ord. of 10-12-2010(04); Ord. No. 2015-080, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. 2017-196, 10-10-2017) 
Cross reference— Leaving vehicle unattended on private ways so as to block access for fire apparatus, § 22-152. 
Editor's note— Provisions regarding the designation of fire lanes, enacted by ordinances amending § 22-152, have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as § 22-292.  
Sec. 22-293. - No parking during street sweeping operations. 
During annual street sweeping operations conducted by the department of public works, when signs are in place giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any streets or parts thereof within the posted ward and precinct, between the hours posted on such signs and on the days posted on such signs. 
(Ord. of 11-28-2006(04))  
Sec. 22-294. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Bicycle means any wheeled vehicle propelled by pedals primarily by human power and operated by one or more persons. 
Bike lane means a lane on a street restricted to bicycles and so designated by means of pavement coloring, lines or other appropriate markings including contra-flow bike lanes. 
Bike route means a roadway shared by bicycles and other modes of transportation which may be designated by signs and/or pavement markings. 
Bicycle sharrow means a pavement marking, established by the manual of uniform traffic control devices that indicates an appropriate location for bicycles to travel on a street. 
Cyclist means a person operating bicycle. 
Dual-flow street means a street or bicycle lane that allows bicycles to travel in the opposite direction of one-way motor vehicle traffic. 
(b)  Obedience to traffic control devices. Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a public safety official. 
(c)  Riding on sidewalks. According to M.G.L., c. 85, § 11B: 
(1)  Bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks when necessary in the interest of safety. 
(2)  Pedestrians have the right-of-way on all sidewalks. The operator of a bicycle shall yield to pedestrians far enough in advance to allow the pedestrian time to react. 
(3)  The operator of a bicycle shall give an audible warning before passing a pedestrian far enough in advance to allow the pedestrian time to react. 
(d)  Business district where sidewalk bicycling is banned. No person older than age 15 and younger than 70 shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk along the following streets: 
Street 	Side 	From 	To 
Main Street 	Both 	220 Main Street 	One Washington Street 
Harbor Walk 	N/A 	2 Commercial Street 	25 Rogers Street 
Harbor Walk 	N/A 	39 Rogers Street 	65R Rogers Street 
Manuel F. Lewis Street 	East 	585 Rogers Street 	255 Main Street 
 
(e)  Bicycle lanes and dual-flow streets. 
(1)  The director of public works shall establish and maintain bicycle lanes upon the following streets: 
Schedule 22-294(e)(1): Location of bicycle lanes 
Street 	Side 	From 	To 
Western Avenue 	South 	97 Western Avenue 	31 Western Avenue 
Rogers Street 	South 	9 Rogers Street 	127 Rogers Street 
Main Street 	South 	6 Rowe Square 	5 East Main Street 
Main Street 	North 	5 East Main Street 	180 Main Street 
 
(2)  The director of public works shall post and mark the following dual-flow streets: 
Schedule 22-294 (e)(2): Locations of dual-flow streets 
Street 	Side 	From 	To 
Nautilus Road 	East 	7 Bass Rocks Road 	11 Nautilus Road 
Bass Avenue 	North 	11 Nautilus Road 	105 Bass Avenue 
 
(3)  The director of public works may post bicycle route signs and install bicycle sharrows. 
(f)  Bicycle parking on the public way. 
(1)  Bicycles may be parked against a street sign pole, or on a bicycle rack or other facility or structure specifically intended for that purpose. Under no circumstances shall a bicycle obstruct the pedestrian path of travel or disability access ramps. 
(2)  Bicycles are not permitted to be parked against: fire hydrants, hand railings, benches, trees and trash receptacles. 
(3)  Abandoned bicycles may be removed and disposed from any public way or property by the city public works department for public safety and maintenance purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-28-2013(111); Ord. No. 2014-136, 4-22-2014, eff. 5-26-2014)  
Chapter 23 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Authority and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Under the authority of the M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 1—29 et seq., the city hereby establishes the city impervious fee or stormwater fee to pay the costs of the city's stormwater management and combined sewer overflow abatement program. 
(b)  The city through the department of public works is authorized to assess and collect service fees from all persons owning land that benefit from the city's stormwater management and combined sewer overflow (CSO) abatement programs. 
(c)  The fee will fund services provided through the department of public works for stormwater management and CSO abatement programs. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(03), § 23-1; Ord. of 4-12-2011(04))  
Sec. 23-2. - Establishment of stormwater fund. 
(a)  The city shall establish a dedicated stormwater fund and an accounting system to manage all funds collected for stormwater management. All revenues and receipts shall be placed in the stormwater fund, which shall be separate from all other funds, and only the expenses of stormwater management programs, services, systems, facilities, and CSO abatement of the city shall be paid by the fund. 
(b)  The department may accept for deposit into the stormwater fund loans, state, federal and private grants, and allocations of funds from the city's general fund or special purpose funds. 
(c)  Stormwater service fees will be set at a rate that covers the costs necessary to carry out the stormwater management programs, services, systems and facilities approved by the city as necessary to properly manage stormwater runoff within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(03), § 23-2)  
Sec. 23-3. - Service area. 
The service area of the utility will include all areas within the municipal boundaries of the City of Gloucester. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(03), § 23-3)  
Sec. 23-4. - Stormwater utility service fees. 
(a)  The city may determine and modify from time to time the service fees of the utility in order that the funds generated correspond to the cost of stormwater management programs, services, systems, and facilities of the city. In general, funding for the stormwater utility shall be equitably derived based on methods that establish a link between the fees and degree of impact imposed on the stormwater management system and facilities. 
(b)  Rate studies may be conducted periodically by the utility to determine all changes and future updates to the stormwater utility use fee schedule. 
(c)  The director of public works shall promulgated regulations implementing the stormwater utility use fee. The fees, rates or other charges shall be referred to the mayor and the city council for approval as required by section 7-16 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(03), § 23-4)  
Sec. 23-5. - Right to enforcement and violations. 
(a)  The director of the department of public works, or his authorized designee is the enforcement authority who shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city has be right to utilize the lien processes to enforce provisions of this article and for non-payment of stormwater fees. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(03), § 23-5)  
Sec. 23-6. - Applicability. 
This article and the fees, obligations and requirements identified herein shall apply to all use of and benefit from the city's stormwater management systems and facilities, occurring on or after the enactment of this article. All persons owning land within the municipality that benefit from the services provided by the utility shall be subject to service fees for their use of the stormwater management systems and facilities occurring on or after the enactment of this article. Property that is vacant and unimproved with no impervious surface will be exempt from the fee. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2009(03), § 23-6; Ord. of 4-12-2011(04)) 
State Law reference— M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 1—29 et seq.  
Secs. 23-7—23-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; discharge of water or other liquid on sidewalks, § 21-10. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sewers, M.C.L.A. c. 40, §§ 5, 6; sewers generally, M.G.L. c. 83. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-15. - Assessments. 
(a)  Every person owning land abutting upon any way in which a main or common sewer has been laid out, and who enters or has entered his particular drain into such main drain or common sewer, or who by more remote means receives benefit thereby for draining his land or buildings, shall be assessed under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 83, § 14. The director of public works or the designee or designees of the director shall have the power as set forth in M.G.L. c. 83, § 15, when ascertaining assessments as a betterment for construction, to apply a rate based upon a uniform unit method. A uniform unit method shall be based upon sewerage construction costs divided among the total number of existing and potential sewer units to be served after having proportioned the cost of special and general benefit facilities as provided in section 23-24(a). 
(b)  Assessments under this section shall be ascertained, assessed, certified and committed to the city treasurer by the director of public works or the designee or designees of the director. Such assessments may be made for all sewers, lateral sewers, pump stations and appurtenant works. Sewer betterment assessments and any sewer betterment policies which are adopted by the city council under M.G.L. c. 80 and M.G.L. c. 83 for particular public sewer construction projects shall follow the procedures set out in section 23-24. 
(Code 1970, § 18-1; Ord. No. 9-1992, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 42-1997, 6-10-1997; Ord. No. 20-1999, § I, 8-10-1999)  
Sec. 23-16. - Laying out and payment for particular sewers connecting with common sewer or main drain and sewer privilege fee. 
(a)  Whenever, in the course of a sewer extension installed by the city, any land is connected with a common sewer or main drain laid out by the department of public works in a public or private way, the department shall, at the expense of the city, lay and maintain the particular sewer providing such connection from the common sewer or main drain to the boundary of the way, except in certain cases where a pump is necessary to tie in the property. If, at the time of construction by the city of a sewer extension, it is determined that a grinder pump or other such device will be required, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 83, § 15, in order to connect any existing building to the sewer, the city shall install and maintain the pump, force main and appurtenances upon obtaining the necessary private property construction and maintenance easements from the property owner. If the city sewer construction involves septic tank effluent pump (STEP) sewers, the department shall, at the expense of the city, install and maintain the STEP sewer components on the private properties which have habitable dwellings. The property owner may elect to install and/or maintain the grinder pump or other pump and the STEP components by means of a private contractor as provided in the city sewer regulations. The city will not provide pumping systems or STEP components for properties that are vacant or have structures which are uninhabitable at the time of the construction by the city of the sewer extension. Installation and maintenance of any pumps, tanks, and appurtenances as may be necessary for tying in residential, commercial or industrial properties developed subsequent to the construction by the city of a sewer extension will be the responsibility, of the private property owner. 
(b)  The owner of any land benefited by the layout of a particular sewer from the common sewer to the boundary of the way shall pay to the city for the permanent privilege of using the same, such reasonable amount as the director of public works may determine, under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 83, § 24, and the amount so determined shall be assessed, certified and committed to the city treasurer by the director of public works. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) and (b) of this and section 23-15, the owners of a subdivision which pursuant to the regulations of the planning board in subdivision control rules section 4.4.2(c) or 4.4.1(b) who have been required to construct a sanitary sewer, shall not be assessed a sewer betterment fee but shall be assessed a sewer privilege fee on a per lot basis in lieu of a betterment. Such fee shall be assessed at the time of the subdivision dry sewer is connected to the main sewer and may be subject to apportionment. In addition, regardless of whether or not a subdivision is involved, any applicant for a privately constructed sewer extension permit shall at, the time such sewer extension is completed, pay such privilege fee as duly adopted by the city council. The fee shall be determined by the director or designees and shall not exceed 40 percent of betterment for the most recent city sewer project. 
(Code 1970, § 18-2; Ord. No. 9-1992, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 28-1992, § 3, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 42-1997, 6-10-1997; Ord. No. 20-1999, § 1, 8-10-1999; Ord. of 12-7-2007)  
Sec. 23-17. - Disposition of receipts from assessments. 
(a)  The receipts from assessments for particular sewers shall be applied to the payment of the cost of particular sewers. 
(b)  The receipts from assessments and charges under section 23-15 shall be applied to the payment of interest upon bonds or notes issued for sewer purposes and to the payment or redemption of such bonds or notes. 
(Code 1970, § 18-3)  
Sec. 23-18. - Plans of sewerage system. 
The location of all sewers and drains and other structures and works used in connection therewith, which constitute part of the system of sewerage or sewage disposal laid out or constructed by the department of public works or as privately constructed under the private sewer extension rules and regulations, shall be shown on plans on file at all times with the department of public works, and a duplicate of the plans shall be filed by the department with the city engineer. Both sets of plans shall be open to inspection by the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 18-4; Ord. of 12-7-2007) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 83, § 2.  
Sec. 23-19. - Charges for use of common sewers. 
(a)  Every person who enters his particular sewer, directly or indirectly, into a common sewer laid out by the department of public works shall pay an annual charge established by the city council for the use of the common sewers, under the provisions of M.G.L. c. 83, § 16. Such charges shall be based on rates established by the director of public works, and the charges on each person in accordance with the rate so established shall be ascertained, assessed, certified and committed to the city treasurer by the director of public works. 
(b)  Commercial users of the city sewer system using in excess of 1,000,000 gallons of water annually are assessed in addition to the charges under subsection (a) of this section the sum of $100.00 for each 1,000,000 gallons of water used annually. 
(Code 1970, § 18-5; Ord. of 5-17-1977, § 1; Ord. No. 2019-045, 2-26-2019)  
Sec. 23-20. - Acceptance of out of town septage prohibited. 
Acceptance of septage from out of town in the city's sewer system is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1984, § I)  
Sec. 23-21. - Form of required notice. 
Whenever notice is required of a party to this article, it shall be by certified mail, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. VIII)  
Sec. 23-22. - Land not built upon; extension of time for assessment. 
Any land not built upon at the time of a sewer betterment assessment may upon application of the land owner receive an extension of time for the payment of the assessment until the land is built upon. Interest at the rate of four percent per year shall be paid annually upon the assessment from the time it was made. The assessment shall be paid within three months after such land is built upon. 
(Ord. No. 9-1992, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 42-1997, 6-10-1997)  
Sec. 23-23. - Compensatory sewer privileges fee; increase in use of land. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, if a betterment has been assessed to: 
(1)  A property based upon the estimated number of developable sewer units as required by this article or a sewer betterment policy adopted by the city council and said property is ultimately developed to accommodate a number of sewer units in excess of the number estimated for determining the betterment assessment; and/or 
(2)  A developed and later in time use of that parcel, is increased to accommodate a number of sewer units in excess of the number estimated for determining the betterment assessment, then the city shall assess a compensatory sewer privilege fee to reflect the increased use. 
(b)  The fee shall be equivalent to the amount which would have been charged as a betterment assessment upon the additional uses or units at the time of the original assessment. Apportionment of the fee shall be permitted only if specifically requested at the time of assessment and only for a period of ten years or less. Apportioned sewer privilege fees shall bear interest at the same rate charged for the most recent city sewer project betterments. 
(Ord. No. 9-1992, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 42-1997, 6-19-1997; Ord. No. 20-1999, § 1, 8-10-1999)  
Sec. 23-24. - Sewer betterment assessments. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The city council shall approve sewer betterments with a city contribution if any of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  The city's debt service expenditures, as documented to the city council by the city treasurer, do not exceed ten percent of its general fund revenue as indicated in the currently adopted budget. 
b.  The project is consistent with the city's facilities master plan as adopted by the city council. 
c.  The project provides a clear environmental benefit and resolves existing neighborhood-wide failed septic systems which have no other feasible resolution. 
d.  The project is required under a state or federal mandate through administrative or court action. 
If any of subsection (a)(1)a through d of this section are met, a city contribution is to be made, pursuant to M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 18 and 23, the city share shall not exceed 25 percent of the total project costs up to and not to exceed the value of $6,000.00 per residential dwelling unit. The city council shall review this section annually. 
(2)  On-lot betterments will be assessed: 
a.  For properties with STEP sewers in accordance with the number and size of step tanks installed on the lot with one on-lot betterment assessed for each standard size tank installed on the parcel. On-lot betterments for oversized step tanks will be assessed with an increased betterment in an amount equal to the percentage increase in the size required for the lot; and 
b.  For grinder pumps or pressure sewer pumps in accordance with the actual project costs of the pumps. 
(b)  Method of assessment: uniform unit. 
(1)  The city shall assess sewer betterments based upon a uniform unit method. Each unit shall be equal to a single-family residence. Multiple-family buildings and nonresidential buildings as described herein shall be converted into units on the basis of residential equivalents. The total assessment for a particular sewerage construction project shall not be based on or limited by an estimated betterment. Revenue generated by said betterment assessment shall be equal to or shall cover the total project costs associated with design and construction of the sewers and pumping station, and appurtenant work of both the on-street and on-lot sewer components, less the city share. 
(2)  The city shall levy assessments against all properties abutting a sewered street after acceptance of the entire pertinent construction contract including finalization of all pertinent contractual documents. The date of acceptance shall be determined by the DPW director. In the order of assessment, the city shall designate the owner of each parcel on the preceding January 1 as liable for assessment under the provisions of the general laws. 
(3)  For assessment purposes, all properties receiving direct benefit from the sewerage system shall be converted into sewer units. Properties receiving direct benefit, either developed or undeveloped, shall be designated a number of sewer units under the following guidelines: 
a.  Single-family dwellings shall comprise one sewer unit. 
b.  Two-family dwellings shall comprise two sewer units. 
c.  Three-family dwellings shall comprise three sewer units. 
d.  Four-family dwellings shall comprise four sewer units. 
(4)  Multiple-family dwellings in excess of four units shall comprise a number of sewer units based on the following methodology: 
a.  Rental residential properties such as apartments shall be assessed one sewer unit for each apartment with more than one bedroom. Rental properties shall be assessed one-half of one sewer unit for each one-bedroom or studio apartment. 
b.  Residential condominium complexes shall be assessed one sewer unit for each dwelling unit. 
(5)  Subdivisions shall be assessed one sewer unit for each buildable lot except that a subdivision which pursuant to subdivision regulations of the city agreed in the course of subdivision approval to install and by the appropriate assessment date for betterments for a particular public sewer constriction project has actually installed a dry system in said subdivision shall not be assessed a sewer betterment fee per lot but shall be assessed a sewer privilege fee as set by this article in section 23-16(c). Certain lots not involving actual subdivision shall also be assessed as provided in this article in section 23-16(c). 
(6)  Nonresidential buildings, which shall include all industrial, commercial and municipal properties, shall comprise a number of sewer units based upon water consumption as follows: nonresidential water usage (gpd) equals sewer units 300 gpd (rounded up to the next whole number). Nonresidential buildings not metered for water use shall be assigned a water consumption volume based on title 5 (part 2, section 13) of the state environment code of the commonwealth's, minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage. 
(7)  When a single structure or building contains a nonresidential use and a residential use and neither use is accessory to the other and the nonresidential use does not receive city water service, such mixed use structure shall be charged a betterment only for the residential unit or use. This provision shall not apply in the following zoning districts as defined in the city zoning ordinance: 
a.  BP, Business Park; 
b.  GI, General Industrial; 
c.  MI, Marine Industrial; 
d.  EB, Extensive Business; and 
e.  S, Service. 
(8)  Undeveloped residential lots shall be converted into dwelling units on the basis of maximum number frontage and area requirements as directed in the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of assessment. Each potential dwelling unit shall then comprise one sewer unit; however, undeveloped lots shall be assessed for only in-street sewer costs and shall not be assessed any on-lot costs. At the time that the lot is built upon, the property owner shall bear the complete costs of installing any necessary on-lot public and private sewer components on their private property pursuant to city sewer regulations. The owner of an undeveloped lot may apply pursuant to M.G.L. c. 83, § 19, to extend the time for payment as provided in this article in section 22-23. In addition, land classified as agricultural, horticultural, recreations or forest land, upon the application of the owner, may have the betterment assessment suspended for so long as the land is devoted to that use pursuant to M.G.L. c. 61A, § 18, M.G.L. c. 61B, § 13, and M.G.L. c. 61, § 5. 
(9)  Undeveloped nonresidential lots shall be converted into a maximum anticipated water consumption on the basis of the zoning ordinance. An equivalent number of sewer units shall then be determined utilizing the formula described for nonresidential developed properties (rounded up to the next whole number). 
(10)  Nothing in this section shall supersede the language of city ordinance section 23-23 concerning a compensatory fee for increase in the use of the land. 
(c)  Betterment payment. 
(1)  Except as provided herein, the provisions of the general laws relative to the assessment, apportionment, division reassessment, abatement and collection of sewer assessments shall apply. The tax collector of the city shall have all of the powers conveyed by the general laws. In accordance with M.G.L. c. 80, § 12, assessments made shall constitute a lien upon the land assessed until the full balance is paid. 
(2)  At the time of assessment, a property owner may select a payment schedule over a period of ten years or 20 years or another term of years less than 20 if they so specifically request. Once a selection has been made, the payment method may not be changed at a later date; however, the balance of the principal due on any lien may be paid in full any time. 
(3)  Upon the transfer of title to a new owner, the seller/transferor shall immediately notify the city treasurer/collector and city assessor. After transfer of title, the betterment lien may be transferred. The betterments may be paid in full to the collector's office without interest or charges within 30 days of the date of assessment. 
(4)  With regard to apportionment, the interest rate charged by the city shall be the project bond rate paid by the city for the sewer project plus a flat fee of $200.00 as allowed by Acts and Resolves of 1993, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, chapter 433. 
(d)  Abatements and deferrals. 
(1)  Unbuildable lot. 
a.  A property owner may request of the building inspector a formal written opinion which declares that under the then current city zoning ordinance, the lots which have been assessed a sewer betterment is not buildable without issuance of one or more variances under the applicable zoning ordinance provisions. This letter must be filed permanently with the building inspector and with the zoning board of appeals. Upon issuance of the opinion, the property owner may then file an application for abatement with the assessing board which shall include a certified copy of the building inspector's opinion and which shall require a notarized statement that the owner and any subsequent purchaser or their assigns or agents shall not apply for a variance to make the lot buildable. 
b.  A property owner may file a notice of intent to construct a dwelling with the conservation commission for one or more lots which have been assessed a sewer betterment. Following the regular hearing procedures of the conservation commission for any such notice, if the commission issues a formal denial of the notice of intent to construct a dwelling, and if all such documents which are otherwise required by law to be filed with the registry of deeds have been so filed, then the property owner may file with the assessing board an appeal action for abatement so long as the owner did not appeal the denial. The appeal action shall include a certified copy of the denial of the notice of intent to construct a dwelling. 
c.  All such abatements which are issued by the assessing board under this section 23-24(d)(1) shall also be permanently filed with the offices of the building inspector and the conservation commission. All applications and orders or opinions issued under this section shall state that the property owner has voluntarily requested that the property be found unbuildable and that the property owner fully understands all consequences stemming from such determination. 
(2)  Age and income. A property owner may defer the betterment assessment as provided in M.G.L. c. 80, § 13B, which has been accepted by the city, if they are 65 years of age or older and qualify under M.G.L. c. 59, § 4, clause 41A. However, the transfer of lien provision, section 23-24(c), betterment payments, shall not apply to deferrals as provided for in this section, in compliance with M.G.L. c. 80, § 13B. 
(Ord. No. 42-1999, 6-10-1997; Ord. No. 20-1999, § 1, 8-10-1999; Ord. of 12-7-2007; Ord. of 1-22-2008)  
Sec. 23-25. - Fees and bonds. 
(a)  General. The applicant of a privately constructed sewer extension shall pay all fees and provide all bonds associated with the private sewer extension. 
(b)  City administrative fees. The applicant of a privately constructed sewer extension shall pay all city administrative fees associated with the privately constructed sewer extension's design review and construction inspection, in accordance with the city rules and regulations and ordinances. Fees shall be approved by the city council. 
(c)  Twenty-five percent performance bond. The applicant of a privately constructed sewer extension shall provide the city with an appropriate performance bond or equivalent escrow account, equal to 25 percent of the estimated construction cost, prior to starting construction of the sewer extension. Said bond shall only be used by the city, if the city determines the applicant failed to complete the construction of the extension or failures or defects in construction. In the event the bond is used to either discontinue the project in a safe and secure manner or complete the project, the applicant shall be deemed by the city to have abandoned the project and all applicant rights to the project shall be waived by the applicant. Any modifications to the extension during construction may require an increase on the performance bond's value. The city shall retain the 25 percent bond for a period of 18 months after completion of the project for the purpose of applying towards failures or defects in construction. Such bonding will not be invalidated by any subsequent contiguous extensions or connections. 
(d)  Fees or assessments to other extensions. It is prohibited for the owner of a privately constructed sewer extension to charge any fees to another contiguous privately constructed sewer extension. Each application for an additional sewer extension shall be considered as a separated sewer extension. An existing applicant may not charge any fees or assessments to a new applicant. 
(e)  Fees or costs collected by the applicant from properties connecting. The applicant shall be allowed to charge an entrance fee to each property owner that desires to connect to the sewer constructed pursuant to these regulations, for the privilege of entering the sewer extension. The amount of any entrance fee payable to the applicant shall be a single fee, and shall not be a continuing fee. In connection with the granting of such entrance fee, the following provisions shall apply. The amount of any entrance fee payable to the applicant shall be in the amount set forth below: 
(1)  The entrance fee shall be calculated based on project costs and the number of potential connections. This calculation shall be performed and agreed to prior to project approval and issuance of the necessary permits to construct the sewer extension and shall incorporate an annual growth factor, based on the Consumer Price Index, calculated and added on an annual basis upon project completion. 
(2)  The city shall not approve any application for a connection, nor shall it issue any connection permit to the sewer extension until the city has received written confirmation from the applicant indicating that the property owner has paid an entrance fee to the applicant. After the applicant provides such written confirmation to the city, the city shall approve any connection permit necessary for the access to the sewer, subject to proper engineering of the connection. 
(3)  Unless and until the entrance fee has been paid, no person shall be entitled to connect to the sewer extension based upon claim that the sewer extension based upon claim that the sewer extension lies within a public way, or in an easement in favor of the city, as the case may be. 
(4)  The applicant shall not profit from the collection of entrance fees. The applicant represents and guarantees that the cost of the project will be reasonable and not exceed the estimated project cost as approved by the city, which sum is referred to as "maximum guaranteed cost." If the actual cost of the project exceeds the maximum guaranteed cost; the applicant agrees to pay from its own funds all amounts in excess of the maximum guaranteed cost. Said maximum guaranteed cost shall be supported by written proposals from the applicant and/or any subcontractors of the applicant 30 days prior to the commencement of construction under this agreement. The right of the applicant to charge and collect entrance fees shall terminate upon the expiration of ten years from the date the construction of the project is substantially completed. Under this agreement, substantial completion shall constitute approval for use by the city and its engineering consultants, or, at that point in time when the applicant has recouped 100 percent of the project costs, whichever is sooner. 
(5)  The payment of entrance fees to the applicant except as stated in subsection (e)(6) of this section, shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any fee or connection charged by the city to any new user. The connection fee to the city shall be assessed to any new user in the same manner and in the same amount as if the sewer extension were already part of the system and not subject to a privately funded extension. 
(6)  The city hereby waives any connection fee from the applicant and any property owner or operator who participates with the applicant within one year of project approval. As a condition precedent to waiving such fees, a capital contributor (property owner or operator) who participates as such shall be required to pay to the applicant the applicable entrance fee provided for in subsection (e)(5) of this section and provided the city receives a copy of the executed agreement. The waiver of such connection fee shall only apply to the specific property of a property owner or operator which directly abuts the sewer line or the extension thereof and not the applicant. The applicant shall identify any and all such participants, in writing, to the city prior to the commencement of construction. 
(f)  Sewer use charges. Upon connection to the privately constructed sewer extension, every user shall pay annual sewer use charges as per section 23-19. 
(Ord. of 12-7-2007)  
Secs. 23-26—23-34. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 23-35. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Act means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Average daily flow means the total volume of sewage in gallons measured or estimated at a metering station or other point during a continuous period of 30 days divided by 30 days. 
Biochemical oxygen demand ( BOD ) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Categorical pretreatment standards means discharge limitations for specific industrial user categories promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under federal law. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Director means the director of public works, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment facility from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. The following are classifications of industrial users: 
(1)  Significant industrial user means: 
a.  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and 
b.  Any other industrial user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the wastewater treatment facility (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling water and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
2.  Contributes a process wastewater that makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater treatment plant; or 
3.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the wastewater treatment facility, either through pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment to workers in the sewers or wastewater treatment facility. 
(2)  Major industrial user means: 
a.  Industries not subject to categorical pretreatment standards that discharge between 5,000 and 25,000 gallons per day of process wastewater, with some potential for violation of pretreatment standards or requirements; and 
b.  Any industrial user not subject to categorical pretreatment standards that discharge less than 5,000 gallons per day and have a history of noncompliance with pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(3)  Other industrial user means: 
a.  An industrial user not subject to categorical pretreatment standards that discharges less than 5,000 gallons per day of process wastewater; and 
b.  An industrial user not subject to categorical pretreatment standards that discharges process wastewater that has no reasonable potential for violation of pretreatment standards or requirements. 
The city may at any time, on its own initiative, or in response to a petition received from an industrial user not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, reclassify the industrial user based on changes in the quantity or characteristics of their wastewater discharge and/or their history of compliance with pretreatment requirements. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Interference means an inhibition or disruption of the operation of the sewage work or of the final use or disposal of sludge. Such inhibition or disruption may result in violation of federal laws or more stringent state or local regulations, which protect air, land or water resources. Such laws or regulations may include, but not be limited to the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the city for the operation of the sewage works. 
Maximum daily flow means the highest volume in gallons measured at a metering station or other point during any continuous 24-hour period. 
National pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard or standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA under sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act applicable to industrial users including the general and specific prohibitions found in 40 CFR 403.5 and the National categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by EPA that are set out in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated into the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1) of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection of this definition. 
NPDES permit means a permit issued to the city's wastewater treatment facility pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the city's wastewater treatment facility into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement, other than a national pretreatment standard, applicable to industrial users. 
Private sewer connections to remain private means sewer connections constructed under the subdivision process, which connect a series of buildings to remain under common ownership through a homeowners association and are not subject to privately constructed sewer extension regulations. 
Privately constructed sewer extension means a sewer extension, including pipe, pump stations and appurtenant works, constructed by an applicant, other than the city, that shall be owned by the city at the completion of construction. 
Privately constructed sewer extension applicant means a person or entity seeking a permit to construct a sewer extension for the city. 
Privately constructed sewer extensions, city assumption of ownership means a privately constructed sewer extension is accepted when the DPW director or his designee declares in writing that the construction is complete and the extension is suitable for use and able to receive wastewater from users. This notice of acceptance shall be signed, dated and kept on file in the city engineering department and sent by certified mail to the applicant. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by the public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer service connection means the extension of the pipe, used only for discharge of sewage, from a point of four feet outside the foundation wall of the building served to its junction with the sanitary or combined sewer. The term "sewer service connection" has the same meaning as the term "particular sewer" in M.G.L. c. 83. 
Significant noncompliance (SNC) means an industrial user whose violations meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit times the applicable TRC (TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH), or in the case of pH, when at least one-third of all measurements taken during a six-month period are either: 
a.  At least one standard unit greater than any applicable upper limit on pH; or 
b.  At least one standard unit less than any applicable lower limit on pH. 
For industrial users required to continuously monitor pH as a condition of their industrial user discharge permit, significant noncompliance for pH exists if the total of all excursions outside the permitted range with a duration equal to or exceeding 30 minutes, totals seven hours, 26 minutes or more in any month. 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the director's exercise of emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations that the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
Slug means any discharge of untreated or inadequately pretreated process wastewater, industrial waste, chemicals or other liquids, resulting from the breakdown of equipment, spills, process upset, accidental or intentional discharge or emergency bypass. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but exclude sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. 1; Ord. No. 28-1992, § 1, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 26-1995, § 1, 4-18-1995; Ord. of 12-7-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 23-36. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Required connections. The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment or recreation situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city are hereby required at their own expense to install suitable sanitary plumbing facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article. No property shall be required to connect to a municipal sewer until their on-site system fails to pass an inspection under 310 CMR 15.00 et seq., as amended, and related board of health regulations. Nothing in this section is intended to conflict with any orders pursuant to 310 CMR 15.00 et seq., or any court orders. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require sewer connections, M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 10, 11, 310; CMR 15.00 et seq. 
(b)  Permit. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director. Any person proposing any change or a new discharge into the system shall notify the director at least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection. 
(c)  Classification of permits; fee. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. A permit and inspection fee of $100.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $150.00 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. A separate permit application shall be submitted, and a separate permit and inspection fee shall be paid for each separate connection with the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  Costs borne by owner. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to assess cost of laying out a particular sewer, M.G.L. c. 83, § 24. 
(e)  Each building served by separate sewer. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where a building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(f)  Use of old building sewer. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. The director may, at his discretion, require any person desiring to make such use of an old building sewer to submit a permit application and to pay a permit and inspection fee. 
(g)  Methods and materials for connections. Sewer service connections shall be laid at such depth and gradient and in such location as the director may determine. The minimum gradient allowable shall be one-quarter inch per foot. No sewer service connection shall service more than one building except by permission of the director. Sewer service connections shall be constructed of first quality vitrified clay, schedule 40 polyvinylchloride or cast iron sewer pipe, and jointed and laid with the standard methods of sewer construction. When completed the inside of a sewer service connection shall be left smooth and clean. No alteration in, or connection with, any service connection shall be made until application is made to and approved by the director. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate the construction and alteration of sewer connections, M.G.L. c. 83, § 10. 
(h)  Construction standards. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM AND WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(i)  Elevation of building sewers. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  Illegal connections. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
State Law reference— Separate systems for drainage of water and sewage required, M.G.L. c. 83, § 5. 
(k)  Connection standards; inspections. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. All sewer service connections shall be laid under the supervision of an inspector appointed by the director. The owner or his authorized representative shall so arrange his work to require the service of the inspector as short a time as practicable. No trench shall be filled in until the pipe laid therein has been inspected and approved by the inspector. 
(l)  Safeguarding excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(m)  Notice for inspections. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require inspection of all materials used in making sewer connections, M.G.L. c. 83, § 10. 
(n)  Ownership; responsibility for cost of connections. Sewer service connections from the sanitary sewer, including combined sewers, to the street side line shall be built only under the direction of the director or designee, and shall be owned, repaired and maintained only by the city, under the direction of the director. Connections from the street side line to a building shall be paid for, owned and maintained by the owner of the property. The director may, at his discretion, require any person owning property so connected to excavate, repair and maintain the privately-owned portion of the connection at his own expense, and to pay to the city those costs incurred by the city in repairing and maintaining the city-owned portion of the connection. 
State Law reference— Owners of land to pay for actual cost of construction of a particular sewer from the street line to a house or building, M.G.L. c. 83, § 3. 
(o)  Responsibility for maintenance of connections. If any sewer service connection becomes obstructed or otherwise fails to function properly, notice must be given promptly to the director by the owner or his duly authorized agent. Prior to contacting the director, the property owners affected shall be responsible to determine that the obstruction is not on their property. The director shall report the nature and location of the obstruction found, the repairs affected and the costs of such repairs to the city engineer. After consideration of these and any other pertinent factors, the engineer shall then determine the portion of those costs to be paid by the owner, and shall direct the city treasurer to invoice the owner for that portion. Any property owner aggrieved by the engineer's allocation of costs may request a hearing before the engineer at which the owner may outline his objections and state his case for readjustment of allocation of costs. Such hearings must be requested within 21 days of owner's receipt of invoice for payment of such costs. Within ten days of such a hearing, the engineer will advise the treasurer and the owner in writing of his decision. 
(p)  Fees collected in segregated account. Any fees collected for the water cross connection program under M.G.L. c. 111, § 160A (310 CMR 22.22) shall be placed in a segregated account to be used exclusively for water cross connection related expenses (personal service, purchased services, supplies, other charges and capital acquisitions). The fund shall be established as a reserve for appropriation by the city council; and the available funds may be used upon recommended transfer by the department head, through the mayor and with approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. II; Ord. No. 9-1992, 3-3-1992; Ord. No. 1-1993, § I, 12-15-1992; Ord. No. 35-1996, § I, 8-20-1996; Ord. No. 42-1997, 6-10-1997; Ord. of 11-13-2001(03), § I) 
Editor's note— The provisions of former 23-36(p), which pertained to fees collected under the Water Cross-Connection Program, have been transferred to section 23-61(p). 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to assess the cost of sewer repair, M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 3A, 14.  
Sec. 23-37. - Restrictions on use of public sewers. 
(a)  Generally. All persons discharging sewage into public sewers connected to the city's sewage treatment plant shall comply with applicable requirements of federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations. 
(b)  Stormwater and other unpolluted waters. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Hot or alkaline waters and wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged heat, as liquid or vapor, in such quantity that the temperature at the city's wastewater treatment facility exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Centigrade, or any wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5 pH units. 
(d)  Dangerous, destructive or improper discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas, including but not limited to wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing pollutants including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) or total suspended solids (TSS), toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(5)  Batch cooking oils, fish scales, fish heads and viscera, fish carcasses and other solids from fish processing operations which have a mean particle size of greater than 40-mesh (0.017 inches), and stickwaters from fish meal production processes; 
(6)  Any water or waste containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil or synthetic oil origin in concentrations greater than 25 milligrams per liter or in such amounts as to cause pass through or interference; 
(7)  Any water or waste from commercial or industrial plants or restaurants containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, or grease; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirements, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director for such materials; 
(10)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(11)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. Garbage grinders may not be used to reduce solids in fish process wastestreams prior to discharge to the city's sanitary sewer; 
(12)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which either singly, or in combination with other discharges, will cause pass through at the wastewater treatment facility. 
(e)  Options of director. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and which may have deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of subsection (k) of this section. 
If the city engineer or director requires the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. These provisions notwithstanding, the director may take enforcement action against any sewer user discharging wastewater containing substances or possessing characteristics as listed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the director they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city engineer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owners thereof shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured materials and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city engineer. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by such owners personnel must be performed by waste disposal firms possessing valid licenses issued by the board of health, and such firms must notify the owners of the means and site location of disposal of the collected materials. 
(g)  Preliminary treatment. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  Control structure. When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilities observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  Measurements, tests, analyses. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the procedures described in 40 CFR part 136. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval of the city engineer. 
(j)  Special agreements. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the city and any user may reach agreement allowing the discharge of any water or waste of a character otherwise regulated by this section to be accepted for treatment by the city in return for payment by the user for such treatment. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a federal pretreatment standard or requirement. However, categorical standards may be adjusted by EPA, upon the request of the industrial user, in accordance with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.13 or 403.15. 
(k)  Information may be required. The director may require any user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewater; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  Plot plans of sewers and appurtenances located within the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills or slug losses to the city's sanitary sewers. 
(l)  Trucked/hauled waste. Discharge to the sewer of trucked or hauled wastes is prohibited except at discharge points designated by the city. 
(Code 1970, § 18-6; Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. III; Ord. No. 28-1992, § 2, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 26-1995, §§ 2—4, 4-18-1995) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate discharges into common sewers, M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 5, 10.  
Sec. 23-38. - Industrial user and pretreatment requirements. 
(a)  Compliance required. Industrial users shall comply with federal, state and local general pretreatment standards and with applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The national categorical pretreatment standards, located in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471, are hereby incorporated in this article. 
(b)  Authority of director. The director may immediately halt, prevent or modify any discharge of pollutants which in his opinion appear to present an imminent endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or any discharge presenting, or which may present, an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with operation of the city sewage works. Actions which may be taken by the director include, but are not limited to, seeking ex parte temporary injunctive relief, entry on private property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt such discharge or demand of specific action by the discharger. 
(c)  Notification of standards. The director shall notify officials of industrial users of applicable categorical pretreatment standards and any applicable requirements under section 204(d) and 405 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 466 et seq., and subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation Recovery Act 42 USC 4901 et seq., as amended. 
(d)  Director to ensure compliance. The director shall randomly sample and analyze the discharges of industrial users and conduct surveillance and inspection activities to identify, independent of information supplied by such persons, occasional and continuing noncompliance with this article. 
(e)  Public participation. The director shall comply with the public participation requirements of 40 CFR part 25 in the enforcement of industrial pretreatment standards and requirements. The director shall provide public notification, at least annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, of all industrial users that were in significant noncompliance at any time during the previous 12 months. 
(f)  Industrial user permit. Industrial users shall apply for and obtain an industrial user permit. Permit applications shall be made in accordance with a form developed by the director. No industrial user may continue to discharge wastewater to the sewers without an industrial user permit issued by the director, and such users shall conform to the terms of such permits. Permits will include, at a minimum: 
(1)  A statement of duration; 
(2)  A statement of nontransferability; 
(3)  Applicable federal, state and local effluent limits; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties. 
Permitted industrial users must notify the director 30 days prior to any facility expansion, production increase or process modification which will result in new or increased discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge, including hazardous wastes. The terms of an industrial user permit may be modified by the director, a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, shall be provided for compliance with such modified terms. Violation of any term of such permit is a violation of this article and may be subject to enforcement action. 
(g)  Categorical pretreatment permit. Within 90 calendar days after the adoption by a federal or state regulatory agency of a categorical pretreatment standards, existing industrial users subject to such standards shall submit a categorical permit application. Such application shall contain information required under applicable federal and state industrial pretreatment reporting regulations. Regional information shall be provided on a form prepared by the director. Such information, as a minimum, shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operators and owners; 
(2)  A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out at such facility; 
(4)  A proposed schedule of actions to be taken to comply with the categorical standards; 
(5)  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer from regulated process streams and from other streams; 
(6)  An identification of the industrial pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
(7)  An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge; and 
(8)  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
The director may require additional information to be included in such application. Beginning 180 calendar days after the adoption of federal or state categorical pretreatment standards, industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards may not discharge sewage to a public sewer, unless a categorical permit is duly issued by the director and the terms of such permit are being met. A violation of any term of such permit is a violation of this article. 
(h)  Reports required. 
(1)  Within 90 days after the date of final compliance by existing industrial users with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the public sewer, such industrial users shall submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated processes governed by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units. Such report shall contain a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional as to whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices or pretreatment is necessary. 
(2)  Any industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice a year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards or required to be analyzed by the terms of the industrial user's permit, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (k) of this section. 
(3)  If sampling by the industrial user indicates a violation of pretreatment standards, the industrial user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user must also resample and submit results of this resampling to the city within 30 days. 
(4)  Industrial users must notify the city, the EPA and the state, in writing, of any discharge to the wastewater treatment plant which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste. 
(5)  At the discretion of the director, an industrial user may be required to develop a slug control plan which, at a minimum, outlines discharge practices (including nonroutine batch discharges); describes stored chemicals; and contains procedures both to notify appropriate city personnel immediately of slug discharges and to prevent adverse impacts from any accidental spill; and followup practices to limit damage to the treatment plant and the environment. 
(i)  Notice of potential problems, including slug discharge. Industrial users shall notify the director immediately of slug discharges and all discharges that could cause problems to the sewer system and/or the wastewater treatment plant, including discharge of the following pollutants: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewers or wastewater treatment plant, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade). 
(2)  Pollutants which are corrosive, but in no case, with a pH less than 5.0. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts that will cause obstruction to the flow. 
(4)  Any pollutant discharged at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference or pass through at the wastewater treatment plant. 
(5)  Heat in such quantities that the temperature at the wastewater treatment plant exceeds 40 degrees Centigrade. 
In the event of a discharge to the sewer of toxic or flammable wastes, the fire department must be notified immediately. 
(j)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment equipment will be required to meet new or existing pretreatment standards the city will negotiate with the industrial user a timetable within which the industrial user will provide the requisite additional pretreatment. The completion date shall not exceed 12 months from the date of issuance of the compliance schedule. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the compliance schedule shall exceed nine months. The industrial user shall submit a written progress report to the director of public works no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule. 
(k)  Reports and applications to be signed by authorized representative. Reports and permit applications submitted by industrial users under this article must contain the following certification statement and shall be signed by an authorized representative. I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. An authorized representative may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least a level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or the proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship; or 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of either of the individuals designated above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the subject facility. 
(l)  Records required. Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under this section shall maintain records of information resulting from monitoring activities required to prepare such reports. Such reports shall include for each sample: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method of time of sampling and the names of person or persons taking the sample; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  The names of person or persons performing the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques and methods used; and 
(5)  The results of such analyses. 
All records and information required to be retained under this article shall remain available for inspection and copying for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of litigation concerning the industrial user's compliance with this article, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 83, § 15. 
(m)  Public access to information. Information and data submitted to the director under this section relating to sewage discharge characteristics shall be available to the public without restriction. Other such information shall be available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302. 
(n)  Dilution prohibited as a form of treatment. Dilution of a wastewater discharge, as either a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to comply with a pretreatment standard or requirement is prohibited, unless expressly authorized by an applicable standard or requirement. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. IV; Ord. No. 9-1993, § I, 6-8-1993; Ord. No. 26-1995, §§ 5—12, 4-18-1995) 
State Law reference— Water pollution generally, M.G.L. c. 21, § 26 et seq., c. 102, § 17, c. 131, § 41 et seq.  
Sec. 23-39. - Tampering with facilities prohibited. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. V, § 1)  
Sec. 23-40. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Right of entry. The director, the city engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the city sanitary sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Information gathering; trade secrets. The director, the city engineer or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. Such information shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restrictions unless the person providing such information specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets. Trade secrets shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon the written request of governmental agencies for their use regarding this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, any state disposal system permits or the pretreatment program. Information accepted by the director as being a trade secret shall not be provided by the director to any governmental agencies, with the exception of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, until and unless a ten-day notification thereof is given to the person who provided the trade secret to the director. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as trade secrets. 
(c)  Observance of safety rules; indemnity. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gaging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 23-37(h). 
(d)  Entry into easements. The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with private property involved. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. VI; Ord. of 10-18-1983, § I; Ord. No. 26-1995, §§ 12, 13, 4-18-1995) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq.  
Sec. 23-41. - Violations. 
(a)  Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of from $20.00 up to $5,000.00 for each day during which such violation shall continue. 
(b)  Injunctive relief. The director is authorized to seek injunctive relief for violations of this article. 
(c)  Liability to city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. of 12-7-1982, art. VII; Ord. of 2-14-1989, § I; Ord. No. 28-1992, § 3, 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 23-42. - Sewer extensions in ward 5-2. 
(a)  Authority . Article II, sewers, division 2, regarding sewer extensions in ward five (5) - precinct two (2), hereafter ward 5-2, has been adopted pursuant to authority set forth in M.G.L. c. 83, § 10. 
(b)  Purpose . This section is designed to serve the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote the efficiency and effectiveness of the city sewer system. 
(2)  To limit the number of sewer extensions in ward 5-2 in an effort to conserve citywide resources pertaining to sewage treatment. 
(3)  To provide for orderly growth in ward 5-2. 
(4)  To delineate areas intended for service by fixed-line sewers versus those areas intended for service by onsite wastewater treatment. 
(5)  To depict where the city may consider authorizing funding for sewer construction and to depict where private parties may fund the cost for sewer construction. 
(c)  Statement of legislative intent . In 1989 the city was required by state and federal government consent decree (USA and Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. City of Gloucester, No. 89-22067-Y) to deal with contamination emanating from sanitary system emissions. The decree included local action to restore and maintain coastal water quality, including formulation of a wastewater management plan (board of health, 1994) which provides strategies to identify and replace substandard septic systems in seven parts of the city with known coastal water pollution problems. The wastewater management plan was developed just as the commonwealth updated on-site wastewater regulations known as Title 5 and it provides a framework to ensure that all septic systems are properly maintained. On August 3, 2000 standards articulated in this plan were adopted as Onsite Wastewater Regulations (Regulation #6) by the board of health. More recently, the Town of Essex was ordered to resolve long standing similar issues of failing septic systems and pollution. The result was that an intermunicipal agreement was instituted providing that Essex would tie into Gloucester's sewer system after it finances construction of a main sewer line along Essex Avenue in Gloucester. With the impending construction of a sewer to Essex, it became a priority to address development potential within the Essex Avenue corridor and on adjacent streets because the area is completely unsewered and has large tracts of undeveloped land. The West Gloucester Land Use and Wastewater Plan (ward 5-2 section) - Final Report, by Daylor Consulting Group, was a byproduct of public process that explores how to solve existing water quality and wastewater disposal problems in the 5-2 precinct while at the same time planning proactively for future physical development of the area. This study: (1) assesses water pollution associated with failing septic systems in the 5-2 precinct; (2) identifies areas where on-site wastewater solutions are most feasible and/or cost effective; (3) identifies areas where sanitary sewer connections are most feasible or cost effective; and (4) places every property either in or out of one of two defined 'sewer service areas' within which it is permissible for a user to dispose wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. This sewer extension ordinance does not necessarily authorize or mandate construction of sewers by the city, but rather it enables or makes it permissible to develop sewers within certain eligible sewer service areas, and it is intended to promote consistency with recommendations of The West Gloucester Land Use and Wastewater Plan (ward 5-2 section) and the Community Development Plan For The City of Gloucester, 2001 by providing a mechanism to facilitate orderly development of sewers inside the aforementioned sewer service areas, to promote sitings of onsite wastewater systems outside of these areas, and to establish a procedure whereby city council may amend these sewer service area boundaries through defined public process. A separate city ordinance and corresponding DPW sewer rules and regulations provide for application and review of a permit application to actually construct specific sewer extensions city wide (including ward 5-2). 
(d)  Effect of ordinance . This section shall apply in the ward 5-2 wastewater district as defined below. This section shall supersede all other ordinances and rules and regulations to the extent such other ordinances or rules and regulations contradict this section. 
(e)  Definitions . The following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Sewer extension . The extension of any existing public or private sewer line, or the installation of any new public or private sewer line, including the appurtenant sewer works for which the ultimate point of wastewater treatment is the city wastewater treatment plant. Any installation of sewer pipe in an existing or newly created public or private way, or any installation of sewer pipe other than a sewer service connection, shall be deemed to be a sewer extension. 
(2)  Eligible sewer extension . Any proposed sewer extension that is situated entirely within one of two categories of "sewer service areas" as shown on the ward 5-2 wastewater district map, exhibit A hereto, is eligible for a sewer extension permit hereunder. A sewer extension deemed "eligible" shall not be entitled to a sewer extension permit unless all other requirements of this section have been satisfied. The depiction of a sewer extension as "eligible" shall not be construed as a representation that the city shall set aside funds for the construction, in whole or in part, of said sewer extension. 
(3)  Sewer extension permit . The document issued by the city department of public works, or its designee, as set forth in subsection (f), below. 
(4)  Sewer service connection . Shall mean the extension of the pipe, used only for discharge of sewage, from a point of four feet outside the foundation wall of the building served to its junction with the sanitary or combined sewer. The term shall have the same meaning as the term, "particular sewer" in M.G.L. c. 83. 
(5)  Ward 5-2 wastewater district . The area shown on the ward 5-2 wastewater district map in which this section shall apply. 
(6)  Ward 5-2 wastewater district map . A map entitled "WASTEWATER DISTRICT MAP: Areas Eligible For City Sewer Service & Areas Eligible for Private Sewer Service PER CITY ORDINANCE, CH. 23 UTILITIES, ART. II. SEWERS, DIV. 2: USE REGULATIONS, Sec. 23-42 SEWER EXTENSIONS IN WARD FIVE PRECINCT TWO" referred to as exhibit A hereto, which is on file with the city clerk and available for review in the city community development department, the department of public health and the DPW/Engineering Department, and which has been adopted by the city council to define the areas eligible for sewer extensions in the ward 5-2 wastewater district. The ward 5-2 wastewater district map and the accompanying text description may be amended from time to time by the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
(f)  Sewer extension permits . All applicants proposing to extend an existing public or private sewer line or to create a new sewer extension shall obtain a sewer extension permit from the department of public works (DPW) before such extension is permitted. 
(1)  Application . The city DPW shall adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the review of sewer extension permits, including but not limited to definition of the minimum required contents of a sewer extension permit application and definition of what constitutes a complete application. Applications will be reviewed for completeness within 30 days. 
(2)  Eligible sewer extensions . No sewer extension permit shall be issued by the DPW unless such sewer extension is entirely within one or more areas that are "Eligible Sewer Extension(s)" on exhibit A, attached [to the ordinance from which this section derives], as may be amended. 
(g)  Sewer extension permit conditions . Sewer extension permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this section and to all other applicable ordinances and regulations, user charges and fees established by the city and the DPW to the extent not superseded hereby. 
(h)  Ward 5-2 wastewater district map . 
(1)  Effect . No sewer extension permit shall be granted unless such proposed extension is entirely within one or more of the areas of "Eligible Sewer Extension(s)" as shown on the ward 5-2 wastewater district map, exhibit A, attached hereto, as may be amended from time to time by the city council. 
(2)  Amendment . A petition to amend the ward 5-2 wastewater district map may be presented to the city council by any applicant for a sewer extension permit, or, in the alternative, by the DPW or the board of health. The city council shall take final action on such petitions within 120 days of receipt of a complete application. Sixteen copies of the application for such review shall be provided to city council by the applicant. Within five days of the receipt of any petition, the city clerk on behalf of city council shall send the application to and request the written recommendation of the DPW, planning board, capital improvements advisory board, conservation commission, board of health, and the shellfish advisory commission. The city council may request the applicant to submit all information necessary, and may engage technical experts, at the applicant's expense, in order to make its determination as set forth below. Failure by any reviewing agency to respond to the city council within 65 days shall be deemed a lack of opposition to the petition. 
(3)  Criteria . The city council may amend the ward 5-2 wastewater district map by adding or deleting areas eligible for sewer extensions. In determining whether an area should be classified as "eligible," the city council shall consider the following criteria. At a minimum, to be determined "eligible", a proposed sewer extension in the area must meet criterion (a) and also meet at least one of criteria of (b) through (f): 
a.  The proposed sewer extension serves an area that could not be feasibly served by either on-site or community wastewater treatment systems. 
b.  The proposed sewer extension promotes the efficiency and effectiveness of the city sewer system. 
c.  The proposed sewer extension was shown on a definitive plan approved by the planning board prior to the effective date of this section. 
d.  The proposed sewer extension improves the capacity of an existing overloaded sewer line. 
e.  The proposed sewer extension eliminates the need for a pump station serving existing development. 
f.  The board of health has determined that the proposed sewer extension is necessary to address existing water pollution problems or public health threats and has provided the rationale for such determination in writing to the city council. 
(4)  Denial . Any denial shall be in writing and shall state the reasons therefor. 
(i)  Effective date . This section shall take effect on January 18, 2003. 
(Ord. of 12-17-2002)  
Secs. 23-43—23-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; discharge of water or other liquid on sidewalk, § 21-10. 
State Law reference— Public water supply, M.G.L. c. 40, § 38 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23-55. - Construction and repair of hydrants or standpipes. 
All hydrants or standpipes established by the city shall be constructed, and all repairs upon such hydrants or standpipes shall be made, and the streets when broken up shall again be put in good order, under the direction of and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 27-1)  
Sec. 23-56. - Director of public works to determine and assess water rates; director's regulations relative to water service. 
The director of public works shall determine and assess all water rates and may establish such regulations not inconsistent with this chapter and other ordinances of the city as it may deem expedient for the introduction and use of water and the measurement thereof, in conformance with the procedures required by section 7-16(a) of the Charter. Upon the failure or refusal of any person to comply with such regulations, the department of public works may shut off or refuse to supply water to his premises. Such regulations shall have all the force and effect of ordinances of the city and may be enforced in like manner. 
(Code 1970, § 27-2)  
Sec. 23-57. - Reserved.  
Sec. 23-58. - Disposition of money paid into treasury on account of waterworks. 
All moneys paid into the city treasury on account of the waterworks shall be placed to the credit of the water division of the department of public works, and shall be held and kept separate for payment of the expenses of operating the works and for such extensions and new construction as shall be recommended by the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 27-4)  
Sec. 23-59. - Damaging waterworks property; unauthorized connections; etc. 
No person shall injure any public pipe, reservoir or fire hydrant connected with the waterworks, or break and enter the same or draw off or cause to be removed any of the water therefrom, or turn on or off the water in any such water pipe, reservoir or fire hydrant, or make any opening or connection therewith, or remove the cover of any hydrant, except in case of fire, without a permit from the department of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 27-5) 
State Law reference— Trespass or other injury to property pertaining to water supply, M.G.L. c. 111, § 170.  
Sec. 23-60. - Water use restrictions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, agency of the state or federal government, or any other legal entity. 
State of water supply conservation means water use restrictions imposed by the city pursuant to this article. 
State of water supply emergency means a water emergency declared by the state department of environmental protection under M.G.L. c. 21G, §§ 15—17. 
Water users or water consumers means all public and private users of the city's public water system, irrespective of any person's responsibilities for billing purposes for water used at any particular facility. 
(b)  Declaration of a state of water supply conservation. The director of public works may declare a state of water supply conservation if, in his judgment, water conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers. A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one or more of the following restrictions, conditions or requirements, limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply: 
(1)  Odd/even day outdoor watering. Outdoor watering by water users with oddnumbered addresses is restricted to oddnumbered days. Outdoor watering by water users with evennumbered addresses is restricted to evennumbered days. 
(2)  Outdoor watering ban. Use of city water for outdoor watering is prohibited. 
(3)  Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only during periods of low demand, as specified in the declaration and the public notification thereof. 
(4)  Filling of swimming pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited. 
(5)  Automatic sprinkler (irrigation system) use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited. 
(c)  Notification of a state of water supply conservation. Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the city as part of a state of water conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water of the state of water supply conservation. Notification shall be provided simultaneously to the state department of environmental protection. 
(d)  Termination of a state of water supply conservation. Termination of a state of water supply conservation will occur when the director of public works determines that conservation measures are no longer necessary and shall so inform water consumers and the state department of environmental protection as in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  State of water supply emergency. Upon notification that a declaration of a state of water supply emergency has been issued by the state department of environmental protection (DEP), no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, or condition of any order approved or issued by the DEP intended to bring about an end to the state of emergency. 
(f)  Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be liable to the city in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation and $100.00 for each subsequent violation which shall inure to the city for such uses as the director of public works may direct. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on complaint before the district court, or by noncriminal disposition in accordance with chapter 40 § 21D of the general laws. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 26-1997, § I, 2-4-1997) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26-1997, § I, adopted Feb. 4, 1997, enacted provisions intended for use as § 23-63; however, these provisions have been interpreted by the editor as superseding the former § 23-60. The former § 23-60 pertained to restriction of water use and derived from § I(27-6) of an ordinance adopted May 5, 1981.  
Sec. 23-61. - Cross connection control requirements. 
(a)  Responsibilities. The director of public works shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the director, an approved backflow device is required at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises and/or at any other location within the customer's facility where a cross connection hazard exists, the director, or his delegated agent, shall give notice in writing to said customer to install approved backflow prevention devices where indicated. The customer shall, within a time period specified by the director, install such approved device, or devices, at his own expense, and failure or refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install said devices within the required time frame, shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such devices have been properly installed. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Approved, as used in subsection (a) of this section, means accepted by the director as meeting the requirements of this section through section 23-63 and 310 CMR 22.22. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on, or available to, the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances, under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source. 
Backflow preventer shall include and mean a device or means designed to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principle device, double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker, residential dual check, double check with intermediate atmospheric vent and barometric loop. 
Backpressure means a condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the supplier's system pressure. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution system of a potable water system from any source other than its' intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the water service entrance. 
Contaminant means any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water. 
Cross connection means any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination. 
Department means the department of public works, water division. 
Fixture isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a cross connection at an in-plant location rather than at a water service entrance. 
Owner means any person maintaining a cross connection installation or owning or occupying premises on which cross connections can or do exist. 
Person means any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the state or federal government, or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means a foreign substance that, if permitted to enter the public water supply system, will degrade the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably effect such water for domestic use. 
Permit means a document issued by the state department of environmental protection, which allows the use of a backflow preventer. 
Potable water means water from any source that has been approved by the department of environmental protection for human consumption. 
Water service entrance or water service connection means that point in the owner's water system beyond the sanitary control of the city; generally considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any unprotected branch. 
(c)  Program authority. The department will operate a cross connection control program, to include the keeping of records and reporting, which fulfills the requirements of state law 310 CMR 22.22, and is approved by the department of environmental protection. Recognizing the threat to the public water system arising from cross connections, the department will classify all threats by degree of hazard and will require the installation of approved backflow devices in accordance with the requirements of 310 CMR 22.22. 
(d)  Cross connections prohibited. The department will not allow any known cross connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to ensure satisfactory operation. The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross connections on his premises. 
(e)  Right of entry. The director and/or other duly authorized employee or agent of the department bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspecting for possible cross connections. The owner shall, upon request of the director or agent make available any plans, specifications and permits as may be necessary for a complete survey of the premises and shall provide labor as necessary to allow inspection and testing of devices if such exist. 
(f)  Fixture protection. If the department requires that the public potable water supply be protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment device and will be required to utilize fixture outlet protection for that purpose. The department will survey the facility and will specify the types of fixture outlet devices, and proper installation of these devices, necessary to protect the potable water on premises. The owner shall be required to install these devices as directed. 
(g)  New installations. On new installations, the department will provide an on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type of backflow preventers, if any, that will be required and will perform initial inspection and testing. Plumbing diagrams must be submitted to the department for review and approval before installation of devices. 
(h)  Existing buildings. For nonresidential establishments, existing prior to March 1, 1992, the department will perform periodic evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made, this timetable being based on the degree of hazard involved, and the history of the devices in question. 
(i)  Noncompliance. The department shall inform the owner, in writing, of any violations noted during the inspection and provide a deadline for compliance with the conditions of the notice of violation. In the event the owner fails to take the necessary actions within the specified time frame, the department will inform the owner by letter, that a water service termination action will be initiated if the owner does not comply within ten days. In the event that the owner fails to comply with the second notification, the department will inform the owner by certified mail that the water service will be terminated within seven days. In the event that the owner promptly informs the department, in writing, of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the department but in no case will the extension exceed an additional 30 days. 
(j)  Existing in-use backflow prevention devices. Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the department to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede the effectiveness of that backflow preventer, or such as to result in an unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the department determines that the degree of hazard has increased, as may be the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment, any existing backflow device must be upgraded to a reduced pressure principle device, or a reduced pressure principle device must be installed in the event that no backflow device was present. The owner is responsible for submitting the necessary plans to the department for review and approval, for each unpermitted existing device, within 30 days of written notification of identification of said device by the department. 
(k)  Emergency termination of service. If the department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(l)  Responsibilities of the owner. The owner is responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross connections on his premises. The owner, having been informed in writing by the department, shall at owner's expense, install, maintain, and test, or have tested, any and all backflow preventers on owner's premises and shall correct any malfunctions. 
(m)  Installation requirements. Only backflow preventers approved by the state department of environmental protection will be allowed. Backflow preventers must be installed in a manner approved by the department. 
(n)  Bypasses. The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the bypass. Owners who cannot shut down their water service for testing of the devices must install a bypass with appropriate backflow preventer. 
(o)  Testing and repair. Periodic testing and inspection of all reduced pressure principle backflow devices shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of 310 CMR 22.22 and the department's cross connection control program. Testing of devices by the department's certified tester shall be conducted during the department's regular business hours. Any backflow device which fails a test shall be repaired or replaced within two weeks of the date of the test, at the owner's expense. The owner must maintain on the premises a spare parts kit and any special tools required for removal and reassembly of the device. Upon completion of the repair, the department will retest the device. Notwithstanding this subsection, high hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails a test and cannot be repaired immediately. 
(p)  Fees and charges. 
(1)  In accordance with section 23-56, the director may set a schedule of fees or charges for: 
a.  Testing; 
b.  Retesting; 
c.  Plan approval. 
(2)  Any fees collected for the water cross-connection program under M.G.L. c. 111, § 160A (310 CMR 22.22) shall be placed in a segregated account to be used exclusively for water cross connection related expenses (personal service, purchased services, supplies, other charges and capital acquisitions). The fund shall be established as a reserve for appropriation by the city council; and the available funds may be used upon recommended transfers by the department head, through the mayor and with approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 51-1992, 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 23-62. - Protection of public water supplies. 
(a)  Illegal entry. No person shall wade or bathe in any source of public drinking water supply including, but not limited to, Babson Reservoir, Goose Cove Reservoir, Haskell's Pond, Dike's Pond, Wallace Pond, Lily Pond, Fernwood Lake and Klondike Quarry, and any tributaries thereto; or cause any animal to go in or upon such source of water supply. No person shall, unless permitted by written permit of the director of public works, fish in a drinking water supply; enter or go in any boat, seaplane or other contrivance; or enter upon the ice for any purpose, including the cutting or taking of ice. 
(b)  Discharge of contaminants and pollutants in watershed. No person shall discharge any residential, commercial, institutional or industrial refuse or waste product or polluting liquid, no human excrement or compost containing human excrement, or other substance of a nature poisonous or injurious either to human beings or to animals, or other putrescible organic matter whatsoever, directly into or at any place from which said liquid or substance may flow or be washed or carried into a public water supply or tributary thereto. 
(Ord. No. 51-1992, 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 23-63. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of section 23-61 shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation in addition to any penalties imposed by the commonwealth, and shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 51-1992, 10-13-1992) 
State Law reference— M.G.L. c. 111, § 160A.  
Sec. 23-64. - Water systems—Public. 
(a)  Name. The name of this section shall be the "Gloucester Public Water Systems Ordinance." 
(b)  Preamble and purpose. The people of the city declare that access to clean and affordable water is essential for life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness — both for the health of the people and for the ecological systems which support human and natural communities — therefore, that it is a right belonging to the people of the city. We believe that our rights are threatened when public water systems, which guarantee that access, are controlled by a corporate few, rather than by our community. We believe that privatization of that infrastructure constitutes a usurpation of our democratic right to make decisions about that infrastructure, and therefore, that we are duty bound under the Massachusetts Constitution to prohibit such action. 
(c)  Statement of law. Public water systems and the infrastructure necessary for the distribution of public water supplies within the city shall be owned by the City of Gloucester or a municipal authority of the city, held as part of the public trust for the residents of the city and the ecosystems within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-26-2010, §§ 1, 2, 4)  
Secs. 23-65—23-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLES AND WIRES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Posting notices on utility poles prohibited, § 14-8; injury to trees by placing or moving of poles, § 24-20. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate wires, M.G.L. c. 166, § 25; poles and wires, M.G.L. c. 166, § 30 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 23-75. - Inspection of wires department established; city electrician designated inspector of wires. 
An inspection of wires department is hereby established, the affairs of which shall be conducted by the city electrician. Such officer is hereby designated as the officer required by the provisions of M.G.L. c. 166, § 32, and for all the purposes of such section he shall be the inspector of wires. 
(Code 1970, § 7-20) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq.; city electrician, § 2-135 et seq.; departments generally, § 2-260 et seq.  
Sec. 23-76. - Duties of inspector of wires. 
The inspector of wires shall have all the powers and be subject to all the duties conferred and required by law. He shall supervise every wire over or under streets or buildings in the city, and every wire within a building which is designed to carry an electric light, heat and power current, except wires within a manufactured building or building component as defined in the state building code and inspected in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the state building code commission. The inspector shall promptly notify the person owning or operating any wire under his jurisdiction whenever its attachment, insulation support or appliances are unsuitable or unsafe, or whenever the tags or marks therein required by M.G.L., c. 166, § 32, are insufficient or illegible. He shall see that all laws, ordinances and regulations relative to wires are strictly enforced. 
(Code 1970, § 7-21) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, M.G.L. c. 166, § 32.  
Sec. 23-77. - Pole specifications. 
All poles for telegraph, telephone and electric lines shall be straight, properly trimmed and painted, in all respects, to the satisfaction and acceptance of the city engineer. Such poles shall not be less than 25 feet in height from the ground, shall be, if of wood, not less than six inches in diameter at the smaller end, and ten inches in diameter at the ground. Such poles shall be properly set in the ground to a depth of at least five feet and shall be octagonal in shape whenever the city council shall so require. When it shall be necessary during the installation of a new pole to temporarily maintain a double pole, the permanent repairs shall be rendered forthwith and the superfluous pole removed within 30 days. Failure to comply with the ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 per instance to the owner of record the pole in question. This amendment shall become effective as of May 1, 1997. 
(Code 1970, § 7-25; Ord. No. 43-1997, § I, 3-18-1997) 
State Law reference— Safety specifications for poles and other structures used to support lines, M.G.L. c. 166, § 34.  
Sec. 23-78. - Poles not to interfere with hydrants, water pipes, etc. 
No poles shall be placed within 15 feet of any hydrant, nor shall any pole be so placed as to interfere with any water pipe, driveway or gutter or intersection of streets. 
(Code 1970, § 7-26)  
Sec. 23-79. - Supervision of work. 
All work establishing and locating any poles by any order or permit of the city council shall be under the direction of the city engineer whose duty shall be to see that all such poles are located according to the plan required by section 23-106. 
(Code 1970, § 7-24)  
Sec. 23-80. - Inspection of poles and supports. 
The inspector of wires shall, as frequently as practicable, thoroughly inspect the condition of all poles carrying electric wires upon or over the streets and buildings within the city, and all supports of such wires when attached to buildings, and ascertain if such poles and supports are kept in proper condition and not weakened by decay or other causes. 
(Code 1970, § 7-33)  
Sec. 23-81. - Repair of defective poles and supports. 
In case any person owning, leasing or operating wires shall neglect or refuse to maintain the poles and supports for such wires in proper condition for safety, the inspector of wires shall cause the poles and supports to be put in proper condition at the expense of the person owning or operating the same, after first giving the person or corporation due notice in writing of his intended action. 
(Code 1970, § 7-34)  
Sec. 23-82. - Removal of poles. 
No pole which has been located and erected under the provisions of this article shall be removed without the written permission of the city council and under the direction of the city engineer. 
(Code 1970, § 7-35)  
Sec. 23-83. - Information required of persons operating wires. 
Every person or contractor operating electric or other wires over or under any street, way or building in the city, upon request of the inspector of wires, shall furnish, within 15 days thereafter, accurate lists and plans of the posts or other supports of his wires, the location of conduits and manholes, if such exist, with information as to location, where and what service is rendered, whether telegraphic, telephonic, telecommunicative, power or electric lighting, and in the latter case, whether arc or incandescent current is used for any district or section in the city. Upon his request, the inspector shall also be furnished such information as to kind, size and tested strength of supporting or service wires, the maximum volts used, together with such other information as may be necessary for the faithful and effectual discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1970, § 7-22)  
Sec. 23-84. - Compliance with plan and permit. 
The construction of any line of electric wires shall conform to the plan and permit provided for in sections 23-105 to 23-112 in every particular, and any pole, wire or conduit placed otherwise than as therein designated shall immediately be removed by the department of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 7-23)  
Sec. 23-85. - Construction of lines crossing streets. 
Whenever any power line shall cross any street or way, it shall be of a height of not less than 25 feet above such street or way, and be protected by proper guard wires, and when practicable, cross at right angles. 
(Code 1970, § 7-27)  
Sec. 23-86. - Insulation of wires running through street. 
Every person having any wire charged with electricity running through a public street shall securely fasten and insulate such wire so that it shall not injure man or tree when coming in contact with the same. 
(Code 1970, § 7-28) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Safety specifications for wires, M.G.L. c. 166, § 30.  
Sec. 23-87. - Permission required to place wires on poles of another. 
No person authorized under this article to erect and maintain poles or electric lines shall suffer or permit any other person, except its or his own agents or employees or the agents and employees of the city, to place wires upon such poles or upon the fixtures thereto affixed, without permission being first obtained from the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 7-29)  
Sec. 23-88. - Location of antennas and similar wires. 
(a)  No antenna, or other wire adapted for the same or similar purpose, shall be attached to any pole, structure or equipment used or operated for the purpose of supporting wires carrying a current of electricity and no such antenna or other wire shall be so located or strung in any manner above or beneath any outdoor, overhead wire carrying a current of electricity. 
(b)  The inspector of wires shall notify any person owning or operating any antenna or other wire referred to in this section, whenever the location thereof is in violation of this section, to remove such antenna or wire. Upon failure to so remove the same within 48 hours after notice from the inspector, the inspector shall, at the expense of the city, remove the same, and the city may recover in contract of the owner or party maintaining such antenna or wire, the expense incurred in such removal. 
(Code 1970, § 7-30)  
Sec. 23-89. - Attaching fixtures to trees. 
No person shall attach any electric wire, insulator or other device for the holding of an electric wire to any tree growing or planted upon any public highway of the city, without a written permit therefor from the director of public works. 
(Code 1970, § 7-32) 
Cross reference— Trees and shrubs, § 24-15 et seq.  
Sec. 23-90. - Injury to trees, shrubs, etc., by workmen. 
No person shall, for the purpose of placing or maintaining wires or lines on poles or for any other purpose connected with the construction and maintenance of telegraph or other electric lines, climb any tree by the use of spurs or of any instrument which shall pierce the tree, or in any way injure, pierce, tear, cut, deface or destroy any tree or branch of a tree or any shrub or other plant, or fixture or ornament or utility in any street, road, way or public place of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 7-31) 
Cross reference— Trees and shrubs, § 24-15 et seq.  
Sec. 23-91. - Temporary removal of wires. 
(a)  Whenever, in order to move a building or for any other necessary purpose, a person desires that the wires of any company be cut, disconnected or removed, the company shall forthwith cut, disconnect or remove the same, if the person desiring this to be done has first left a written statement, signed by him, of the time when, and the place, described by reference to the crossings of streets or highways, where he wishes to remove the wires, at the office of the company in the city seven days before the time so stated, or, if there is no such office, if he has deposited such statement in the post office, postage prepaid, and directed to the company at its office nearest to such place, ten days before the time mentioned in the statement. If the company neglects or refuses to cut, disconnect or remove wires, as hereinbefore provided, the inspector of wires may cause the same to be cut, disconnected or removed, and the city or town may recover of the company in contract the expense of so doing. 
(b)  Every person having any wire charged with electricity running through a tree in a public highway shall temporarily remove any such wire or the electricity therefrom, when it shall be necessary, in order to take down, clean or prune any trees growing in the public highway, within seven days after the service upon the owner of such wire, or his agent, of a written notice to remove such wire or the electricity therefrom, signed by the director of the department of public works. 
(c)  Any member of the fire department or other officer of the city may cut, disconnect or remove the wires of any person in case of fire to a building, when such wires interfere with the operations of the firemen, or the extinguishment of the fire, or access to or egress from such building, and the city shall not be liable for any expense or damages on account of such cutting, disconnecting or removing. 
(Code 1970, §§ 7-36, 7-37) 
State Law reference— Temporary removal of wires, M.G.L. c. 166, § 39.  
Sec. 23-92. - Removal of certain wires. 
(a)  No person owning, leasing or operating wires, nor any employee thereof, shall leave or permit an unused piece of wire to be left on the surface of any street or sidewalk, or an unused coil or loose end of wire to remain attached to any crossarm or post for more than 24 hours. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the inspector of wires to cause to be removed all dead wires of whatever nature attached to buildings if, in his judgment, they are in a dangerous condition or liable to become dangerous to life or property. He shall notify in writing the person owning, leasing or operating such wires of his desire for the removal thereof and give him at least ten days in which to comply with the requirements, except in cases in which in his judgment there is immediate liability of injury to persons or property from the wires, and in all such cases the notice shall require their removal immediately. In the event of the refusal of any person to take proper action, the inspector may cause the work to be done and the expense to be charged to the owner. 
(Code 1970, §§ 7-38, 7-40) 
State Law reference— Removal of abandoned wires, M.G.L. c. 166, § 30; removal of untagged wires, M.G.L. c. 166, § 32.  
Sec. 23-93. - Indemnification of city against claims for injuries. 
Every person erecting, maintaining or using poles, wires or other apparatus mentioned in this article shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, servants, and agents, from and against all lawful claims and demands for injuries to persons and property occasioned by the maintenance and operation of such poles, wires or apparatus or the transmission of electric currents by means thereof, and the agents and officers of the city exercising the rights and powers given or reserved in this chapter shall not be held liable to such person on account thereof, or by reason of any injury caused thereby. 
(Code 1970, § 7-41)  
Secs. 23-94—23-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN 
 
Sec. 23-105. - Required; authority of city council to grant. 
No person shall erect, locate or maintain any telegraph, telephone, television or other lines of electric wires or conduits therefor or poles or other structures in support thereof within the city, without first obtaining a permit so to do. The city council shall have the exclusive authority to permit the erection and maintenance of such wires, conduits, poles and structures within the city. 
(Code 1970, § 7-47)  
Sec. 23-106. - Street plan to accompany application. 
(a)  Whenever an application is made for a permit required by this division, the applicant shall furnish and file in the office of the city clerk, at the time of making such application, a plan of the streets to be effected upon a suitable scale. Upon such plan shall be marked, by dots or otherwise each and every pole presently located on the street, within the distance where locations are required by the application filed, and in characters to distinguish one from the other. 
(b)  The plan referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall not be required when the lines for which a permit is sought are to be located on poles already erected. 
(Code 1970, § 7-48)  
Sec. 23-107. - Agreements required of applicant. 
(a)  No permit required by this division shall be issued until the applicant or the owner of the structure to be erect, if different, has filed with the city council a written agreement accepting and promising to abide by all the conditions and provisions of this article and all orders, rules, regulations and amendments hereafter made in addition thereto. 
(b)  In addition to the agreement required by subsection (a) of this section, each applicant for a permit required by this division shall execute an agreement in writing satisfactory to the general counsel agreeing to accept the location and conditions of granting such permit and to save the city harmless from any and all claims whatsoever, by whomsoever made, for damages, costs, expenses, charges or compensation for or on account of or in any way growing out of the activities authorized by the permit. Such agreement, after its approval by the general counsel shall be filed with the city clerk, and no permit shall be issued until such agreement is so filed. 
(Code 1970, § 7-49)  
Sec. 23-108. - Action on application by city engineer. 
Every application for a permit required by this division shall be referred to the city engineer. The city engineer shall examine every such application in or over any street or public place to be effected, and shall report to the city council any facts which, in his opinion, bear upon the question of granting or refusing to grant such application. 
(Code 1970, § 7-50)  
Sec. 23-109. - Hearing required on certain applications. 
No permit to erect a pole for the support of any electric wires, or for the construction of underground conduits, shall be granted until after a public hearing has been held by the city council on the application for such permit, after at least 14 days' notice of such hearing, duly advertised at the expense of the applicant in one or more local newspapers. 
(Code 1970, § 7-51)  
Sec. 23-110. - Issuance; contents. 
The city council may issue a permit required by this division to the person applying therefor. At the time of such issuance, the council shall determine and specify, on the plan required by section 23-106 by red dots, where each pole may be located. A permit so issued shall specifically designate the streets where the wires may run, and the location of each pole thereon, as exhibited on such plan, the kind of pole, the height at which all wires must be placed, and the dimensions and locations of the underground conduit, if such wires or any part thereof shall be laid underground. 
(Code 1970, § 7-52)  
Sec. 23-111. - Issued subject to certain rights of city. 
(a)  Any permit granted under this division shall be subject to the right of the city, free of charge, to place its fire alarm, telegraph and police signal wires upon the poles or through the conduit so permitted to be maintained. 
(b)  Any permit granted under this division shall be subject to the right of the city to permit the location of lines by other persons upon poles and through conduits already erected, upon payment to the owner thereof a reasonable compensation to be determined by the parties, or if they fail to agree, to be determined after notice and hearing by the city council. 
(c)  All permits granted under the provisions of this division shall be upon condition that the wires, poles or structures covered thereby may be altered or changed at any time by the city council after 14 days' notice and opportunity to be heard shall have been given to the parties interested, and that any such wires, poles or structures may be temporarily removed, altered or changed by the department of public works, after one days' notice in writing, in case of public necessity, at the expense of the person owning such wires, poles or structures, without liability on the part of the city therefor. Any pole so removed shall be immediately replaced in its original legal location as soon as the necessity for which such pole was removed has passed. In case any location in any street shall be altered, a substitute location in some other street may be granted by the city council in accordance with the terms and conditions of this division. 
(Code 1970, § 7-53)  
Sec. 23-112. - Records to be kept. 
The plan provided for in section 23-106 and a copy of the permit issued under this division shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1970, § 7-54)  
Secs. 23-113—23-123. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 23-124. - Purpose. 
(a)  Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies; alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding. 
(b)  Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm drainage system is necessary for the protection of the city's water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. 
(c)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent pollutants from entering the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4); 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4; 
(3)  To require the removal of all such illicit connections; 
(4)  To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and 
(5)  To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of section 23-124 through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-125. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Authorized enforcement agency means the director of the department of public works, its employees, officers, or agents are designated to enforce this article. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended. 
Discharge of pollutants means the addition from any source of any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drainage system or into the waters of the United States or Commonwealth of Massachusetts from any source. 
Groundwater means water beneath the surface of the ground. 
Illicit connection means a surface or subsurface drain or conveyance which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drainage system, including without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Illicit discharge means direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in seciton 23-131. The term does not include a discharge in compliance with a NPDES stormwater discharge permit or a surface water discharge permit, or resulting from fire fighting activities exempted pursuant to section 23-131. 
Impervious surface means any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks and rooftops. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or municipal storm drainage system means the system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or manmade or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the city. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States. 
Non-stormwater discharge means discharge to the municipal storm drainage system not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Owner means a person with a legal or equitable interest in property. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee or agent of such person. 
Pollutant means any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Pollutants shall include without limitation: 
(1)  Paints, varnishes and solvents; 
(2)  Oil and other automotive fluids; 
(3)  Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; 
(4)  Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables; 
(5)  Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; 
(6)  Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; 
(7)  Dissolved and particulate metals; 
(8)  Animal wastes; 
(9)  Rock, sand, salt, soils; 
(10)  Construction wastes and residues; and 
(11)  Noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Process wastewater means water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product or waste product. 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface water runoff and drainage. 
Surface water discharge permit means a permit issued by the department of environmental protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Toxic or hazardous material or waste means any material, which because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under M.G.L. c. 21C and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000. 
Wastewater means any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product. 
Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel through which water flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream. 
Waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts means all waters within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, costal waters, and groundwater. 
Wetlands means coastal and freshwater wetlands, including wet meadows, marshes, swamps, and bogs, as defined and determined pursuant to M.G.L. c. 131, § 40 and 310 CMR 10.00 et seq. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-126. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to flows entering the municipal storm drainage system. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-127. - Authority. 
This article is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Procedures Act, and pursuant to M.G.L. c. 83, §§ 1, 10, and 16, as amended by St. 2004, c. 149, §§ 135—140, and the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-128. - Responsibility for administration. 
The authorized enforcement agency shall administer, implement and enforce this article, and any rules and regulations adopted thereunder. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the authorized enforcement agency to employees or agents of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-129. - Regulations. 
The authorized enforcement agency may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this article failure by the authorized enforcement agency to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this article. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-130. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), into a watercourse, or into the waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
(b)  Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drainage system, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection. 
(c)  Obstruction of municipal storm drainage system. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the municipal storm drainage system without prior written approval from the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-131. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities. 
(b)  The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from the prohibition of non-stormwaters provided that the source is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drainage system: 
(1)  Waterline flushing; 
(2)  Flow from potable water sources; 
(3)  Springs; 
(4)  Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(5)  Diverted stream flow; 
(6)  Rising groundwater; 
(7)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(8)  Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or air conditioning condensation; 
(9)  Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
(10)  Water from individual residential car washing; 
(11)  Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one ppm chlorine) provided the water is allowed to stand for one week prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance; 
(12)  Discharge from street sweeping; 
(13)  Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test; 
(14)  Non-stormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit or a surface water discharge permit, waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the department of environmental protection, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations; and 
(15)  Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the authorized enforcement agency as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-132. - Emergency suspension of municipal storm drainage system access. 
The authorized enforcement agency may suspend municipal storm drainage system access to any person or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an emergency suspension order, the authorized enforcement agency may take all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment, 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-133. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of or suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage system or waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify the fire and police departments, board of health, and the department of public works. In the event of a release of non-hazardous material, the reporting person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency no later than the next business day. The reporting person shall provide to the authorized enforcement agency written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-134. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Director of department of public works. The director of the department of public works or appointed designee shall enforce the regulations of this article, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations. 
(b)  Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of the regulations of this article, permit, notice, or order issued there under, the authorized enforcement agency may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(c)  Orders. 
(1)  The authorized enforcement agency or an authorized agent of the authorized enforcement agency may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this article or the regulations there under, which may include: 
a.  Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4; 
b.  Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
c.  That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; and 
d.  Remediation of contamination in connection therewith, 
(2)  If the authorized enforcement agency determines that abatement or remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the city may, at its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(3)  Within 30 days after completion by the city of all measures necessary to abate the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the city, including administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the authorized enforcement agency within 30 days of receipt of the notification of the costs incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a decision of the authorized enforcement agency affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a special assessment against the property owner and shall constitute a lien on the owner's property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in M.G.L. c. 59, § 57 after the 31st day at which the costs first become due. 
(d)  Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article, order or permit issued there under, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the city may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D and adopted by the city as a general ordinance in which case the authorized enforcement agency of the city shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the first violation shall be a written warning. The penalty for the second violation shall be $50.00. The penalty for the third violation shall be shall be $100.00. The penalty for the fourth and subsequent offenses shall be $200.00. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Entry to perform duties under this article. To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the authorized enforcement agency, its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and regulations and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the authorized enforcement agency deems reasonably necessary. 
(g)  Appeals. The decisions or orders of the authorized enforcement agency shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-135. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Sec. 23-136. - Transitional provisions. 
Residential property owners shall have 90 days from the effective date of section 23-124 of this article to comply with its provisions provided good cause is shown for the failure to comply with section 23-124 during that period. 
(Ord. of 8-28-2012)  
Chapter 24 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Power of department of public works pertaining to vegetation, § 2-283; cutting or removing trees to move buildings, § 5-28; posting notices on trees prohibited, § 14-8; notice to property owners of time allowed for removal of trees, where streets are under construction, § 21-40; attaching fixtures to trees, § 23-89; injury to trees, shrubs, etc., by workmen installing wires, § 23-90. 
State Law reference— Shade trees, M.G.L. c. 87, § 1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
Park trees are defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in designated public parks in all areas owned by the city or on land to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees or shade trees are defined as all trees within a public way or on the boundaries thereof. 
Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I) 
State Law reference— Definition of public shade trees, M.G.L. c. 87, § 1.  
Sec. 24-2. - Tree warden—Position created. 
There is hereby created and established a position entitled tree warden, superintendent of insect control and city forester (hereafter, called "tree warden"). This person shall be qualified by training and experience in the field of arboriculture and licensed to apply pesticides by the state pesticide board. The position of forest warden held by the fire chief shall remain separate from the position created here. The mayor shall have the right to review the tree warden's conduct and decisions. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I) 
Cross reference— Fire chief to act as forest warden, § 8-23. 
State Law reference— Local superintendents of insect pest control, M.G.L. c. 132, § 13; powers of tree wardens, M.G.L. c. 87, § 2.  
Sec. 24-3. - Same—Term of office. 
The mayor of the city shall appoint the tree warden for the term of three years. The state bureau of shade tree management and pest control shall be notified in writing forthwith by the city clerk of the appointment of the name and address of the tree warden. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I) 
State Law reference— Authority to appoint a tree warden, M.G.L. c. 41, § 1.  
Sec. 24-4. - Street tree—Species allowed without written permission. 
No species other than the following trees may be planted as street trees without written permission of the tree warden: 
Small Trees 	Medium Trees 	Large Trees 
Crabapple, flowering 	Ash (Green) 	Elm 
Golden rain tree 	Honey locust 	Coffee tree 
Hawthorne 	Linden 	Maple (Silver) 
Bradford pear 	Oak (English) 	Maple (Sugar) 
Red bud 	Oak (Red) 	Sycamore 
Peach, flowering 	Birch (River) 	Sycamore (London plane) 
Plum, purple leaf 	Poplar 	Cottonwood 
Service berry 	Sassafras 	Tulip tree 
	Merrill magnolia 	Beech (Purple) 
 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-5. - Same—Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with their size. No trees may be planted closer together than the following: 
(1)  Small trees: 30 feet; 
(2)  Medium trees: 40 feet; and 
(3)  Large trees: 50 feet; 
except in special plantings designed or approved by the tree warden. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-6. - Same—Location. 
No street tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet to any street corner measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any fire plug. Shade trees may be planted at a distance not exceeding 20 feet from public ways provided that the written consent of any private owner of such land is first obtained. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I) 
State Law reference— Planting of shade trees, M.G.L. c. 87, § 7.  
Sec. 24-7. - Planting near utilities. 
No street tree other than those species listed under the small trees heading in section 24-4 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-8. - Public tree care. 
The tree warden shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs on the edge of roads, streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds, in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 24-14. This chapter does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners provided that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this section and sections 24-4 through 24-7. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-9. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this section at the determination of the tree warden. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-10. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
The tree warden may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is unsafe or is affected with any injurious fungus, insects or other pest. The tree warden shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or harbor insects or diseases which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The tree warden shall coordinate his efforts as necessary with the commonwealth's division of plant pest control, department of agriculture. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I) 
State Law reference— Director of the division of plant pest control, M.G.L. c. 128, § 16 et seq.  
Sec. 24-11. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-12. - Interference with tree warden or deputies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the tree warden or his deputies while planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-13. - Enforcement. 
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed $300.00. Each day an unlawful act occurs, and/or each tree acted upon, may constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-14. - Cutting of public shade trees; hearings. 
Public shade trees shall not be cut, trimmed or removed, in whole or in part, by any person other than the tree warden or his deputy, even if such person be the owner of the tree in the land on which such tree is situated, except upon a permit in writing from said tree warden nor shall they be cut down or removed by the tree warden or his deputy or other persons without a public hearing, and said tree warden or deputy shall cause a notice of the time and place of such hearing thereof, which shall identify the size, type and location of said shade tree or trees to be cut down or removed to be posted in two or more public places in the city and upon the tree or trees at least seven days before such hearing and to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than seven days before the day of the hearing. Such hearings, when concerning scenic roads, shall be consolidated into a single public hearing before the tree warden and the planning board. This section is consistent with the procedures prescribed in M.G.L. c. 87, § 3. 
(Ord. of 8-4-1987, ch. I)  
Sec. 24-15. - Permit required to plant trees, shrubs in certain areas. 
No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted in any section of the highways of the city or grounds occupied by public buildings until such tree or shrub shall first have been approved and the place where it is to be planted designated by the tree warden and a permit granted therefor. 
(Code 1970, § 24-11) 
State Law reference— Municipal approval required to plant trees in public ways, M.G.L. c. 87, § 2.  
Sec. 24-16. - Cutting, removing, etc.; permit from tree warden required. 
(a)  No person shall cut, prune, break, climb, injure or remove any living tree in the public highway or cut, disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree on a public highway, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the tree warden. 
(b)  Any citizen may petition for the removal of a tree in the public streets, upon which a hearing shall be had as provided in M.G.L. c. 87, § 3. If there is no objection thereto, as mentioned in M.G.L., c. 87, § 4, the tree warden shall issue a permit to the person petitioning therefor if he thinks favorably of such action. If there is objection, as stated in M.G.L. c. 87, § 4, the mayor shall pass on the petition. Should a permit finally be issued, and if the removal is for the improvement of the petitioner's property or for the construction of a building, the expense of the removal shall be borne by the petitioner, but the method of removal shall be directed by the tree warden. 
(Code 1970, § 24-12)  
Sec. 24-17. - Spraying. 
No person shall spray, with any chemicals or insecticides, any tree in a public highway without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the tree warden. 
(Code 1970, § 24-13)  
Sec. 24-18. - Attachment of ropes and fixtures. 
No person, without a written permit from the department of public works, shall place any rope or other fixture on a tree or guard in a public highway. 
(Code 1970, § 24-14)  
Sec. 24-19. - Impeding passage of air and water to roots. 
No person, without a written permit from the tree warden, shall place or maintain, upon the ground in a public highway, cement, stone or other substance which impedes the free passage of water and air to the roots of any tree in the highway, without leaving an open space of ground outside the trunk of the tree in an area not less than four feet square. 
(Code 1970, § 24-15)  
Sec. 24-20. - Injury by placing or removal of poles. 
No person shall place a pole within eight feet of any tree on a public highway in the city, nor shall any person remove a pole where, in so doing, the roots of the tree will be in danger of being injured, without first notifying the tree warden of the removal. 
(Code 1970, § 24-16) 
Cross reference— Poles and wires, § 23-75 et seq.  
Sec. 24-21. - Injuring by pouring salt water on highway. 
No person shall pour salt water upon any public highway in such a way as to injure any tree planted or growing thereon. 
(Code 1970, § 24-17)  
Sec. 24-22. - Protection when buildings are erected or repaired. 
In the erection or repair of any building or structure, the owner thereof shall place such guards on all nearby trees on the public highways as shall effectually prevent injury to them. 
(Code 1970, § 24-18) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5.  
Sec. 24-23. - Injuring or removing protective devices. 
No person shall injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any tree placed on the public highway. 
(Code 1970, § 24-19)  
Sec. 24-24. - Exemptions from article. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to any highway now or hereafter within the jurisdiction of the state highway commissioners; nor as preventing the removal of any tree or part which endangers persons traveling on the highway or the removal of any tree if so ordered by the city council for the purpose of widening the highway. 
(Code 1970, § 24-20) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to trim, cut or remove trees, etc., which endangers persons traveling on the highway or for purposes of widening any such highway, M.G.L. c. 87, § 5.  
Secs. 24-25—24-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY PLANTINGS COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— In keeping with the general format of the Code art. II, §§ 24-41—24-44, have been redesignated as herein set out by the editor. 
 
Sec. 24-41. - Established. 
There is hereby established a city plantings committee, consisting of the director of public works or his designee, the tree warden, and not less than three nor more than seven additional members appointed by the mayor from the voters and residents of the city. Appointees shall serve staggered terms of three years, and appointments shall be subject to Charter sections 3-3 and 2-10. 
(Ord. No. 15-1991, 5-28-1991)  
Sec. 24-42. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the city plantings committee shall be designated, from time to time, by the mayor. Members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 15-1991, 5-28-1991)  
Sec. 24-43. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city plantings committee to plan and coordinate plantings on city land, in public parks, and on public land alongside roads and ways within the city; to foster programs for maintaining these; to coordinate with representatives of the state planting arrangements involving state highways and lands; to advise the city on questions of planting; and in general, to encourage and facilitate plantings which benefit the city. The committee has the duty to determine that any land to be planted is not privately controlled land. 
(Ord. No. 15-1991, 5-28-1991)  
Sec. 24-44. - Authority of tree warden or director of public works. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as reducing or abridging the authority of the tree warden or the director of public works as provided in this chapter and any other applicable provisions in this Code of Ordinances and under M.G.L. c. 87. 
(Ord. No. 15-1991, 5-28-1991)  
Chapter 25 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate vehicles, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22; common carriers generally, M.G.L. c. 159; common carriers of passengers by motor vehicles, M.G.L. c. 159A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 25-1—25-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS AND PRIVATE LIVERY VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Use of taxicab stands, § 22-171. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-15. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be deemed and construed to have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless from the particular context it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended: 
Carrier shall mean and include every person, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other form of business organization, their lessees, receivers or trustees, engaged in operating, or causing to be operated, taxicabs. 
Compensation shall mean and include any money, thing of value, payment, consideration, reward, tip, donation, gratuity or profit paid to or accepted or received by the driver of any vehicle in exchange for transportation of a person, whether paid upon solicitation, demand, or contract, or voluntarily, or intended as a gratuity or donation. 
CORI shall mean an official report obtained from the Mass. Criminal Offender Record Information System and shall be a confidential report as required by state law. A CORI report received for the purposes of this Chapter 25 shall not be disseminated beyond the authorized requestor and the city police chief or his designee. 
Driver shall mean and include every person driving, operating, or in charge of any vehicle. 
Motor vehicle or vehicle shall mean every motor-propelled vehicle used for the transportation of persons over the public streets. 
Private livery vehicle shall mean a vehicle licensed as such and its use shall be limited to trips by the hour, previously arranged for out of town trips, funerals, weddings, or sightseeing. 
Taxi stand shall mean a place on a public street designated by the city council for the use, while awaiting employment, of taxicabs and private liveries. 
Taxicab shall mean and include every vehicle of a distinctive color or colors or insignia used for the transportation of passengers over the streets of the city, but not over defined routes, for compensation, the charge to patrons being determined and indicated by the mechanical calculation of a taximeter, except vehicles used in car pools. 
Taximeter shall mean and include a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance or for waiting time or both and upon which such charge is plainly registered by means of figures, indicating dollars and cents. 
(Code 1970, § 25-1; Ord. of 2-11-1986, § I; Ord. of 10-23-2012) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-16. - Identification of taxicabs. 
Each taxicab operated in accordance with the terms of this article shall have the name of the city and the trade name of the carrier painted on either side of the vehicle in letters must be not less than four inches high and one-half inch wide in a position approved from time to time by the city council. All lettering of taxicabs shall be of a contrasting color. No permit shall be granted to any carrier to operate any taxicab whose color scheme, name, trade name, monogram, or insignia shall be in conflict with, or in imitation of, any color scheme, name, trade name, monogram or insignia used by any other carrier, and which shall be of such character and nature as to be misleading or deceptive to the public. 
(Code 1970, § 25-4; Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018) 
State Law reference— Identification of taxicabs, M.G.L. c. 40, § 22.  
Sec. 25-17. - Taxicab roof lights. 
All taxicabs shall be equipped with roof lights and such lights shall be on when the taxicab is vacant. 
(Code 1970, § 25-5)  
Sec. 25-18. - Misleading signs on private livery vehicles. 
No private livery vehicle shall carry any sign whatsoever that would mislead the public to believe that the vehicle is a taxicab. 
(Code 1970, § 25-6)  
Sec. 25-19. - Taxicab driver's badge. 
All taxicab drivers must display a taxicab photo identification (ID) in their vehicles. The photo IDs are to be supplied by the taxi company and to remain the property of the taxi company and the photo ID will be affixed with the city seal in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1970, § 25-7; Ord. of 7-22-2003(02), § I)  
Sec. 25-20. - Availability of taxicab service. 
Taxicab service shall be available by telephone call, by engagement of the taxicab when standing at a regularly assigned taxi stand, or when properly hailed from the street or curb. It shall be unlawful for any carrier or driver of a taxicab to refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person upon request, anywhere in the city, when a taxicab of the carrier is standing in a regularly assigned taxi stand, and such service shall be rendered immediately upon request. 
(Code 1970, § 25-8)  
Sec. 25-21. - Drivers of taxicabs to use most direct route. 
Every driver of a taxicab who is engaged to carry passengers shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destinations, unless otherwise directed by a passenger. 
(Code 1970, § 25-9)  
Sec. 25-22. - Private livery vehicles not to be parked in taxi stand. 
No person shall park, or permit to be parked, any private livery vehicle in any regularly assigned taxi stand. 
(Code 1970, § 25-10)  
Sec. 25-23. - Limitation on number of passengers. 
The number of passengers which may be carried in any vehicle covered by a permit issued under section 25-37 shall be limited to the seating capacity of the vehicle as specified by the manufacturer. No person shall be carried in the vehicle who is required to share in any way the seating space occupied by another, nor shall any person be carried who is required to occupy any space in or on the vehicle which does not provide a seat. 
(Code 1970, § 25-3)  
Sec. 25-24. - Police inspections. 
Any vehicle under this article shall be subject to inspection by the police department at any time for the purpose of determining if the condition of the vehicle is a hazard to public safety during the term of said license, and the cost of said inspections shall be $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 2018-182, 10-23-2018)  
Secs. 25-25—25-34. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 25-35. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall drive, operate, or cause to be operated, nor shall any person employ, permit or allow another to drive, operate or cause to be operated, any taxicab or private livery vehicle over any street of this city, for the purpose of transporting passengers for compensation, regardless of whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the city, nor shall any person solicit, induce, persuade, invite or procure such transportation of passengers for compensation, or accept compensation therefor, without a permit first having been obtained from the licensing commission authorizing such operations and acts. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle which is lawfully transporting a passenger from a point outside to a destination within the city, or is en route to a destination outside the city; provided that no driver or other person in charge of the vehicle shall, without such permit, solicit, or accept a passenger from within this city for transportation to any destination whatsoever; 
(2)  A vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise issued by the city; 
(3)  A vehicle being operated under what is commonly referred to as a share the ride plan or carpool or agreement, where a person en route from his place of residence to his place of business, or vice versa, transports another person, living and working in the same general vicinities upon payment of a sum estimated to cover the actual approximate cost of operation of the vehicle; 
(4)  Vehicles being used as ambulances and being operated pursuant to authority granted by and in accordance with other ordinances or laws; 
(5)  Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by a person using the vehicle under a plan commonly known as a U-Drive-It but not when transporting other persons for compensation. 
(Code 1970, § 25-21)  
Sec. 25-36. - Petition. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall file a petition therefor with the licensing commission. The petition shall be verified by oath of the applicant, if a natural person or by oath of an officer or partner of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, partnership, association or incorporated company. The petition shall set forth the name, age, and address of the petitioner, if a natural person, or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of all its officers, together with their respective addresses, or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of the partners comprising the partnership, association or company, together with their respective ages and addresses. The petition shall also state the trade name or style, if any, under which the petitioner proposes to operate, full information pertaining to the extent, character and quality of the proposed operations and the manner in which the proposed operations are to be conducted. 
(b)  No person shall be the owner who is not twenty-one (21) years of age or older or who has had an under the influence of drugs or alcohol conviction or dispositions under M.G.L. c. 90 within the past five (5) years or the equivalent in any jurisdiction. 
(Code 1970, § 25-22; Ord. No. 2018-183, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 25-37. - Hearing; issuance; denial. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued under this section that will increase the number of taxicabs or private livery vehicles in the city, except after a hearing thereon, conducted under and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may from time to time be prescribed therefor by the licensing commission and until the licensing commission shall have determined that the public convenience and necessity require the operation proposed by the applicant for such permit. The licensing commission, in determining whether or not such facts exist, shall take into consideration the public demand for such service, the adequacy or inadequacy of service being rendered by other carriers, the effect of such service upon traffic, the financial responsibility of the applicant, the character of equipment proposed to be furnished, and any and all other facts which the licensing commission may deem relevant. The burden of establishing the existence of public convenience and necessity shall always be borne by the applicant for a permit, and no such permit shall be issued unless there has been an affirmative showing of the existence of such public convenience and necessity by such applicant. 
(b)  The licensing commission shall, upon receipt of a petition under this article, make full and complete inquiry into the facts set forth therein and shall either issue or deny a permit upon the proposed terms, or upon terms other than those proposed. Such permit shall be for a specified number of vehicles which shall only be increased pursuant to the procedure provided in subsection (a) of this section. No permit shall be denied except for good cause and after notice to the applicant that he may request a hearing thereon before the licensing commission. 
(Code 1970, §§ 25-23, 25-24)  
Sec. 25-38. - Fees. 
The fee for permits required by this division shall be $50.00 for each taxicab and private livery vehicle. No permit shall become effective until the fee has been paid. 
(Code 1970, § 25-25; Ord. of 7-22-2003(02), § I; Ord. No. 2009-144, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 25-39. - Effect. 
A permit issued under this division shall constitute evidence of compliance with the terms of this article and shall authorize the permittee to operate vehicles under the conditions specified in this article; subject, however, to the requirements, obligations and limitations imposed by other applicable laws, ordinances, and orders of the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 25-26)  
Sec. 25-40. - Term. 
A permit issued under this division, shall be valid until December 31 next following its issuance, unless sooner revoked. 
(Code 1970, § 25-27)  
Sec. 25-41. - Assignment or transfer. 
No permit issued under this division shall be assigned or transferred without first obtaining the consent of the licensing commission. 
(Code 1970, § 25-28)  
Sec. 25-42. - Suspension or revocation; hearing. 
(a)  The licensing commission shall have the power to suspend or revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this division when it shall have determined that any of the provisions of this article have been violated, or that any holder of such a permit has failed to comply with the terms of the permit or this article or the rules and regulations of the licensing commission pertaining to the operation, and to the extent, character and quality of the service, of any vehicle covered by the permit. 
(b)  Before revocation or suspension of the permit, the holder thereof shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before the licensing commission, and shall be notified thereof and entitled to counsel. Notice of the hearing shall be in writing, and shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, such service to be upon the holder of the permit, or its manager or agent. The notice shall state the grounds of complaint against the holder of the permit and shall also state the time when, and the place where, the hearing will be held. If the permit holder cannot be found, or service of the notice cannot be made upon him in the manner provided in this section, then a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the person at his last known address, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1970, § 25-29)  
Sec. 25-43. - Permitted. 
No livery vehicle shall be used as a taxicab. 
(Ord. of 7-22-2003(02), § I)  
Secs. 25-44—25-54. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 25-55. - Required. 
No owner or person having charge or management of a taxicab shall employ or permit or allow any person to drive the same, and no person shall drive the same, other than a person licensed to do so by the licensing commission. 
(Code 1970, § 25-40)  
Sec. 25-56. - Application—Generally. 
(a)  Application for a license to drive a taxicab shall be made to the licensing commission. 
(b)  All applicants must be pre-screened by their taxicab company prior to submitting an application for a license to the licensing commission. Pre-screening shall include without limitation, the following: review of the applicant's driving record complete with a letter verifying that the applicant is suitable for a license certification as well as whether the applicant has been previously authorized by any city or state to operate a taxicab or livery vehicle, and certification that the taxicab company has insurance and that said insurance shall cover the applicant if the applicant is granted a license. Failure to adhere to this section may result in a denial of a license. 
(Code 1970, § 25-41; Ord. No. 2018-184, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 25-57. - Same—To be approved by chief of police. 
No license shall be issued under this division until the city clerk, on behalf of the licensing commission, and as an authorized CORI representative, has requested and received as satisfactory state CORI report on the applicant. If there is any question as to whether the CORI report is satisfactory, the city clerk shall refer the CORI to the chief of police or his designee for a determination of whether the CORI report is satisfactory. The decision of the police chief shall be final and shall determine if a license shall be approved or denied. 
(Code 1970, § 25-42; Ord. of 10-23-2012)  
Sec. 25-58. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this division to any person unless he can read, write and speak the English language intelligently, nor unless he shall be a resident of the commonwealth, nor unless he shall present a valid operator's license, issued to him by the registrar of motor vehicles of the commonwealth. 
(b)  An applicant who has been denied a license may request in writing a hearing before the licensing commission within three business days of receipt of the notice of denial. The denial shall become final if a written request for a hearing is not received within said time frame. 
(c)  If an applicant is found to be unqualified for a license because of a lack of good moral character, or similar criteria, he shall be furnished by the police department with a statement to this effect. The statement shall contain a complete record of the evidence upon which the determination was based. The applicant shall be entitled, as of right, to a rehearing on the issue before the police department if he has relevant evidence not previously considered regarding his qualifications. 
(d)  When a licensed taxicab driver changes his/her home address or place of employment, he/she shall within five business days of such change notify the licensing commission of such change. 
(e)  An applicant who has a criminal record or has within the last five years any of the following may be considered unsuitable to hold a license: 
(1)  Conviction of a felony; 
(2)  Violation of parole or probation; 
(3)  Conviction of illegal gambling and/or lottery; 
(4)  Conviction of a sex offense and/or is currently a registered sex offender; 
(5)  Conviction of assault and battery on or disobeying the directives of a police officer; 
(6)  Conviction of narcotics and/or alcohol related offenses; 
(7)  Conviction of firearms violation; 
(8)  Conviction or five or more moving violations of motor vehicle laws where public safety and/or property was put at risk or injured. 
(Code 1970, § 25-43; Ord. of 10-23-2012; Ord. No. 2018-185, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 25-59. - Fee. 
The fee for a license under this division shall be $50.00. An administrative fee of $10.00 shall be paid for the transfer of a taxicab driver's license. 
(Code 1970, § 25-44; Ord. No. 122-1988, § I, 9-29-1998; Ord. of 7-22-2003(02), § I; Ord. No. 2009-144, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 2018-186, 10-23-2018)  
Sec. 25-60. - Issuance; signing; recordation. 
The city clerk shall issue and sign the licenses required by this division, as clerk of the licensing commission. The clerk shall keep a record of all licenses so issued. 
(Code 1970, § 25-45)  
Sec. 25-61. - Numbering. 
Every license issued under this division shall be numbered in order as granted. 
(Code 1970, § 25-46)  
Sec. 25-62. - Term. 
Unless sooner revoked or suspended, any license issued under this division shall continue in force until January 1 next after the date of issuance thereof. 
(Code 1970, § 25-47)  
Sec. 25-63. - Licensee's identification card. 
(a)  The city clerk, when issuing a license or renewal under this division, shall also deliver to the licensee an identification card. The identification card shall set forth the number and term of the license, the name of the licensee, and a personal description of the licensee, including his age, height, weight, race, color of hair and color of eyes. 
(b)  The licensee shall, at all times when driving or in charge of a taxicab, carry the identification card upon his person or in an accessible place in the vehicle, and shall show the same whenever so required by any police officer. 
(Code 1970, § 25-48; Ord. of 10-23-2012)  
Sec. 25-64. - Suspension or revocation. 
Any license issued under the terms of this division may be suspended or revoked at any time by the licensing commission for good cause after notice to the licensee and a hearing. 
(Code 1970, § 25-49)  
Secs. 25-65—25-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAXICAB FARES 
 
Sec. 25-75. - Prescribed. 
(a)  The fares to be charged the public for taxicab service shall be such as are prescribed in the carrier's permit, and shall not be less than or more than the fares which are hereby fixed as follows: 
(1)  For the first "flag-drop" the rate is $3.50, and for each additional one-seventh-mile or fraction thereof the rate is $0.45. The waiting rate shall be $18.75 per hour. Fares shall be based upon a combination of mileage and time. 
(2)  For each adult passenger over two, $0.10 additional charge. 
(3)  Additional charge for up to and including four parcels is $0.50 and for each additional parcel $0.10. 
(4)  Fares for all persons 60 years of age and older, disabled veterans and handicapped persons may be reduced or discounted up to 30 percent. When reduced or discounted rates are offered, they must be offered to all persons regardless of the point of origin or destination of ride. Any company who offers such discounts shall display a sign conspicuously posted in each taxi vehicle, informing all passengers of the discount. All such discounts shall be given upon reasonable proof of identification. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section: 
Flag drop means anywhere from one-half to one mile. 
Waiting time means the time consumed while the taxicab is not in motion at the direction of a passenger, but no charge shall be made for time lost through traffic interruptions or for delays caused by the inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver. 
(Code 1970, § 25-60; Ord. of 3-20-1975, § 1; Ord. of 9-12-1978, § I; Ord. of 12-12-1979, § 1; Ord. of 5-22-1984, § I; Ord. of 5-19-1987, § I; Ord. of 11-15-1988, § I; Ord. of 11-15-1988, § I; Ord. of 11-21-1989, § I; Ord. No. 25-1997, § I, 2-4-1997; Ord. No. 57-2000, § I, 2-15-2000; Ord. of 1-18-2005(05), § I; Ord. of 5-24-2011(02))  
Sec. 25-76. - Charging, collecting, etc., unauthorized fares. 
It shall be unlawful for any carrier or any agent or employee thereof, or any driver or operator of any taxicab covered by this article, to charge, collect, demand, receive, arrange, solicit or bargain for any amount of compensation other than the fares established and authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1970, § 25-61)  
Sec. 25-77. - Display. 
Every taxicab used or operated under this article shall, at all times, have displayed in the taxicab, at a location and in a manner approved by the city council, the fares to be charged for any such taxicab service, and which fares shall always be visible to all passengers in the taxicab. 
(Code 1970, § 25-62)  
Sec. 25-78. - Failure to pay. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the authorized fare of any taxicab after having employed the same and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired, or engaged, of the value of any such service. 
(Code 1970, § 25-63)  
Secs. 25-79—25-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TAXIMETERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Weights and measures, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Testing taximeters, M.G.L. c. 98, § 45. 
 
Sec. 25-90. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any carrier to operate any taxicab in the city, unless and until the taxicab is equipped with a taximeter of a type and design approved by the sealer of weights and measures and the licensing commission. All charges for taxicab service shall be calculated and indicated by a taximeter. 
(Code 1970, § 25-74)  
Sec. 25-91. - Prohibited taximeters. 
No taximeter, the mechanism of which will register a combined charge for mileage and waiting time in any single position, shall be used. 
(Code 1970, § 25-80)  
Sec. 25-92. - Maintenance within standard of accuracy. 
It shall be the duty of every carrier operating a taxicab, and also the driver thereof, to keep the taximeter operating at all times within such standard of accuracy as may be prescribed from time to time by the sealer of weights and measures. 
(Code 1970, § 25-76)  
Sec. 25-93. - Inspection and testing; correction of defects. 
(a)  Every taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the sealer of weights and measures at least once every 12 months. Upon the completion of the inspection and of any adjustments necessary to cause the taximeter to operate within the standards of accuracy approved by the sealer of weights and measures, the sealer of weights and measures shall cause to be placed upon the meter a gummed label having printed thereon the following: 
"This taximeter was inspected and tested on _______ (date) and found to comply with standards of accuracy prescribed by the sealer of weights and measures." 
The date on which the inspection was made shall be stamped in the blank space provided for that purpose. No such label shall be removed except at the time of a subsequent inspection. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, every taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the sealer of weights and measures. Upon discovery of any inaccuracy of the taximeter, the operator thereof shall remove, or cause to be removed, from service the vehicle equipped with the taximeter until the taximeter has been repaired and accurately adjusted. 
(Code 1970, § 25-70)  
Sec. 25-94. - Passengers not to be carried unless meter in operation. 
No passenger shall be carried in a taxicab unless the taximeter is in operation. This provision shall apply when the taxicab is engaged for a trip within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1970, § 25-75)  
Sec. 25-95. - Dial to be lighted and discernible to passengers. 
The taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible to a passenger riding in the taxicab. 
(Code 1970, § 25-77)  
Sec. 25-96. - Not to register unless taxicab engaged. 
No taximeter shall be so operated as to cause any charge to be registered thereon except during the time while the taxicab is engaged by a passenger. 
(Code 1970, § 25-79)  
Sec. 25-97. - Operation of flag. 
(a)  At all times while a taxicab is engaged, the flag of the taximeter shall be thrown into a position to register charges for mileage or into a position to register charges for waiting time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab, while carrying passengers, to display the flag attached to the taximeter in such a position as to denote that the vehicle is not employed, or to fail to throw the flag of the taxicab to a position indicating that the vehicle is unemployed at the termination of each and every trip. 
(Code 1970, § 25-81)  
Chapter 26 - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Penalty for possession, use of unsealed or false weighing devices by hawkers and peddlers, § 11-16; applicant for junk dealers license to present receipt from sealer of weights and measures, § 19-31; provisions relating to taximeters, § 25-90 et seq. 
State Law reference— Weights and measures, M.G.L. c. 98. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - General powers and duties of sealer. 
The sealer of weights and measures shall have all the powers and perform all the duties provided by the general laws of the commonwealth. He shall cause all such laws as relate to the use of weights and measures and the giving or use of false weight or measure to be strictly enforced and, for this purpose, shall be a special police officer, without pay as such. 
(Code 1970, § 28-1) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-40 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal responsibility to appoint sealer, M.G.L. c. 98, § 34; powers and duties of sealer, M.G.L. c. 98, §§ 34—56B.  
Sec. 26-2. - Collection of fees by sealer and disposition thereof. 
The sealer of weights and measures shall collect the following fees and charges which by law he is allowed to receive, and shall pay over to the city treasurer each month all sums so received by him. 
(1)  Weights and measures—fees and charges (whether sealed, not sealed or condemned): 
a.  Scales w/capacity of 1,000 pounds: $200.00. 
b.  Scales w/capacity 100—1,000 pounds: $25.00. 
c.  Scales/balances ten—100 pounds: $20.00. 
d.  Scales/balances under ten pounds: $20.00. 
e.  Liquid capacity measure of capacity of less or more than one gallon and measures on pumps: $5.00. 
f.  Liquid measuring meter diameter one-half to one inches (gas, oil, grease): $20.00. 
g.  Each stop on pump: $3.00. 
h.  Liquid measuring meter diameter over one inch: 
1.  Vehicle tank pump: $50.00. 
2.  Vehicle tank gravity: $75.00. 
3.  Bulk storage: $75.00. 
4.  Bulk storage w/state certification of prover: $75.00. 
i.  Taxi meter, odometer—hubodometer: $25.00. 
j.  Device to determine linear or area (fabric measuring, wirerope, cordage, yard sticks, dry measures, leather measure (semiannually): $10.00. 
k.  Milk bottle or jars: $20.00. 
l.  Vehicle tanks used in sale of commodities by liquid measure per 100 gallon: $50.00. 
m.  Separate tanks—same vehicle (each): $25.00. 
n.  All weights (avoirdupois, metric, apothecary, troy) and other measures at the discretion of sealer: $10.00. 
(2)  Scales and balances: Any adjustment or leveling (if adjustable or leveled by sealer): $10.00. (Set at discretion of sealer.) 
(3)  Liquid measuring devices: 
a.  One-inch or less inlet: adjustments (if adjustable by sealer): $15.00. (Set at discretion of sealer.) 
b.  One-inch to four-inch inlet: adjustments (if adjustable by sealer): $15.00. 
(Code 1970, § 28-4; Ord. of 6-27-1984, § I) 
State Law reference— Fees of sealers, M.G.L. c. 98, § 56.  
Sec. 26-3. - Certificate of sealing. 
The sealer of weights and measures shall, at the time of sealing, furnish the owner of the articles sealed, or his agent, with a certificate stating the name and address of the owner of the article, the date when sealed, and the amount of the fee, if any, collected. The certificate shall be signed by the sealer. 
(Code 1970, § 28-5) 
State Law reference— Testing and sealing of weights and measures, M.G.L. c. 98, § 41.  
Sec. 26-4. - Records and reports of sealer. 
The sealer of weights and measures shall keep a detailed record of all work performed by him, and shall annually make a report in writing to the mayor. 
(Code 1970, § 28-6) 
State Law reference— Record of sealing, M.G.L. c. 98, § 41.  
Chapter 27 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES UNDER FOUR UNITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 11, 1989, enacted provisions designated as ch. 27, and at the discretion of the editor, §§ 1—4 have been included herein as §§ 27-1—27-4. 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following meanings: 
Condominium unit means a unit in a housing condominium as that term is defined in M.G.L. c. 183A. 
Condominium or cooperative conversion eviction means an eviction of a tenant for the purpose of removing such tenant from a housing accommodation in order to facilitate the initial sale and transfer of legal title to that housing accommodation as a condominium or cooperative unit to a prospective purchaser or an eviction of a tenant by any other person who has purchased a housing accommodation as a condominium or cooperative unit when the tenant whose eviction is sought was a resident of the housing accommodation at the time the notice of intent to convert is given to convert the building or buildings to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership pursuant to section 27-2 hereafter; provided, however, that the eviction of a tenant for nonpayment of rent or other violation of a rental agreement shall in no event be deemed a condominium or cooperative conversion eviction. 
Cooperative unit means a unit in a housing cooperative which has been organized under the provisions of general laws including, without limitation, the provisions of M.G.L. c. 156B, 157 or 157B. 
Elderly tenant means a tenant who is a person or group of persons residing in the same housing accommodation any of whom has reached the age of 62 years or over as of the date of receipt of the notice provided for hereunder. 
Handicapped tenant means a person entitled to occupy a housing accommodation who is physically handicapped, as defined in M.G.L. c. 22, § 13A, as of the date of receipt of the notice provided for hereunder. 
Housing accommodation means any building, structure, or part thereof or land appurtenant thereto including buildings containing fewer than four housing accommodations, or any other real or personal property rented or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes, together with all services connected with the use or occupancy of such property, but not including the following: 
(1)  Housing accommodations which the United States or the commonwealth or any authority created under the laws thereof either owns or operates; 
(2)  Housing accommodations in any hospital, convent, monastery, asylum, public institution or college or school dormitory operated exclusively for charitable or educational purposes or in any nursing or rest home for the aged; 
(3)  Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes, and roominghouses and boardinghouses which are occupied by transient guests staying for a period of fewer than 14 consecutive calendar days; 
(4)  Housing accommodations constructed or converted from a nonhousing to a housing use after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; 
(5)  Housing accommodations which were constructed or substantially rehabilitated pursuant to any federal mortgage insurance program, without any interest subsidy or tenant subsidy attached thereto; or 
(6)  Housing accommodations financed through the state housing finance agency, with an interest subsidy attached thereto. 
Interest subsidy means any payment made by the federal or state government to reduce the effective interest rate payable by a mortgagor. 
Low or moderate income tenant means a tenant who is a person or group of persons residing in the same housing accommodation so long as the total income for all such tenants for the 12 months immediately preceding the date of notice provided for hereunder is less than 80 percent of the median income for the area set forth in regulations promulgated from time to time by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to 42 USC 1437 et seq., and calculated pursuant to said regulations. 
Tenant means a person or group of persons collectively entitled to occupy a housing accommodation pursuant to a rental agreement written or implied. 
Tenant subsidy means any payment made by the federal or state government for or on behalf of any tenant to be applied toward the reduction of the tenant's rental payment. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 1)  
Sec. 27-2. - Notices. 
(a)  If a building submitted to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 183A, 156B, 157 and 157B or any provisions of the general laws governing the cooperative form of ownership has been used, in whole or in part, for residential purposes within one year prior to the recording of a master deed creating a condominium or the filing of the articles of organization creating a housing cooperative, the owner thereof shall give each tenant of all housing accommodations in such building or buildings notice of intent to convert the building to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership. Such notice shall state in clear and conspicuous language the following: 
(1)  That the owner has filed or intends to file a master deed at a registry of deeds whose location is stated in the notice or has filed or intends to file articles of organization with the secretary of the commonwealth; 
(2)  That any tenant residing, on the date the notice of intent is given, in the building converted or to be converted to the condominium or cooperative forms of ownership shall have a period of time which shall be stated in the notice, from the date of receipt of such notice, as authorized by this section, before the tenant shall be required to vacate the housing accommodation occupied on the date the notice is received; 
(3)  That any tenant residing on the date the notice of intent was given in the building or buildings to be converted shall have a period of time, which shall be stated in the notice, from the date of receipt of such notice, as authorized by this chapter, to purchase the unit occupied by the tenant on the date the notice is received on terms and conditions which are substantially the same as or more favorable than those which the owner extends to the public generally for the 90 days following the expiration of said tenant's right to purchase as may be required by subsection (b) of this section. 
All notices required under this section shall be deemed to have been given when a written notice is delivered in person or mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the party to whom the notice is being given. Whenever an owner is required to give notice of intent provided for in this section, the period of notice shall not be less than the expiration of any written agreement between the owner and the tenant of the housing accommodation which governs the use and occupancy of said housing accommodation or one year from the date the tenant of such housing accommodation is given said notice of intent, whichever is greater; provided, however, that in the case of a housing accommodation occupied in whole or in part by a handicapped tenant or occupied by an elderly or low or moderate income tenant the period of notice shall not be less than two years from the date the tenant of such housing accommodation receives said notice of intent. No person shall bring any action seeking a condominium or cooperative eviction until the expiration of the periods of time for notice to tenants specified in this act. The burden of proving qualifications with respect to age, handicap and income shall rest with the tenant. 
(b)  Any owner of residential property who converts such property to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership shall give to any tenant who is entitled to receive notice pursuant to this section the right to purchase the housing accommodation occupied by such tenant at the time such notice is delivered on terms and conditions which are substantially the same as or more favorable than those which the owner extends to the public generally for the 90 days following the expiration of said tenant's right to purchase. Such tenant may exercise a right to purchase such housing accommodations by executing a purchase and sale agreement prior to the expiration of 90 days after the date of receiving a copy of the purchase and sale agreement properly executed by the person offering the housing accommodation for sale. 
(c)  The owner of residential property converted to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership shall pay to any tenant who is entitled to receive a notice pursuant to this section and who does not purchase the housing accommodation which he occupies or another housing accommodation in the same building or buildings relocation benefits for the actual, documented costs of moving, not to exceed $750.00 per housing accommodation; provided, that if such housing accommodation is occupied, in whole or in part, by a handicapped tenant or is occupied by an elderly or low or moderate income tenant, the maximum relocation benefit shall not exceed $1,000.00 per housing accommodation. Such relocation benefits shall be payable within ten days after the date on which the tenant vacates the housing accommodation occupied by him; provided, however, that no tenant shall be eligible for such relocation benefits unless all rent due and payable for said unit under the rental agreement or extension of such agreement, if any, has been paid by the tenant prior to the date on which the housing accommodation is vacated and only as long as the tenant voluntarily vacates the housing accommodation for which recovery of possession is sought on or before the expiration of the notice period. 
(d)  Any owner or residential property converted to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership shall assist elderly, handicapped and low or moderate income tenants who qualified as such as of the date of receipt of the notice authorized pursuant to this section locating, within the period of the notice to such tenants, comparable rental housing within the city which rents for a sum which is equal to or less than the sum which such tenant had been paying for the housing accommodation occupied at the time of receipt of the notice authorized by this section. The failure of the owner of such residential property to find such substitute housing accommodation shall extend the period of notice for up to an additional two years. 
(e)  Any owner of residential property converted to the condominium or cooperative form of ownership shall give to any tenant who is entitled to receive a notice pursuant to this section an extension of the rental agreement at the expiration thereof. Such extension, where required, shall be for such period or periods of one year or such fraction thereof as shall equal the period of notice to which such tenant is entitled pursuant to the provisions of this section. The provisions of such rental agreement may not otherwise be modified by the property owner, except with respect to the amount of annual rent, any increase in which shall not exceed an amount equal to the sum which would result by multiplying said rent by the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, during the calendar year immediately preceding the date upon which such rental agreement is commenced, or ten percent, whichever is less; provided, however, nothing herein shall limit the right of a property owner to any amounts which may be due under a valid escalation clause.  
Sec. 27-3. - Violations; penalty; jurisdiction. 
(a)  Any owner who converts residential property in violation of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $300.00. Each unit converted in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Any violation of this chapter by an owner of residential property shall not affect the validity of a conveyance of a condominium unit or an interest in a housing cooperative to a purchaser for value who has no knowledge of the violation. 
(c)  The district and superior courts have jurisdiction over an action arising from any violation of this chapter and have jurisdiction in equity to restrain any such violation. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 3)  
Sec. 27-4. - Limitation of applicability. 
This chapter shall not be applicable to any unit in a building converted to the condominium or cooperative forms of ownership for which, on or before the date of adoption of the ordinance from this chapter is derived, a master deed has been recorded or articles of organization filed, and a deed or, in the case of a cooperative, a proprietary lease, conveying the unit to a bona fide purchaser for value who intends to occupy such unit as a principal residence has been recorded, in the case of such deed, in the county's Southern District Registry Of Deeds. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 4)  
Chapter 28 - MARIJUANA RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— M.G.L. c. 64N, § 3, excise tax on the retail sales of marijuana for adult use at the rate of three percent. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Number of marijuana retail establishments. 
Marijuana retailers shall be subject to M.G.L. c. 94G, § 12 and the following restrictions to ensure there are no undue impacts on the health, safety, and well-being of the public: 
(1)  As defined in M.G.L. c. 94G, the number of marijuana retailers shall be limited to no more than 20 percent of the number of licenses issued within the city of the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not be drunk on the premises where sold under M.G.L. c. 138, § 15. Should 20 percent of the number of licenses issued be a whole number and one-half or greater, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number; should it be less than one-half, the number shall be rounded down. 
(2)  All marijuana retail establishments shall comply with all regulations that may be promulgated by the cannabis control commission. 
(Ord. No. 2018-078, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 28-2. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of 935 C.M.R. 500, specifically 935 C.M.R. 500.105(4)(b), Prohibited Practices, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an establishment so as to clearly display any marijuana advertising products, paraphernalia or accessories so that it is visible to a person from the exterior of establishment. This includes any of the same that have multiple uses of which one is for marijuana. 
(b)  This section may be enforced by any police officer through any lawful means including noncriminal disposition pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D. The fine for a violation shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty dollars for the first offense; 
(2)  Five hundred dollars for the second offense; 
(3)  One thousand dollars for each offense thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-181, 10-23-2018)  
Appendix A - SPECIAL ACTS APPLICABLE TO THE CITY SINCE 1970[1] 
Year 	Number 	Text 
1970 	87 	Authorizes acquisition of lands and buildings for St. Peter's High School to perform renovations thereon and to borrow money for such purpose. 
	198 	Authorizes city manager to appoint members of Gloucester Industrial Development Commission. 
	383 	Authorizes abatement and refunding of erroneously assessed taxes from Rose's Oil Service, Inc. 
	390 	Sets commencement of terms of city counselor; amends ch. 203 of Acts of 1961. 
	441 	Regulates transfer of certain property of Gloucester Lyceum and Sawyer Free Library, etc., and to borrow money for such purpose. 
	500 	Authorizes entrance into agreement with McNiff-Dominic Transit Co., Inc., to provide public transportation. 
1971 	None 	
1972 	275 	Authorizes establishment of salary of city manager in excess of limit imposed by general law. 
	545 	Authorizes formation of vocational regional school district. 
1973 	123 	Increases amount of money city can borrow for library purposes. 
	921 	Extends the terminal date of certain harbor tideland licenses. 
	1025 	Authorizes regional district school committee to amend agreements in connection with the adoption and certifying of their budget. 
	1065 	Authorizes borrowing money to repay certain federal aid anticipation notes. 
1974 	142 	Provides the placement of names of candidates for public office on official ballots used in municipal elections be drawn by lot. 
1975 	178 	Regulates the rate of interest on Gloucester Industrial Development Commission bonds. 
	406 	Establishes an historic and scenic district planning commission in Essex County. 
	763 	Authorizes Department of Environmental Quality Engineering to study the renovation and renewal of the new state fish pier. 
	788 	Exempts the office of shellfish constable from the provisions of the civil service law. 
1976 	104 	Authorizes expenditure of appropriations for preliminary studies for the new state fish pier. 
	153 	Relates to the membership of the Gloucester Community Pier Association. 
1977 	173 	Validates certain actions of city relative to certain borrowings thereby. 
	451 	Provides the position of executive secretary to fisheries commission and the secretary of such executive secretary be exempt from civil service law and rules. 
	464 	Relates to the disbursement of funds for the new state fish pier. 
1978 	64 	Authorizes appropriation and payment of certain sum of money to Gordon G. Pew. 
	519 	Relates to the Gloucester fisheries commission membership. 
1979 	none 	
1980 	143 	Authorizes construction of a roadway across a portion of Babson Reservoir. 
1981 	120 	Authorizes building and discharging from a primary waste water facility. 
	587 	Provides certain license to fill solid and maintain structures and buildings on and over tidewaters on Gloucester harbor. The irrevocable and tidal interest of commonwealth therein be released. 
	740 	Establishes Gloucester Pier Advisory Board. 
1982 	6 	Exempts position of city electrician from civil service law and rules. 
	114 	Authorizes issuance of a liquor license to Collins Package Store, Inc. 
	172 	Exempts position of agent of board of health from civil service laws and rules. 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Appendix B - GENERAL LAWS ACCEPTED BY THE CITY[1] 
Adopted Legislation by City Council (Since 1954 Revision) 
Chapter 	Acts/Section 	Subject 	Year 
Adopted 	Page No. 
Ch. 252 	A/1954 	Membership of the Gloucester Community Pier Association; powers and duties 	04/05/1954 	69 
Ch. 322 	A/1954 	Authorizing City to use playground for school site 	04/21/1954 	77 
Ch. 97 	A/1955 	School Committee, terms of membership, filling of vacancies (Voted at City Election, 11/08/1955) 	11/08/1955 	46 
Ch. 206 	A/1955 	Water Dept. placed under jurisdiction of Dept. of Public Works (Voted City Election, 11/08/1955) 	11/08/1955 	74 
Ch. 177 	A/1955 	Park Dept. placed under jurisdiction of Dept. of Public Works (Voted City Election, 11/08/1955) 	11/08/1955 	104 
Ch. 608 	A/1955 	Designating Traffic Circle, Chester H. Grant Memorial Circle 	08/04/55 	206 
Ch. 332 	A/1955 	Water assessments to meet cost of laying water pipes in public and private ways 	09/01/1955 	220 
Ch. 442 	A/1955 	Playground Dept. placed under jurisdiction of Dept. of Public Works (Voted City Election, 11/08/1955) 	11/08/1955 	226 
Ch. 443 	A/1955 	Sewer Dept. placed under jurisdiction of Dept. of Public Works (Voted City Election, 11/08/1955) 	11/08/1955 	226 
Ch. 343 	A/1956 	Establishing the Licensing Commission 	05/31/1956 	174 
Ch. 180 	A/1957 	Reduction of membership of the City Council (Voted City Election 11/05/1957) 	11/05/1957 	71 
Ch. 251 	A/1957 	Making certain positions in labor service permanent 	05/23/1957 	122 
Ch. 487 	A/1954 	Water Liens & Charges 	06/06/1957 	127 
Ch. 414 	A/1957 	Authorizing payment 	06/20/1957 	134 
Ch. 139 S. 1,2,3 		Disposition of burned and dilapidated buildings 	12/19/1957 	245 
Ch. 427 	A/1957 	Pension increase for certain retired Police and Fire personnel 	01/16/1958 	9 
Ch. 522 	A/1958 	Establish regulations for connection with common sewer 	08/14/1958 	186 
Ch. 374 	A/1956 	Widow's Pensions, Police and Fire 	02/12/1959 	25 
Am. by Ch. 583 	A/1957 	(Amends GL Ch. 32, Sec. 90A) 		
Ch. 81 	A/1959 	Authority to grant easement over Fishermen's Mem. Park 	03/26/1959 	54 
Ch. 40 S. 8C 		Establishing Conservation Commission 	02/28/1962 	28 
Ch. 329 	A/1962 	Sell certain Park Land at Public Auction 	04/12/1962 	66 
Ch. 382 	A/1962 	Change of title of executive officer of Gloucester Police Dept. and provision for life tenure, JJ Coyle 	05/10/1962 	80 
Ch. 631 	A/1962 	Increasing membership of Gloucester Fisheries Commission 	07/19/1962 	125 
am. Ch. 260 				
Ch. 100 	A/1965 	Life tenure, Kenneth S. Webber, Auditor 	03/18/1965 	42 
Ch. 559 	A/1965 	Conveyance of Lane's Cove land to B.U. (Repealed Ch. 751, Acts of 1967) 	08/19/1965 	127 
Ch. 32B, S11C 	A/1966 	BC/BS Retirees, Hospital, Surgical, Medical 	05/26/1966 	182 
Ch. 148 	S56 	Outdoor Parking Lot 	01/19/1967 	10 
Ch. 90 	S18A 	Jaywalking 	03/16/1967 	48 
Ch. 90 	S20C 	Beach Parking 	04/20/1967 	65 
Ch. 130 	S8A 	Authority of Police as Natural Resource Officers 	08/17/1967 	171 
Ch. 544 	A/1968 	Authority for City to convey certain park land on southerly side of Route 128 	07/26/1968 	140 
Ch. 347 	A/1969 	Filling of vacancies of School Committee 	06/05/1969 	99 
Ch. 40D 	S3 	Establishment of an I.D.C. Finance Authority 	08/07/1969 	141 
Ch. 144 	S94-98 	Tenement Owner requirement to file info w/Board of Health 	04/03/1969 	58 
Ch. 140 	S188-190 	Picnic Grounds 	03/20/1969 	47 
Ch. 40C 	S4 	Establish Historic District Study Committee 	03/19/1970 	52 
Ch. 40 	S22D 	Create ordinance relative to parking of trailer boxes on public streets 	05/07/1970 	90 
Ch. 626 	A/1970 	Allow State to deduct insurance premiums from retired teachers 	06/10/1971 	65 
Ch. 48 	S58(e) 	Firefighters Residency 	12/02/1971 	128 
Ch. 100 	A/1968 	Municipal Employees Union 	01/20/1972 	11 
Ch. 32 	S81A, 81B, 83A 	Retirement, Police and Fire Personnel 	03/15/1973 	31 
Ch. 386 	A/1962 	Salary of City Clerk 	03/15/1973 	33 
Ch. 448 	A/1973 	Cemeteries 	08/02/1973 	101 
Ch. 121C 	A/1972 	Establish EDIC 	02/22/1977 	68B 
Ch. 148 	S26C 	Smoke Detectors, six or more dwelling units, hotels, lodging houses, etc. 	08/15/1978 	245 
Ch. 32B 	S11A 	Standardizing Life Insurance Benefits 	08/23/1994 	
Ch. 32 	S53 	Retirement Board Member's Compensation 	10/30/1995 	
Ch. 111 	S127B½ 	Municipal Funding of Residential Improvements to Meet Certain Public Health Code Requirements 	12/12/1995 	
Ch. 32B 	S16 	Offer HMO health insurance plan 	04/30/1996 	
	S18 	Offer Medicare supplemental health insurance plan 	04/30/1996 	
	S9(c), (d), (g) 	Contribute 50 percent of cost of health insurance premiums for surviving spouses 	04/30/1996 	
Ch. 44 	S70 	Establish a Revolving Account 	5/16/1996 	
Ch. 40 	S57 	Local Licenses and Permits 	10/29/1996 	
Ch. 71 	A/1996 	Creating a Veterans Buy Back 	2/18/1997 	
Ch. 17 	A/1997 	COLA Law 	6/9/1998 	
Ch. 194 	A/1998, S288 	Pension Allowance Adjustment for Retirees 	12/1/1998 	
Ch. 456 	A/1998 	Granting the Cost of Living Adjustments to Noncontributory Retirees 	4/27/1999 	
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Appendix C - PERSONNEL ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-40 et seq. 
Editor's note— The city's personnel ordinance, adopted on January 25, 1983, has been set out in appendix C at the discretion of the editor. Original article and section designations have been retained. Amendments to the personnel ordinance are indicated by a history note enclosed in parentheses following the amended section. Language enclosed with brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for clarity. Typographical errors have been corrected without notation. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE 
This ordinance shall apply to all city departments, including the school department, and to the positions of all employees in the service of the city other than those positions which are filled by popular election or which are under the direction and control of the school committee. In some cases, certain personnel policies are covered by the civil service law and rules or by collective bargaining agreements. In such cases, said law, rules, and agreements shall constitute the governing policy. However, where subject civil service law and rules or collective bargaining agreements do not address a particular situation, subject or circumstance, the policies of this ordinance shall prevail and apply.  
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 
The following words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the meanings indicated below unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Appointing authority [means] any person, board, or commission having the power of appointment or employment. 
Casual Position [means] a position requiring employment at irregular intervals. 
City [means] the City of Gloucester. 
Civil service law [means] general laws chapter 31 as amended and rules and regulations made thereunder. 
Class [means] a group of positions sufficiently alike in duties, authority and responsibility to justify the application of the same class title, qualifications and salary range to all positions in the group and the use of the same test of fitness in recruiting. 
Classification plan [means] a schematic list of classes supported by class specifications. 
Classified service [means] positions in the service of the city which are subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
Compensation plan [means] a schedule of compensation for all classes in the classification plan, including any successive pay rate established for each class. 
Demotion [means] the movement of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class with a lower maximum pay rate. 
Department [means] any department, board, committee, commission or other agency of the city, as defined by the mayor, subject to this ordinance. 
Department head [means] the officer, board or other body having immediate supervision and control of a department. 
Dismissal [means] the permanent involuntary separation from service of an officer or employee for just cause. 
Eligible list [means] a list of persons who have met the requirements for a given class of positions and who are eligible for appointment. 
Emergency employee [means] an employee appointed by a department head for a specified time during an emergency where appointment from an eligible list is not possible and without the approval of the personnel director. 
Employee [means] a person occupying a position, or a person who is on authorized leave of absence. 
Fulltime position [means] a position requiring the observance of a normal work week for the respective department as established by administrative regulation. 
Incumbent [means] the current occupant of a position. 
Layoff [means] the separation of an employee because of lack of work or funds or other reasons not related to fault, delinquency or misconduct on the part of the employee. 
Leave [means] an authorized absence from regularly scheduled work hours which has been approved by proper authority. 
Merit raise [means] an increase in pay from one step to a higher step in the pay range for an employee who meets the eligibility conditions established in accordance with article 9 of this ordinance. 
Parttime position [means] a position requiring the observance of less than normal working hours on a regular recurring basis and, if salaried, paid on a proportional basis at one of the rates established for fulltime employment. 
Pay grade [means] a range of salary or wage rates appearing in the compensation plan. 
Permanent employee [means] an employee retained on a continuing basis. 
Position [means] an office or post of employment in the city service with assigned duties and responsibilities calling for the fulltime or parttime employment of one person in the performance thereof. 
Probationary period [means] a working test period, following an appointment, during which an employee is required to demonstrate, by conduct and actual performance of the duties, fitness for the position to which appointed. 
Promotion [means] the movement of an employee from a position of one class to a position of another class with a higher maximum pay rate. 
Provisional position [means] a position authorized on a requisition when there is no suitable civil service eligible list. 
Seasonal position [means] a position requiring the observance of normal working hours but which is filled only during certain months or seasons of the year. 
State personnel administrator [means] the personnel administrator who directs the division of personnel administration, Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Suspension [means] the temporary, involuntary separation from service of an officer or employee for just cause. 
Temporary position [means] an office or post of employment in the city service which is filled for a specified time.  
ARTICLE 3. - STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF PERSONNEL DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Establishment of department. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the city a personnel department which shall administer the provisions of this ordinance. The department shall consist of a personnel director who shall be appointed by and report to the mayor. The personnel director shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be confirmed by the city council in odd years only. 
(b)  The personnel director's salary shall be in accordance with the classification and compensation plans for management and nonunion employees. 
(c)  The mayor shall furnish the department with such office space as it may require for carrying out its responsibilities and, upon request of the department, shall provide it with an adequate place for the holding of public hearings and meetings. 
(d)  The department shall keep a record of official proceedings and actions, establish its own rules of procedure and may, subject to the appropriate therefor, make such expenditures as may be necessary for the performance of its duties. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the personnel department shall have access to all facts, figures, records and other information relating to the personnel of city departments, other than the school department, and the same shall be furnished forthwith by any such departments whenever so requested by the personnel department, in such forms as the department may require. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1986, § I; Ord. No. 2017-100, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 3-2. - Functions of department. 
The personnel department shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Administer the city's comprehensive personnel ordinance, including the attendant classification and compensation plans, and the collective bargaining agreements covering municipal employees. 
(2)  Formulate, issue, amend or revoke, subject to the mayor's approval, policies and administrative regulations for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this ordinance and for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the other ordinances and votes of the city pertaining to personnel administration which said department may be responsible for administering and/or enforcing. Each such order shall be numbered in sequence and shall be maintained in a personnel department file of all such orders issued which shall be open to public inspection. 
(3)  Assist in negotiating and administering collective bargaining agreements with municipal unions. 
(4)  Provide advice and assistance to the mayor, department heads and elected and appointed supervisory officials on all personnel matters including position classification, pay administration, employee relations, employee grievances and disciplinary action. 
(5)  Develop and administer a recruitment and placement program designed to fill vacant positions in the city with the best qualified persons. 
(6)  Plan, develop and conduct training programs. 
(7)  Study classification, assignment and utilization of personnel in all departments, other than the school department, and make recommendations for improvements thereof. 
(8)  Develop, establish, and coordinate uniform personnel practices and procedures for city departments including the standardization of forms and records to be used in the city's personnel administration program. 
(9)  Serve as labor registrar for the city under the civil service law; furnish information relative to civil service examinations; provide assistance to all departments on civil service matters; perform liaison responsibilities between city departments and the division of personnel administration of the commonwealth. 
(10)  Discharge all duties and functions incident to the administration of workmen's compensation insurance; secure information from all departments concerning the preparation and filing of all reports and information required by law and the department of industrial accidents. 
(11)  Recommend to the mayor and city council the enactment of such ordinances as are considered necessary to implement and administer the city's personnel administration program. 
Note— The process for amending this ordinance shall be in accordance with the Charter, § 2-11. 
(12)  Maintain a personnel record system incorporating vital statistics and other pertinent data including a record of personnel transactions affecting job status for each employee of the city except those under the jurisdiction of the school department. 
(13)  Develop, establish and coordinate a municipal employee safety program for the city. 
(14)  Develop, establish and coordinate an affirmative action and equal employment program for the city. 
(15)  Discharge all duties and functions incident to the administration of the city payroll and payroll system. 
(16)  Be responsible for compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(Ord. of 12-16-1986, § I)  
ARTICLE 4. - CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION PLANS 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Establishment of classification plan. 
(a)  Section 4-1 and appendix A shall constitute the classification plan of the city within the meaning of section 108A of chapter 41 of the general laws. 
(b)  The positions of all officers and employees in the service of the city, other than the positions of officers elected by the city and those positions in the service of the school department, are hereby classified by titles listed in appendix A, whether said positions are fulltime, parttime, seasonal, casual or other in nature. 
(c)  The title of each class, as established by the classification plan, shall, except as otherwise provided herein, be the official title of every position allocated to the class and the official title of each incumbent of a position so allocated and shall be used to the exclusion of all others on payrolls, budget estimates and other official records and reports pertaining to the position. If, in the instance of any position subject to the civil service law, a different title for the position shall be established by the state personnel administrator, such title shall be the official title of the incumbent of said position and shall be used on all payrolls, budget estimates and other official records and reports pertaining to the position. 
(d)  Temporary positions, except positions which can be allocated to classes appearing in appendix A, shall be established by the personnel department in consultation with the appointing authority, except as otherwise provided by statute.  
Sec. 4-2. - Existing and new positions. 
Except for paid elective positions, positions in the service of the school department, and positions allocated to their appropriate class by the state personnel administrator pursuant to the civil service law, each position in the city service shall be allocated by the personnel department to a class established by the classification plan. No person shall be appointed, employed or paid as an employee of the city in any position subject to this classification plan under any title other than a title appearing in said plan or a title approved as stipulated in this ordinance, nor shall such a person be employed under a title inappropriate to the classification plan in terms of the duties actually to be performed, or being performed, in the position, except as provided in the emergency provisions of the ordinance. Whenever a new position is established, or the duties of an existing position are so changed as in effect to create a new position, upon presentation of sustaining data satisfactory to the personnel department, the said department shall allocate such new and changed position to its appropriate class. No position shall be reclassified until the personnel department has determined that such reclassification will be consistent with the classification and compensation plans.  
Sec. 4-3. - Classification descriptions and qualifications. 
(a)  The personnel department shall establish, maintain and amend from time to time as it deems necessary, written definitions or job descriptions for each class of positions established pursuant to section 4-1(b). Said definitions or job descriptions shall describe the essential character of the duties and responsibilities of positions, setting forth the minimum qualifications for entrance to positions of the class. Such definitions or job descriptions shall be descriptive only and except as provided herein with respect to minimum qualifications not restrictive. 
(b)  They [the definitions or job descriptions] shall serve to define the scope of the several classes and not to prescribe in detail the duties or lines of promotion of any individual position. 
(c)  In the instance of classes of positions subject to the civil service law, the minimum qualifications of employment shall be those approved by the state personnel administrator for positions of the class subject to the civil service law. 
(d)  In the instance of all other classes of positions, the minimum qualifications for allocation thereto shall be prescribed by the personnel department and shall be based upon the minimum qualification recommended to said department by department heads, an examination by the personnel department of the work content of positions allocated to the class and the personnel department's study of comparable positions in private employment, in the services of other municipalities and in the state service. 
(e)  Every two years, beginning in 1994, the personnel director shall review the classification system referred to in section 4-3. Further, the director shall, pursuant to 4-3(a) and 4-3(d) herein, make or recommend any necessary and appropriate changes. Further, this review shall be completed by July 1 of each review year. 
(Ord. No. 10-1994, § I, 7-26-1994)  
Sec. 4-4. - Compensation plan. 
(a)  The compensation plan shall consist of the schedule incorporated into appendix B for management and nonunion employees, schedules incorporated into collective bargaining agreements and schedules of salary and wage rates covering other miscellaneous position classes included in the classification plan. Each position class shall be allocated to a pay grade consisting of a salary range with step increments or a single rate incorporated into the appropriate schedule. 
(b)  The personnel department shall administer the provisions of the compensation plan and shall establish such policies, procedures and regulations as it deems necessary for the administration thereof subject to the requirements of section 3-2. 
(c)  If a position subject to the civil service law shall be classified by the state personnel administration under a title not specified in appendix A, the city personnel department shall allocate the position class to an appropriate pay grade in the compensation plan (subject to provisions of collective bargaining agreements where applicable). 
(d)  Increases in compensation under the compensation plan, except as provided by collective bargaining agreement are permissive and are not mandatory for management personnel. Management employees shall be entitled to a salary review on the annual anniversary date of his/her employment. Merit raises for management personnel shall be awarded solely on the basis of the results of the performance evaluation process. In cases where merit raises are appropriate, an adjustment equal to at least one increment shall be awarded to the employee. Individual salaries need not be specifically established at one of the seven increments of the salary grade but may be established at any level between the minimum and maximum of the grade so long as any merit adjustments are of an amount equal to at least one increment within the range (or five percent of the salary). No increase shall become effective unless the appropriation made according to law, to which it is chargeable, is sufficient for the purpose and unless it is approved by the personnel department. The compensation plan for nonunion, nonmanagement employees shall follow that of the union employees and shall increase automatically at the same time and in the same increments as the union employee compensation plan increase. 
(e)  Except for employees whose positions are covered by collective bargaining agreements, any employee occupying a position in the classification plan who is not recommended to receive the increment specified in the plan shall have the right to appeal to the personnel department. Upon receipt of such appeal, the personnel department may initiate and approve the increment without the recommendation of the department head after hearing both the employee and the department head or may deny the appeal. Employees whose positions are covered by collective bargaining agreement shall be restricted to the appeals process provided in the respective agreement. 
(f)  When any management or nonunion position becomes vacant, and is to be filled, the mayor shall have the authority to establish the salary of the new employee at any rate within the pay grade assigned to the position. 
(g)  The mayor shall submit annually to the city council recommended adjustments to the compensation plan for nonunion employee. Said adjustments shall if adopted become effective on the first day of the fiscal year for which they are adopted. 
(Ord. of 9-6-1983, § I)  
ARTICLE 5. - BENEFITS AND WORKING CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Exception to applicability. 
The provisions incorporated into sections 5-2 through 5-7 of this ordinance shall not apply to employees covered by collective bargaining agreements. In such cases, the provisions of said agreements shall constitute the governing policy and shall be cited by reference. These provisions shall apply in total to all other permanent officials, officers and employees, civil service and noncivil service alike.  
Sec. 5-2. - Saturday, Sunday and Holidays. 
(a)  The following shall be paid holidays: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, President's Day, Patriots' Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas. 
(b)  Legal holidays declared by the commonwealth shall be paid holidays for employees of the city. 
(c)  If a nonmanagement employee is required to work on Saturday, Sunday or holidays, time and one-half shall be paid for work performed on Saturdays and double time on Sundays and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 5-3. - Vacations. 
(a)  Every permanent official, officer and employee, after he/she has been employed an aggregate of 30 weeks, shall be granted a vacation without loss of pay in each calendar year, in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Ten working days if his/her service is less than five years. 
(2)  15 working days commencing with the sixth year of service and ending with the tenth year of service. 
(3)  20 working days commencing with the 11th year of service, but in no event shall an employee or official be entitled to a vacation longer than four weeks in any calendar year. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, any permanent official, officer or employee, who served as a temporary official, officer or employee, shall be entitled to one year of service for vacation purposes for each year in which he/she performed duty as a temporary official, officer or employee for at least 30 weeks. 
(c)  Permanent parttime employees who work a scheduled week of 20 hours or more but less than the established weekly hours, shall be credited with vacation leave in the same proportion that the scheduled hours of the employee bears to the scheduled hours of the department. 
(d)  15 working days of vacation time may be accumulated and carried forward from one year to the following year. Vacation time excess to the 15 days shall be lost unless provision (g) below applies. 
(e)  A compensatory day shall be given for such holidays as occur during an allotted vacation. 
(f)  Time for taking vacation leave shall be at the discretion of the department head; department head time for taking vacation leave shall be at the discretion of the mayor. 
(g)  Should the work load of a given department be such that an employee cannot be excused to take vacation leave within the calendar year in which leave is credited, then upon recommendation of the appointing authority and approval of the personnel director, such unused vacation leave may be used in the following calendar year. 
(h)  Employees who leave the employment of the city prior to completing the full 12 months for which vacation benefits are accrued shall be required to reimburse the city for any vacation taken which constitutes a greater proportion of the vacation entitlement than the proportion of one year actually worked. 
(i)  A vacation shall be defined as a work week. 
(j)  Vacation pay shall be based upon the pay rate of the highest rated job classification held by an employee for a cumulative period of 30 days during the immediately preceding 12-month period.  
Sec. 5-4. - Sick leave. 
(a)  A nonmanagement employee of the city who becomes ill shall be entitled to sick leave aggregating not more than 18 days in any calendar year, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, without loss of pay. 
(b)  Nonmanagement employees shall be entitled to utilize three personal leave days provided the immediate supervisor is notified as soon as practical and, as determined by the department head and personnel director, such personal leave does not substantially interfere with the operation of the employee's department. 
(c)  Nonmanagement employees, upon retirement from city service under the provisions of "The Contributory Retirement System for Public Employees" shall be entitled to payment of an amount equal to his/her daily rate of pay (not to exceed $25.00) times the number of unused sick leave days outstanding on the date of retirement, divided by four. 
(d)  Sick leave may be accumulated by any nonmanagement employee who becomes ill, for such portion of the 18 days annual sick leave that is not used in the particular year to which it applies for a total of 250 working days. 
(e)  The rate of pay which shall be paid to any regular city employee absent from work on account of illness shall be at the same rate as the employee would be paid if he/she were not absent. 
(f)  Every department head, at all times, shall have the right to request of any absent employee, a certificate or other dependable evidence of the employee's sickness in fact and, in the event a department head doubts the right of an employee to be absent from work and to use any accumulated sick leave due the employee, the department head shall notify the personnel director. The latter shall notify the mayor who may cause to be organized a medical board to determine the extent of the employee's illness and his/her right to recover pay for accumulated sick leave. The medical board shall consist of three physicians entitled to practice in the commonwealth, one physician to be appointed by the employee, another to be appointed by the mayor, and such two physicians to pick a physician to serve as the third member, if they do not agree. The reasonable expense of the medical board shall be paid by the city and the amount charged to the department involved. 
(g)  Until such time as a central record, computerized or other, system is established, a record shall be kept by the department head of every city department, which record shall show a detailed and accurate account of the periods of illness and accumulation of sick leave relating to every employee of the respective departments. 
(h)  If any injury, illness or disability provided for in this section is self-inflicted or self-imposed, or if there is any other good reason or cause to deny an employee of the city sick leave or injury with pay under this section, the personnel director may, after due inquiry which meets constitutional standards determine what if any pay shall be given under the circumstances. Sickness or accidents sustained or caused to any city employee as the result of the use of alcohol, marijuana, marijuana products or drugs shall not be considered a proper claim for leave with pay under the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Management employees of the city are considered to be salaried employees, thus absence, due to illness, will not result in the loss of pay. Therefore, the allocation and aggregating of a specific number of sick days per year for management employees is neither appropriate nor in the best interest of the city or employee. 
(j)  The mayor and/or department head, at all times, shall have the right to investigate and require evidence of sickness on the part of any management employee as per the process so outlined in section 5-4(f) above. Continued employment of management employees in a prolonged illness status shall be determined by the medical board and appropriate recommendations made to the mayor or city council. 
(k)  Because of past practice and prior benefits earned while participants in labor contracts, certain management employees have accumulated the same sick leave benefits as afforded nonmanagement employees. For these management employees, those benefits are hereby "grandfathered." However, continued aggregating stops upon the approval of this ordinance and continued sick leave benefits shall be administered for management employees as so indicated herein. Management employees hired after the date of approval of this ordinance [January 25, 1983] shall be afforded sick leave benefits as so described herein. 
(l)  Relative to [sub]section (f), management employees who are on sick leave for a period of eight weeks shall be subject to a review by said medical board. 
(m)  All persons becoming management employees after January 25, 1983, who previously served as nonmanagement city employees and who accumulated sick leave days pursuant to nonmanagement union contract provisions or by this article, shall not lose those accumulated sick leave days for purposes of reimbursement upon retirement. However, as provided elsewhere in said article, no further accumulation shall be allowed. This section shall apply to all such persons who have retired since January 25, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 3-1991, § I, 2-26-1991; Ord. No. 2018-077, 5-22-2018)  
Sec. 5-5. - Funeral leave. 
(a)  Three days of funeral leave shall be granted [to a] nonmanagement employee who attends funeral services for his/her spouse, children, mother, father, brother, sister, mother-in-law, sister-in-law (the sister of the employee's spouse or wife of the employee's brother), brother-in-law (the brother of the employee's spouse or the husband of the employee's sister), father-in-law, grandparents, grandparents of the spouse, grandchildren and for a relative permanently residing in the employee's household. One day shall be granted for a relative not specified above, providing the employee can attend the funeral. 
(b)  Management employees of the city who are considered to be salaried who are absent due to funeral leave shall not suffer loss of pay.  
Sec. 5-6. - Health and welfare. 
(a)  The city shall pay 75 percent of the cost of the premium for group medical insurance coverage. Under the provisions of general laws, chapter 32B, this coverage may continue in effect upon retirement. 
(b)  Employee premium contributions shall be deducted weekly for medical and life insurances. 
(c)  An employee who receives a personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment, or arising out of an ordinary risk of the street while actually engaged, with authorization, in business affairs or undertakings of his employer, shall be paid compensation by the city of Gloucester pursuant to the Massachusetts Workmen's Compensation Act, M.G.L. chapter 152, section 26. 
(d)  As provided under the provisions of general laws, chapter 32B, the city shall provide and pay 75 percent of the premiums for the life insurance on each employee as follows: 
(1)  $2,000.00 death benefit. 
(2)  $4,000.00 accidental death benefit. 
(3)  $2,000.00 death benefit during retirement. 
(4)  Employee contributing to insurance shall be deducted weekly. 
(Ord. No. 2018-139, 8-14-2018)  
Sec. 5-7. - Work week. 
The normal work week for management and nonunion employees shall be established by administrative regulation of the personnel department and approved by the mayor.  
Sec. 5-8. - Working conditions. 
(a)  Fulltime officials or employees of the city shall not engage in any other business or employment during the hours of duty, and at no time shall be connected with or interested in the sale, to the city or to the public, of anything, the sale or purchase of which may be influenced by the position of the municipal official or employee or in the selling of which the municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his office or position, an unfair advantage over merchants or others engaged in that line of business. 
(b)  No fulltime officer or employee shall absent himself from office during office hours, except in case of sickness, vacation or absence on business in connection with his official duties. 
(c)  The violation of subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be sufficient cause for dismissal.  
Sec. 5-9. - Maternity leave. 
(a)  Every fulltime female employee shall be entitled to maternity leave for a period of ten weeks if she complies with the following conditions: 
(1)  She has been employed for at least three consecutive months; and 
(2)  She gives two weeks' notice of her expected departure date and notice that she intends to return to her job. 
(b)  She shall be able to return to the same or a similar position without loss of employment benefits for which she was eligible on the date her leave commenced provided that nothing has occurred during her leave which would have otherwise terminated her employment with the city under existing law, rule, or regulations. 
(c)  Accrued sick leave benefits must be provided for maternity leave purposes under the same terms and conditions which apply to other temporary medical disabilities. If there are no accrued sick leave credits, the maternity leave shall be without pay, or if there is only partial sick leave accrual, the remainder of the eight-week [10-week] period of maternity leave shall be without pay. 
(d)  This ordinance may be supplemented by a written maternity leave policy developed by the personnel director pursuant to section 3-2(2). This policy shall have the same force and effect as this section. 
(Ord. No. 28-1995, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 5-10. - Pension. 
The City of Gloucester, under the procedures outlined in the Massachusetts General Laws, chapter 32, provides to all employees a contributory retirement system, of which the employee's contribution amounts to seven percent of his/her regular salary. Enrollment in the retirement system is mandatory.  
Sec. 5-11. - Longevity. 
(a)  An employee shall earn longevity salary adjustment as follows: 
(b)  Longevity shall not appear in the base pay of the employee but shall be payable, in lump sum, the first week of December of each year to all employees who have reached their required service by 1 December of each year. 
(c)  Years of service shall be correlated with years of service in the retirement system. 
(d)  Longevity payment schedule shall be as follows and is subject to adjustment as approved by the council on a periodic basis: 
(1)  Ten years of service: $180.00. 
(2)  15 years of service: $240.00. 
(3)  20 years of service: $425.00. 
(e)  This section shall apply to both management and nonmanagement employees. 
(Ord. of 2-5-1985, § I) 
Editor's note— The provisions of an ordinance of Feb. 5, 1985, amending § 5-11 hereof, have been incorporated as § 5-11(e) at the discretion of the editor.  
ARTICLE 6. - EMPLOYMENT, PROMOTION AND TRANSFER 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Personnel director approval. 
No employment in, promotion to, or transfer to a paid, appointive position in the city service, except those positions whose incumbents are appointed by the city council, shall take effect until it has been approved by the personnel director as being in compliance with the requirements of the classification plan, the appropriate compensation plan, the affirmative action plan, state civil service rules (in the case of civil service positions), and the provisions of this ordinance.  
Sec. 6-2. - Appropriation approval. 
No employment, promotion or transfer shall become effective until such time as the appropriation or other monies out of which compensation is to be paid is certified as adequate by the city auditor and city comptroller.  
Sec. 6-3. - Department head recommendation. 
(a)  No position shall be filled and no proposed promotion to a position subject to this section shall be approved by the personnel director until it shall first be recommended by the board or department head overseeing the department to which the position is assigned. 
(b)  In the case of an emergency declared by the mayor, said department may, subject to the limitations of its appropriations and to such requirements as the personnel department may determine, employ emergency employees without the requirement of prior approval by the personnel department.  
Sec. 6-4. - Employee procedures. 
(a)  Vacancy notification. 
(1)  When any authorized position (provisional, temporary, or permanent civil service or noncivil service, fulltime or parttime, entry level or promotional) becomes vacant, the department head shall file notice in writing of such vacancy with the personnel department within 15 working days of the vacancy. 
(2)  If the department head wishes to fill a vacant position, a request to fill the vacancy shall be filed with notification of the vacant position. In cases where Massachusetts civil service applies, the department shall attach a completed roster of pertinent information to be provided by the personnel department which will be transferred onto civil service request forms. 
(3)  No action may be taken to fill a vacancy until written approval is received from the city personnel director and the mayor. The mayor, at his/her discretion, may choose not to fill a vacancy. 
(4)  It is the duty of the personnel department to maintain, wherever practical, an active eligible list of applicants. In order to maintain eligible lists, the personnel department shall advertise vacancies, when necessary, as specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(5)  Following the closing date for accepting applications, the personnel department shall provide a certified list of eligible applicants to the department head within 15 working days. 
(b)  Recruitment. Every reasonable effort shall be made to publicize positions and examinations so that all interested persons are informed and qualified persons are attracted to compete. The personnel department shall post a list of vacant positions in the city in a conspicuous public place in the following locations: the department in which the vacancy exists; the city hall main bulletin board; the city personnel department; and the local office of the division of employment security. Copies of job announcements shall also be sent to newspapers, radio stations, educational institutions, professional and vocational societies, public officials, and special recruitment resources for minorities and women as the personnel director determines necessary to attract a sufficient pool of qualified applicants. 
(c)  Selection Procedures (noncivil service). The personnel director shall utilize any one or more of the following selection procedures to determine the fitness and ability of the applicants for entry-level and promotional positions: 
(1)  A written examination. 
(2)  An oral examination. 
(3)  A practical (or performance) test. 
(4)  An evaluation of education and experience. 
(5)  A structured interview (mandatory with finalists). 
(6)  An evaluation of past performance (in the case of promotions). 
(7)  A physical test of strength, ability or dexterity. 
(8)  A pre-employment physical examination (mandatory). 
(9)  Any other appropriate measure of fitness. 
The personnel director, after consultation with the appropriate department head, shall determine in each instance what procedure or combination of procedures shall be used and the relative weight assigned to each part of the examination. The personnel director shall also ensure that all selection procedures are sufficiently job-related. 
(Examinations for civil service employees are conducted by the state division of personnel administration as prescribed in general laws, chapter 31.) 
(d)  Eligible lists (noncivil service). Eligible lists shall be established by classification for noncivil service, nonmanagerial positions, such positions to be determined by the personnel director. When composite examination scores are used, candidates achieving passing scores (or higher) shall be ranked on the eligible list in order of their scores. In such cases the director shall certify the names of the five highest ranking candidates and the department head shall recommend one from among that list of five. When selection procedures are limited to interviews and the evaluation of experience and training, the personnel director shall provide to the department head a list of eligible candidates listed in order of their date of application, along with employment applications and/or resumes and their respective rankings on experience and training. The department head shall recommend a candidate from the list provided. Eligible lists shall remain in effect for limited periods of time, as determined by the personnel director. 
(Eligible lists for civil service positions are provided by the state division of personnel administration in accordance with general laws, chapter 31.) 
(e)  Appointment. A department head, upon selecting an applicant to fill a vacancy, shall submit to the personnel director a request for appointment of the person selected. The mayor shall make appointments in the case of department head and other positions specified in the city charter. The personnel department shall thereupon send an authorization to the city auditor, with a copy to the city treasurer, to place the person on the city payroll with the classification and salary rate authorized for the position. Such authorization shall be accompanied by the necessary federal and state tax withholding forms and any pertinent insurance documents required. 
(f)  Promotion. Vacancies occurring in noncivil service positions above the entry level shall, whenever possible, be filled by promotion of a qualified employee within the city service. However, the personnel director may recruit applicants from outside the city service whenever he/she has reason to believe that better qualified applicants are available than from within the city service. The procedures for selecting employees at the promotional level shall be the same as those provided in section 6-4(c), selection procedures. The personnel director, after consultation with the appropriate department heads, shall determine what procedure or combination of procedures is best suited to each promotional position. 
(For civil service positions, promotions shall be made in accordance with general laws, chapter 31.) 
(g)  Probation. Each employee shall serve a probationary period of three months following a permanent appointment to either an entry-level or promotional position. If, after the three-month period, the employee has performed satisfactorily (as determined by a performance evaluation), he/she shall be appointed permanently. An employee may be dismissed, suspended, or demoted at any time during the probationary period and will not be eligible for an appeal, and notification shall be in writing. 
(For civil service positions, probation is specified in the civil service law.)  
ARTICLE 7. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION 
The City of Gloucester fully recognizes its moral responsibility and legal obligation to afford equal employment opportunity to all applicants and employees and to act affirmatively in all employment matters in order to achieve this goal. The affirmative action plan approved by the city council on June 8, 1977, constitutes the official equal employment opportunity policies of the city. 
In accordance with Executive Order No. 74, as amended and revised by No. 116, chapter 151B, Massachusetts General Laws, title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended by the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, Federal Executive Order 11246, as amended, and applicable federal civil rights laws, discrimination based on race, sex, color, religion, national origin, marital status, or age is prohibited in all terms and conditions of employment. These terms and conditions include, but are not limited to: hiring and employment, promotion, transfer, discharge, benefits and compensation, membership in labor organizations, or relief from any prohibited practices. The City of Gloucester will not discriminate on the basis of any of the above mentioned factors, nor on the basis of an applicant's handicap, unless there is a bona fide occupational qualification which precludes employment.  
ARTICLE 8. - TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Training policy. 
It shall be the policy of the city to encourage employees at all levels of the city service to participate in training and development programs designed to improve their skills; to increase their knowledge of new federal and state laws and programs, new technology, and new methods of operation; and to reduce gaps between actual and expected performance as determined by regular evaluations of performance.  
Sec. 8-2. - Training needs. 
The personnel director shall from time to time conduct a formal or informal training needs assessment to determine the range of needs that exist and an order of priority for meeting those needs.  
Sec. 8-3. - Developing training programs. 
Wherever practical, the personnel director shall develop on-site training programs using the training skills of city employees, local experts, and various colleges, universities and vocational schools within or outside the region.  
Sec. 8-4. - Training costs. 
Whenever sufficient funding is available, it shall be the policy of the city to assume the normal costs for tuition, fees and educational materials. Employees who request enrollment in educational and training programs outside regular working hours shall be encouraged to do so without additional salary compensation. Exceptions to this general policy shall be spelled out in administrative regulations formulated by the personnel director and approved by the mayor.  
ARTICLE 9. - PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Performance evaluation guidelines. 
Performance evaluation shall be the continuing responsibility of all supervisors, and supervisors shall discuss performance informally with each employee as often as necessary to ensure effective performance. Except where provided otherwise in collective bargaining agreements, each supervisor shall make an appraisal in writing and shall discuss with each employee his/her overall work performance at least once each fiscal year, on the employee's anniversary date. The format and process of such appraisals shall be established by the personnel director, after consultation with department heads. However, maximum flexibility shall be permitted from one department to another. Written appraisals shall be filed with the personnel director and each employee shall be supplied with a copy and sign a document indicating that they have seen same and [been] given right to rebut.  
Sec. 9-2. - Uses of performance evaluation. 
Performance evaluation shall be used to provide a continuing record of employee development, a means of identifying effective performance as well as areas needing improvement, and as a forum for encouraging effective supervisory-employee communications. For management and nonunion personnel performance evaluation shall serve as a basis for making decisions on merit raises pursuant to section 4-4. For noncivil service employees performance evaluation may be used for making decisions regarding promotions, the order of layoffs, and other pertinent personnel actions as may be specified in administrative regulations formulated by the personnel director (pursuant to section 3-2), provided such evaluation procedures are not in conflict with any collective bargaining agreements.  
ARTICLE 10. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION AND SEPARATION 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Exception to applicability. 
The provisions incorporated into sections 10-2 through 10-8 of this ordinance shall not apply to any employees covered by the civil service law. Nor shall these provisions apply to employees covered by collective bargaining agreements, where such agreements address the same policies, or city department heads.  
Sec. 10-2. - Demotion. 
A department head may reduce the salary of an employee within the range provided in the appropriate pay plan or demote the employee for just cause with the approval of the personnel director. The employee shall be notified in writing of the contemplated action by registered letter or in hand (return receipt requested from addressee only) and the reasons for such action at least five working days prior to the effective date of the action and a copy of said notice shall be filed with the personnel director. Any permanent employee who is demoted may appeal for a hearing, in writing, to the personnel appeals board within five working days after the date of service of such notice of demotion. The board shall grant the employee a hearing within 14 working days thereafter. The hearing shall be public at the option of the employee and he/she may be represented by counsel, and notifications to employee shall be by registered mail or signed receipt.  
Sec. 10-3. - Suspension. 
(a)  A department head, following consultation with the personnel director, may suspend without pay and for just cause, any permanent employee in his/her department covered by this article for such length of time as he/she considers appropriate. In any suspension, the personnel director shall be furnished immediately with a written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for such suspension and a copy of such statement shall be furnished immediately to the employee. 
(b)  Any suspension or any combination of suspensions for the fiscal year may be appealed to the personnel appeals board. Any employee wishing to make such an appeal shall notify his/her department head and the personnel director in writing of his/her intention to appeal within five working days of the receipt of an appeal. Within not more than ten working days of the receipt of an appeal, the personnel appeals board shall hold a hearing which shall be public at the option of the employee and [at] which he/she may be represented by legal counsel.  
Sec. 10-4. - Dismissal. 
A permanent employee may be dismissed by a department head for just cause, provided the employee is given a written statement five working days prior to the effective date of the dismissal setting forth the reasons for said dismissal and a copy is filed with the personnel director. Any employee so dismissed shall have the right to make an appeal in writing within five working days of the date of receipt of the letter of dismissal. Such appeal shall be sent by registered mail or presented in person to the personnel appeals board and the board shall grant the employee a hearing within ten working days of the receipt of said letter and shall render a decision within 14 working days thereafter. The hearing shall be public at the option of the employee and he/she may be represented by counsel. Said employee may remain in the employ of the city, with or without pay, pending decision.  
Sec. 10-5. - Transfer. 
An employee may be transferred from one department to another with or without the employee's consent, provided: 
(1)  Such transfer is to a position in the same class or another class having the same minimum and maximum salary limits, involving the performance of similar duties, and requiring substantially the same basic qualifications; and 
(2)  Such a transfer is approved by the personnel director. An employee so transferred may appeal said transfer to the personnel appeals board if he/she feels said transfer was made arbitrarily or capriciously.  
Sec. 10-6. - Layoff. 
(a)  A department head may layoff a permanent employee in the classified service when he/she deems it necessary by reason of shortage of work or funds, material change in the departmental organization, or for other related reasons which are outside the employee's control and which do not reflect discredit upon the services of the employee. The employee shall be provided with a written notice of such layoff 14 working days prior to the effective date of such action. 
(b)  The order of layoffs shall be by seniority within classification by departmental unit whenever possible. However, past performance, [and] current and projected employment needs of the city shall also be a determining factor, based upon a report from the department head. 
(c)  No temporary or permanent separation of an employee from the classified service as a penalty or disciplinary action shall be considered a layoff. The names of employees affected shall be kept on a special employment list and said employees shall be recalled in the order and based upon the same criteria as were used in determining the original layoff.  
Sec. 10-7. - Resignation. 
(a)  To resign in good standing, an employee must give the appointing authority at least 14 calendar days prior notice unless the appointing authority, because of extenuating circumstances, agrees to permit a shorter period of notice. 
(b)  A written resignation shall be supplied by the employee to the appointing authority giving reasons for leaving. The resignation shall be forwarded to the personnel director with a statement by the appointing authority as to the resigned employee's service performance and pertinent information concerning the cause for resignation. Failure to comply with this requirement shall be entered on the service record of the employee and may be cause for denying future employment by the city.  
Sec. 10-8. - Just cause standard. 
For purposes of this article, just cause shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Incompetency. 
(2)  Inefficiency. 
(3)  Inexcusable neglect of duty. 
(4)  Failure to perform in one or more critical elements of the job. 
(5)  Fraud in securing appointment. 
(6)  Insubordination. 
(7)  Drunkenness. 
(8)  Addiction to narcotics or habit-forming drugs. 
(9)  Inexcusable absence without leave. 
(10)  Chronic tardiness. 
(11)  Sick leave abuse. 
(12)  Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. 
(13)  Willful disobedience. 
(14)  Misuse or unauthorized use of municipal property. 
(15)  Other misconduct or violations of work rules, regulations, charter, ordinance or election laws. 
(16)  Working another job on city time.  
ARTICLE 11. - PERSONNEL APPEALS BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 28-1995, § I, adopted May 22, 1995, amended former art. 11, §§ 11-1—11-7, to read as herein set out. Former art. 11 derived from the personnel ordinance of January 25, 1983. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Appointment. 
Within 30 days following the acceptance of the revised ordinance, the personnel appeals board shall be constituted in the following manner: 
(i)  The mayor shall appoint a member to represent nonunion management employees; 
(ii)  G.M.A.A. and A.F.S.C.M.E. Local 687 employees shall each elect one member representative, one of whom shall serve on board hearings involving his or her respective members; 
(iii)  The above three individuals shall elect a permanent member of the board by unanimous consent. This member shall be a neutral and impartial chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-2. - Membership. 
Regular members of the personnel appeals board shall serve for a three-year term and shall serve without compensation. The personnel director shall maintain all records of membership. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-3. - Vacancy. 
If any member shall vacate his office for any reason, a successor shall be appointed forthwith. Such successor shall serve until the expiration of the term of the member so vacating. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-4. - Meetings. 
The personnel appeals board shall meet at least once each month at such regular times and in such regular place as it may determine, unless there is no current business before it. Additional meetings shall be held at the request of the personnel director or as the personnel appeals board shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-5. - Duties and jurisdiction. 
Any and all employee grievances shall first be filed with the personnel director, who shall issue response within 15 working days following receipt of the grievance. In the event the employee remains dissatisfied with the response of the personnel director, the employee shall retain appeals rights through the appeals board. 
The appeals board shall serve those eligible employees not afforded appeal rights by either arbitration procedures specified in a collective bargaining agreement or by the civil service commission. The appeals board shall have authority to: 
(1)  Hear appeals in cases of suspensions, demotions or dismissals; 
(2)  Hear appeals in cases of layoffs and transfers (from one department to another) only if the employee can show bad faith on the part of the municipal employer; 
(3)  Hear appeals on selections, promotions, and other related personnel actions where there is an alleged violation of the procedures established herein or in attendant administrative regulations; 
(4)  Advise the personnel director, upon request of the director, on any personnel matters including individual employee requests for reclassification of positions not covered by collective bargaining agreement and benefits determination, excluding workers compensation and M.G.L. c. 41, § 111-F, claims. 
(5)  Maintain, by clerk as a record, minutes from all meetings. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-6. - Board decisions. 
An individual may file an appeal to the personnel appeals board within 30 days of any specific action which is being appealed. 
The personnel appeals board shall hear any appeal within 14 working days after such appeal is presented and shall render its decision within an additional 14 working days. The action of the municipal appointing authority shall be upheld if it is shown by substantial evidence to be based on just cause. Any such decision of the board shall be final and binding on all parties, subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-7. - Other investigative procedures. 
The personnel appeals board will have no jurisdiction in certain matters not listed in section 11-5. 
This ordinance does not affect any powers of the personnel director to manage other investigations. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
Sec. 11-8. - Alternative appeal rights. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the rights of employees covered by civil service to appeal a suspension, demotion, or dismissal to the civil service commission pursuant to [M.G.L.] c. 31, §§ 41—44, or to limit the rights of employees covered by collective bargaining agreements to exercise any appeal procedures negotiated as part of said agreements; provided that in such cases, the employee shall elect one method of appeal which shall constitute the exclusive remedy. 
(Ord. No. 28-95, § I, 5-22-1995)  
ARTICLE 12. - SEVERANCE CLAUSE 
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable and if any such provision or the application of any such provision to any person or circumstances shall be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such invalidity, illegality or unconstitutionality shall not be construed to affect the validity, legality or constitutionality of any of the remaining provisions or the application of said ordinance to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it is held invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional.  
APPENDIX A. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN[3] 
Alphabetical Listing of Fulltime and Parttime Position Classes 
and Allocation to Compensation Grade and/or Schedule 
Position 	Schedule 	Compensation 
Grade 
Account Clerk 	AFSCME 	V 
Account Specialist 		XIII-A 
Archivist/Records Clerk 	AFSCME 	VII 
Art Coordinator, Council on Aging, PT 		IV 
Asphalt Raker 	AFSCME 	V 
Asst. to Animal Control, Police 		VI 
Asst. Buyer 	AFSCME 	V 
Asst. Department of Public Works Director 		
Asst. Fire Chief 		
Asst. Harbormaster 	AFSCME 	VI 
Asst. Registrar of Voters 	AFSCME 	VII 
Asst. Sanitary Inspector 		
Asst. Skating Rink Manager 		
Asst. Supt. Fire Alarm and Police Signal System 		
Asst. Traffic Sign Erector 	AFSCME 	V 
Asst. Water Registrar 	AFSCME 	V 
Attendant 		
Audio-Visual Librarian 	AFSCME 	VI 
Backflow Prevention Device Tester 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Board Secretary 		
Bookkeeper, Community Development 		VII 
Bookkeeper, DPW 		VII 
Bookkeeper, Treasurer/Collector 		VII 
Building Custodian (Junior) 	AFSCME 	VI 
Buyer 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Cafeteria Helper 		
Cafeteria Manager 		
Carpenter 	AFSCME 	VI 
Cataloguer 	AFSCME 	VI 
Children's Librarian 	AFSCME 	VI 
Circulation Librarian, Library 		VI 
Civil Service Director 		
Clerk of Committees 		VIIIA 
Clerk—Personnel 	AFSCME 	IV 
Clerk Typist 	AFSCME 	IV 
Collection Specialist 		VII 
Code Enforcement Inspector 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Commissioner of Public Safety 		
Confidential Secretary (OPW) 	Mgt. 	VIIIA 
Confidential Secretary (Police Dept.) 	AFSCME 	V 
Custodian (Junior) 	AFSCME 	VI 
Data Control Clerk 		
Deputy Collector 	AFSCME 	VII 
Deputy Fire Chief 	Fire 	IV 
Deputy Sealer Wts. and Measures 		
Director of Communications and Constituent Services 		
Drillman 	AFSCME 	V 
Electrician 		
Electrician Helper 	AFSCME 	V 
Executive Secretary 		
Executive Secretary to Mayor 	AFSCME 	VIIA 
Executive/Confidential Secretary 		VIIIA 
Facilities Manager (Department of Public Works) 		
Financial Secretary 		
Fire Captain 	Fire 	III 
Firefighter 	Fire 	I 
Firefighter and Asst. Mechanic 	Fire 	II 
Fire Inspector 		
Fiscal Analyst 		
Forestry Maintenance Man 		
Grants Accounting Specialist 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Grounds Maintenance Man 		
Head Lifeguard 		
Head Pumping Station Operator 	AFSCME 	VII 
Head Treatment Plant Operator 	AFSCME 	VII 
Heavy Motor Equipment Operator 	AFSCME 	VI 
House Worker 		
Junior Clerk Typist 	AFSCME 	IV 
Junior Draftsman 	AFSCME 	VI 
Junior Engineering Aid 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Junior Library Assistant 	AFSCME 	V 
Junior Planner 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Laborer 	AFSCME 	V 
Laundry Worker 		
Legal Secretary (Mayor's Office) 	Mgt. 	VIIIA 
Library Administrative Aid 	AFSCME 	V 
Lifeguard 		
Lineman 	AFSCME 	VI 
Mason 	AFSCME 	VI 
Master Mechanic 		
Master Mechanic, Fire Department 	Fire 	III 
Medical Worker 		
Meter Installers 	AFSCME 	VI 
Meter Reader 	AFSCME 	VI 
Milk Inspector 		
Motor Equipment Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	V 
Motor Equipment Operator 	AFSCME 	V 
Motor Equipment Repair Foreman 	AFSCME 	VII 
Motor Equipment Repairman 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Office Manager 		
Oil Burner Maintenance Man 		
Operations Manager: Public Properties 		XII 
Painter 		
Park Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	V 
Park Police Officer 		
Parking Control Officer 	AFSCME 	V 
Parking Meter Repairman 	AFSCME 	VI 
Pensions Clerk 	AFSCME 	VI 
Personnel Assistant, Personnel 		VI 
Pipelayer, Engineering 		VI 
Plumbing and Gas Fitting Inspector 	AFSCME 	VIIIB 
Police Captain 	Police 	
Police Lieutenant 	Police 	III 
Police Matron 		
Police Officer 	Police 	I 
Police Sergeant 	Police 	II 
Principal Account Clerk, Auditors 		VII 
Principal Clerk 	AFSCME 	VI 
Principal Clerk and Secretary 		
Principal Clerk and Typist 		
Public Works Foreman 	AFSCME 	VII 
Public Works Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	V 
Pumping Station Operator 	AFSCME 	VI 
Recreation Leader, PT 		V 
Reference Librarian 	AFSCME 	VI 
Revenue Manager, Engineering 	Mgt. 	XII 
Sanitary Inspector 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Secretary (Mayor's Office) 	Mgt. 	VI-A 
Secretary (City Clerk's Office) 	AFSCME 	VI-A 
Secretary to Community Dev. Director 	AFSCME 	VI 
Senior Account Clerk 		VII 
Senior Bookkeeper 		
Senior Building Custodian 		
Senior Building Maintenance Craftsman 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Senior Clerk 	AFSCME 	V 
Senior Clerk-Stenographer 	AFSCME 	V 
Senior Clerk-Typist 	AFSCME 	V 
Senior Engineering Aide 		
Senior Library Asst. 		
Senior Meter Reader 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Senior Planning Aide 	AFSCME 	VII 
Sewer Foreman 	AFSCME 	VII 
Sewer System Maintenance Craftsman 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Shellfish Warden 	AFSCME 	VII 
Sign Painter 	AFSCME 	VI 
Signal Maintainer 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Signal Maintainer Helper 		
Skating Rink Equipment Operator 		
Skating Rink Maintenance Man 		
Social Worker, Council on Aging 	AFSCME 	VIII 
Special Motor Equipment Operator 	AFSCME 	VI 
Storekeeper 	AFSCME 	VI 
Stores Delivery Man 		
Supervisor of Payroll Systems 	Mgt. 	IX 
Telecommunications Technician 		VIII 
Telephone Operator 		
Tree Warden 		VIII 
Traffic Sign Erector 	AFSCME 	VI 
Traffic Supervisor 		
Treatment Plant 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Tree Climber 		
Tree Surgeon 		
Tourism Coordinator, Community Development 	Mgt. 	IX 
Wastewater Engineering/Financial Coordinator 		XII 
Watchman 	AFSCME 	V 
Water Meter Foreman 	AFSCME 	VII 
Water Meter Repairman 	AFSCME 	VI 
Water System Foreman 	AFSCME 	VII 
Water System Maintenance Man 		
Working Foreman Craftsman 	AFSCME 	VII 
Working Foreman Forestry Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Heavy Motor Equipment Operator 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Laborer 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Motor Equipment Operator 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Motor Equipment Repairman 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Public Works Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Sewer Craftsman 		VII 
Working Foreman Skating Rink Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Signal Maintainer 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Special Motor Equipment Operator 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Tree Surgeon 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Water Meter Repairman 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Working Foreman Water System Maintenance Man 	AFSCME 	VIA 
Workman's Compensation/Benefits Agent 	AFSCME 	VII 
Young Adult Librarian Assistant 	AFSCME 	V 
Youth Services Coordinator 	Mgt 	X 
 
New 
Grade 	Position Title 	Current 
Grade 
M-12 	Chief Financial Officer 	M-9 
M-12 	Director of Public Works 	M-10 
M-12 	Fire Chief 	M-10 
M-12 	Police Chief 	M-10 
M-11 	Asst. Fire Chief 	
M-11 	Chief Administrative Officer 	M-9 
M-11 	General Counsel 	M-10 
M-10 	Community Development Director 	M-9 
M-9 	Admin. Assistant to the Mayor 	M-14 
M-9 	Asst. Department of Public Works Director 	
M-9 	Building Inspector 	M-8 
M-9 	City Engineer 	M-14 
M-9 	Economic Development Director 	
M-9 	Principal Assessor 	M-8 
M-9 	Public Health Director 	M-8 
M-8 	Assistant CFO/Treasurer/Collector 	
M-8 	Assistant General Counsel 	M-7 
M-8 	Auditor 	M-13 
M-8 	City Clerk, Management 	M-7 
M-8 	City Planner 	M-12 
M-8 	Director of Information Services 	
M-8 	Facilities Manager (Department of Public Works) 	
M-8 	Grant Development Manager 	
M-8 	Library Director 	M-12 
M-8 	Personnel Director 	M-12 
M-8 	Purchasing Agent 	M-12 
M-8 	Treasurer/Collector 	M-13 
M-7 	Administrator 	M-12 
M-7 	Assistant Auditor 	M-5 
M-7 	Assistant City Engineer 	M-13 
M-7 	Computer Network 	
M-7 	Environmental Engineer 	M-13 
M-7 	Grants Administrator 	M-12 
M-7 	Grants Compliance Manager 	
M-7 	Harbormaster 	M-11 
M-6 	Assessor 	M-12 
M-6 	Computer Technician City/School 	
M-6 	Council on Aging Director 	M-11 
M-6 	Fiscal Analyst, confidential 	
M-6 	General Ledger Accountant 	M-4 
M-6 	Master Mechanic 	
M-6 	Operations Mgr. - Central Services 	M-12 
M-6 	Operations Mgr. - Public Property 	M-12 
M-6 	Operations Manager, Water, Sewer & Highway 	
M-6 	Public Health Sanitarian - Supervisor 	M-10 
M-5 	Asst. Library Director 	M-10 
M-5 	Civil Engineer 	
M-5 	Computer Technician 	
M-5 	Fisheries Director 	
M-5 	Information Support Specialist 	
M-5 	Jr. Civil Engineer 	M-10 
M-5 	Marketing and Event Project Manager 	
M-5 	Pretreatment Coordinator 	M-10 
M-5 	Public Health Nurse 	M-4 
M-5 	Senior Planner 	
M-5 	Technical Support Specialist 	
M-5 	Youth & Recreation Director 	
M-4 	Conservation Agent 	
M-4 	Electrical Inspector 	M-11 
M-4 	Financial Coordinator, Police 	
M-4 	Inspector of Engineering 	M-9 
M-4 	Local Building Inspector 	M-9 
M-4 	Payroll Supervisor 	M-3 
M-4 	Sanitarian 	M-10 
M-4 	Sr. Project Manager 	M-10 
M-4 	Veterans Agent 	M-3 
M-3 	Assistant Purchasing Agent 	M-10 
M-3 	Assistant City Planner 	M-9 
M-3 	Assistant City Clerk 	M-9 
M-3 	Housing Rehab. Specialist 	M-10 
M-3 	Recycling Coordinator 	M-9 
M-3 	Sealer of Weights & Measures 	M-9 
M-3 	Supervisor of Payroll 	M-9 
M-3 	Tourism Coordinator 	M-2 
M-2 	Assistant Assessor 	M-9 
M-1 	None 	
 
(Ord. of 5-22-1984, § I(1, 3); Ord. of 2-5-1985, § I; Ord. of 4-9-1985, § I; Ord. of 8-19-1986, § I; Ord. of 10-21-1986, § I; Ord. of 4-14-1987, § I; Ord. of 8-25-1987, § I; Ord. of 2-2-1988, § I; Ord. of 8-16-1988, § I; Ord. No. 7-1990, § I, 1-16-1990; Ord. No. 23-1992, § I, 8-4-1992; Ord. No. 6-1993, § I, 4-6-1993; Ord. No. 18-1993, § I, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 7-1994, § I, 4-12-1994; Ord. No. 14-1994, § I, 8-23-1994; Ord. No. 17-1994, § I, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 18-1994, § I, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 13-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 20-1995, § I, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 28-1995, § I, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 48-1995, § I, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 38-1996, § I, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. 19-1996, § I, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 41-1997, § I, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 50-1997, § I, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 76-1998, § I, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 116-1998, § II, 8-18-1998; Ord. No. 8-1999, § I, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 9-1999, § I, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 13-1999, § I, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 41-1999, § I, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 70-2000, § I, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 83-2000, § I, 8-15-2000; Ord. No. 89-2000, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. of 4-24-2001, § I; Ord. of 6-5-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 6-5-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 6-19-2001(03), § I; Ord. of 6-11-2002(03), § I; Ord. of 7-23-2002(01), § I; Ord. of 12-13-2005(04), § I; Ord. of 11-27-2007; Ord. of 6-10-2008; Ord. of 9-2-2008(04); Ord. of 6-8-2010(01); Ord. of 3-30-2010(05); Ord. of 8-31-2010(01); Ord. of 8-31-2010(02); Ord. of 5-24-2011(03); Ord. of 3-27-2012(04); Ord. of 3-27-2012(05); Ord. of 5-22-2012(03); Ord. of 5-12-2012; Ord. of 6-12-12; Ord. No. 2014-094, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 2016-177, § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Classification plan, app. C, §§ 4-1—4-3. 
 
APPENDIX B. - COMPENSATION PLAN[4] 
Salary and wage schedules adopted for management and nonunion employees, schedules incorporated into collective bargaining agreements and schedules covering other miscellaneous position classes are included as Appendix B to the personnel ordinance and incorporated herein by reference. Said schedules are kept on file and available for inspection at the office of the town clerk. 
Salary and wage schedules included in Appendix B are as follows: 
FIRE: Schedule is adopted as per Union Contract 
POLICE: Schedule is adopted as per Union Contract 
AFSCME: Schedule is adopted as per Union Contract 
MANAGEMENT AND NONUNION: Schedule is adopted and approved by City Council 
Union salary and wage schedules included herein are to be updated on connection with renegotiated union contracts. Management and nonunion salary and wage schedules included herein are to be updated as approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-147, 7-12-2016; Ord. No. 2016-177, 9-13-2016) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Compensation plan, app. C, § 4-4. 
 
APPENDIX C. 
Grade I: none. 
Grade II: none. 
Grade III: none. 
Grade IV: Clerk Typist. 
Grade V: Senior Clerk; Accounting Clerk; Asst. Registrar, City Clerk; Sr. Clerk Typist; Senior Lib. Asst.; Jr. Lib. Asst.; Young Adult Lib. Asst.; Sr. Clerk/Steno; Accounts Payable Clerk; Asphalt Raker DPW; P.W. Laborer, DPW Maintenance Man, MEO; Janitor/Night Watchman; Weigher on Scales; Asst. Tr. Sign Erector; Drillman, Electrician's Helper; Confidential Secretary (Police Dept.); Meter Maid; Technical Support Specialist. 
Grade VI: Secretary; Principal Clerk; Lineman; Jr. Draftsman; Cataloguer; Reference Librarian; Audio-Visual Librarian; Children's Librarian; Sewer Pump Station Operator; HMEO; SMEO; Elec. Wat. Pump Station Op.; Storekeeper, Water Meter Reader and Repair; Janitor; Carpenter; Building Custodian; Tr. Sign Erector; Sign Painter; Mason; Junior Bldg. Custodian; Parking Meter Man; Motor Equipment Repair; Assistant to Harbormaster; Library Administrative Aide; Pipelayer, Engineering; Circulation Librarian, Library; Assistant to Animal Control, Police; Personnel Assistant; Meter Installer; Operations Manager, Water, Sewer & Highway. 
Grade VIA: Engineering Aide, grade 2; Water Tr. Plant Operator; Senior Meter Reader. 
Grade VII: Asst. Registrar of Voters; Code Enforcement Inspector; Sanitary Inspector; Shellfish Warden; Head Pump Stat. Operator, Sewer, Foreman, DPW; Bookkeeper, Community Development; Bookkeeper, DPW; Bookkeeper, Treasurer/Collector; Principal Account Clerk, Auditors; Working Foreman Craftsman, Sewer Craftsman. 
Grade VIII: Signal Maintenance (Electrician's); Supt., Solid Waste; Telecommunications Technician; Backflow Prevention Device Tester; Community Development, P/T; Director of Computer Services; Grants Accounting Specialist. 
Grade VIIIA: Clerk of Committees. 
Grade VIIIB: Plumbing and Gas Fitting Inspector. 
Grade IX: none. 
Grade X: none. 
Grade XI: none. 
Grade XII: none. 
Grade XIII: none. 
Grade XIV: none. 
(Ord. No. 18-1993, § I, 12-21-1993; Ord. No. 8-1994, § I, 4-12-1994; Ord. No. 17-1994, § I, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 18-1994, § I, 4-27-1994; Ord. No. 13-1995, § I, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 20-1995, § I, 3-7-1995; Ord. No. 28-1995, § I, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 48-1995, § I, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 38-1996, § I, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. 19-1996, § I, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 41-1997, § II, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 50-1997, § II, 7-22-1997; Ord. No. 76-1998, § II, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 89-2000, § I, 9-26-2000; Ord. of 4-24-2001, § I; Ord. of 6-5-2001(02), § I; Ord. of 6-19-2001(03), § I)  
Appendix D - REORGANIZATION PLANS[1] 
This appendix contains a listing of all reorganization plans approved by the city which, subject to applicable law and the city charter, reorganize, consolidate, or abolish any city agency, in whole or in part, or establish new city agencies. The plans are included herein as an appendix to the Code, per Charter Section 7-3. 
1.  Assessor's Department, approved 2-17-1998. 
2.  Department of Public Works, approved 3-14-2011. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2011(04)) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Publication of reorganization plan, § 7-3. 



The City of Gloucester Massachusetts 
ZONING ORDINANCE 

Issued January 2016
With Amendments to Date Incorporated 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. of Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No.  3-18-2008(1) Omitted Publication  9- 2-2008(1) Included Publication  9- 2-2008(2) Included Publication  9- 2-2008(3) Included Publication  9- 2-2008(4) Included Publication 11-18-2008(1) Omitted Publication 11-17-2009(1) Omitted Publication  3-30-2010(1) Included Publication  3-30-2010(2) Included Publication  3-30-2010(3) Included Publication  3-30-2010(4) Included Publication  3-30-2010(5) Included Publication  3-30-2010(6) Included Publication  4-27-2010(1) Included Publication  6-14-2011(1) Included Publication  6-14-2011(2) Included Publication  6-14-2011(3) Included Publication  6-14-2011(4) Included Publication 11-29-2011(1) Included Publication  5- 8-2012(1) Included Publication  8-28-2012(1) Omitted Publication 10-23-2012(1) Included Publication 10-23-2012(2) Included Publication  7-23-2013(1) Included Publication  7-23-2013(2) Included Publication  8-27-2013(1) Included Publication  8-27-2013(2) Included Publication 10- 8-2013(1) Omitted Publication 11-12-2013(1) Included Publication  2-11-2014(1) Omitted Publication  5-27-2014(1) Omitted Publication  5-27-2014(2) Omitted Publication  8-26-2014(1) Omitted Publication  6-23-2015(1) Included Publication  9- 8-2015(1) Included Publication 11-17-2015(1) Included Publication 12-15-2015(1) Included Publication  4-12-2016(1) Included 1  5-10-2016(1) Included 1  6-28-2016(1) Included 1  7-12-2016(1) Included 1  4-25-2017(1) Included 1  4-25-2017(2) Omitted 1  8-22-2017(1) Included 1  9-26-2017(1) Included 1 10-10-2017(2) Omitted 1  9-11-2018(1) Included 2  9-11-2018(2) Included 2  9-25-2018(1) Included 2 11-13-2018(1) Included 2 11-13-2018(2) Included 2  
CITY OF GLOUCESTER - In the Year 1969 
BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Gloucester as follows: An Ordinance ordained September 27, 1950 relative to Zoning and further amended on April 17, 1969 by striking Sections 1-29 and inserting in their places Sections I-VI, and further amended on September 2, 2008 by striking Sections I-III and inserting in their places the following amended Sections I-III. 
SECTION I - ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES 

1.1 - TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gloucester. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
1.2 - PURPOSE, INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT, DEFINITIONS 
1.2.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the Zoning Ordinance is to promote and enhance the health, safety, convenience, quality of life and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Gloucester. In furtherance of this purpose, this ordinance shall have the following specific objectives, as identified by the Massachusetts legislature in enacting the Zoning Act, MGL Chapter 40A: 
To lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage housing for persons of all income levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city, including consideration of the recommendations of the comprehensive plan adopted by the Planning Board, and the comprehensive plan, if any, of the Metropolitan Area Planning Council; and to preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill said objectives. Section 2A of Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975. 
1.2.2 Interpretation 
In interpreting the Zoning Ordinance, its provisions shall be deemed the minimum requirements for effectuation of the purposes and objectives set forth in Section 1.2.1. 
1.2.3 Conflicts with Other Regulations, Rules, etc 
Where application of the Zoning Ordinance results in the imposition of greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulation, permit, restriction, easement. covenant or agreement the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
1.2.4 Relation to MGL Chapter 40A 
While many of the provisions of MGL Chapter 40A are set forth in this ordinance, other provisions of less common application have been omitted. In either case, the provisions of Chapter 40A shall control. 
1.2.5 Reserved 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 11-13-2018(2)) 
1.3 - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS 
1.3.1 Enforcement of Zoning Ordinance; Appeals of Zoning Decisions 
(a)  The Inspector of Buildings shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  To aid the Inspector of Buildings in enforcement of this ordinance, every police officer shall notify his or her superior officer, for referral to the Inspector of Buildings, of any building or structure on which construction work is being done without the display of a duly issued building permit. At the request of the Inspector of Buildings, the Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
(c)  The Inspector of Buildings shall issue the following penalties for violations of the provisions of this ordinance: 
(i)  First offense: a written warning; 
(ii)  Second offense: a fine of $100.00; 
(iii)  Third offense: a fine of $200.00; 
(iv)  Fourth offense and each offense thereafter: a fine of $300.00. 
    Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
    The Inspector of Buildings may institute, in the name of the city, the appropriate civil or criminal action, to prevent, correct, restrain, abate or punish violations of this offense. 
(d)  Upon conviction, any person, corporation or other entity violating or refusing to comply with the provisions of this ordinance may be fined up to three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  The Inspector of Buildings shall respond within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a written request to enforce the provisions of this ordinance against any person alleged to be in violation thereof. Such response shall be in writing, shall specify the action taken or declined to be taken, and shall set forth the reasons for the Inspector of Buildings' decision. 
(f)  The Inspector of Buildings shall maintain a record of all permits issued by the Building Department, and shall make a monthly report of such to the Board of Assessors and a yearly report to the City Council. 
(g)  Any action, suit, or proceeding to enforce the provisions of this ordinance shall be commenced in the manner of and within the time limitations set forth in MGL, Chapter 40A, Section 7. 
1.3.2 Building, Occupancy and Use Permits Required 
(a)  No building or structure shall be constructed, altered, expanded or moved without a building permit. No use of a building, structure or land shall be begun or changed without a use permit. No building or structure shall be occupied without an occupancy permit. 
(b)  Unless a variance or other relief has been duly granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.7, or unless otherwise allowed as a nonconforming use or structure pursuant to Section 2.4, no permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or expansion of any building or structure, or for the use or change in use of any land, building or structure, unless the plans, specifications and other information submitted to the Building Department indicate that said use, land, building or structure will conform in all respects to the provisions of this ordinance, as well as the State Building Code, 780 CMR 1.00 et seq., and any other relevant statute, ordinance or regulation. 
(c)  The form of all applications for building, occupancy and use permits, and the form of the said permits, shall be as prescribed by the Inspector of Buildings. 
(d)  Construction or operations under a building or use permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this ordinance, unless such construction, occupancy or use is commenced within six (6) months of issuance of said permit, and in the case of construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
(e)  If construction under a building permit is not commenced within six (6) months of the issuance of the permit, or is discontinued for a period of six (6) months or more, said permit shall be void and no further construction shall be allowed without the issuance of a new permit or without a written extension from the Inspector of Buildings. 
1.3.3 Procedures Relating to Building, Occupancy and Use Permits 
(a)  No building permit for an unsewered lot shall be issued unless the applicant has first obtained Health Department approval of the septic system design. 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates compliance with the requirements of the Drainage and Grading Regulations of the Department of Public Works (hereinafter, "DPW"). 
(c)  The application for a building or use permit on a lot not shown on the most recent Assessors' Map shall include certification by the Assessors' Office as to the map and lot number of said lot. 
(d)  The application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan, which shall be drawn to scale and show (1) the dimensions of the lot to be built upon, including boundaries and lot area, (2) the dimensions (including the square footage) of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, (3) the percentage of lot coverage of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, (4) all setback distances, (5) all required off-street parking and loading spaces and (6) all screening, existing or proposed. The application for a building permit shall also be accompanied by a plan or sketch of all relevant elevations of the proposed construction. The Inspector of Buildings may waive one or more of the above requirements for those minor projects which will have negligible neighborhood impact. 
(e)  The application for a building, occupancy or use permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the City Council and amended from time to time, payable by check or money order to the order of the City of Gloucester. See Appendix B, Schedule of Fees Under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(f)  The application for a building, occupancy or use permit shall be approved or disapproved by the Inspector of Buildings within twenty days of its filing. When such application is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing. 
(g)  At the request of the Inspector of Buildings, the DPW shall inspect any building on a lot for which a drainage and grading plan has been required pursuant to the DPW's Drainage and Grading Regulations, and provide written certification to the Building Department within ten days of such request that it complies with said plan. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 4-12-2016(1)) 
1.4 - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
1.4.1 Membership 
In accordance with MGL Chapter 40A there shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall consist of five members and two associate members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Gloucester and who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council. Each member and associate member shall have been a resident of the City of Gloucester for at least three years prior to his or her appointment to the board. Members shall be appointed for a term of three years; associate members shall be appointed for a term of two years. Members and associate members may be reappointed to successive terms. Vacancies on the board shall be filled in the same manner as other appointments, except that any member or associate member appointed to fill the unexpired term of a member or associate member who has resigned or who otherwise is no longer on the board shall serve only for the duration of said unexpired term, following which such member or associate member shall be eligible for reappointment as specified herein. 
1.4.2 Duties of Associate Members 
The chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall designate one of the board's associate members to act as a member of the board in the case of the absence, inability to act or conflict of interest of another member. The chairperson shall designate an associate member to act as a member in the event of a vacancy on the board, until said vacancy is filled. 
1.4.3 Quorum 
A quorum of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of four members and associate members. No more than five members and associate members shall vote on any matter before the board. No member or associate member may vote on a matter before the board unless he or she has attended all board hearings at which evidence was presented on said matter. Provided, however, that a board member shall not be disqualified from voting on the matter solely due to that member's absence from a single session of the hearing at which testimony or other evidence was received. Before any such vote, the member shall certify in writing that he or she has examined all testimony or other evidence received at the missed session, by review of an audio or video recording of the missed session or a transcript thereof. The written certification shall be part of the record of the hearing in accordance, with MGL Chapter 39 Sec 23D. 
1.4.4 Conflict of Interest 
No member or associate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall appear before the board on behalf of any party in any matter pending before it. 
1.4.5 Officers 
The members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall annually elect one member as chairperson, who shall preside at all meetings. The members shall also elect a vice chairperson to act in the absence of the chairperson, and a secretary, and shall prescribe rules for the conduct of board affairs. 
1.4.6 Removal for Cause 
A member or associate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the Mayor, but only for cause, and only after written charges have been filed and a public hearing held. 
1.4.7 Minutes 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its meetings, which shall show the vote of each member upon each question. All such minutes shall be public records, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
1.5 - GENERAL PROCEDURES RELATING TO APPEALS, VARIANCES AND SPECIAL PERMITS 
1.5.1 Procedures and Fees for the Filing of Applications 
(a)  City Council : An application to City Council for a special permit may be submitted at any time to the City Clerk, who shall time-stamp it. Copies of said application, with the City Clerk's time-stamp, shall forthwith be filed by the applicant with the Building Department and the Planning Department and shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount as set forth at Appendix B, Schedule of Fees Under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance, payable by check or money order to the order of the City of Gloucester. 
(b)  Zoning Board of Appeals : An application for a special permit or variance may be submitted at any time. An application for appeal from the decision of the Inspector of Buildings must be submitted within thirty (30) days of: 
(i)  The date of a written decision, ruling or order of the Inspector of Buildings; or 
(ii)  The date by which the Inspector of Buildings was required by this ordinance to have issued a written decision but failed to do so. 
All applications must be submitted to the City Clerk, who shall time-stamp it. Said application, with the City Clerk's time-stamp, shall forthwith be filed by the applicant with the Building Department and shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount as set forth at Appendix B, Schedule of Fees Under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance , payable by check or money order to the order of the City of Gloucester. 
(c)  Planning Board : An application for a special permit may be submitted at any time to the City Clerk, who shall time-stamp it. Said application, with the City Clerk's time-stamp, shall forthwith be filed by the applicant with the Community Development Department and shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount of as set forth at Appendix B, Schedule of Fees Under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance , payable by check or money order to the order of the City of Gloucester. 
1.5.2 Certification of Completeness 
No application to the Zoning Board shall be time-stamped by the City Clerk unless the Inspector of Buildings has certified that it is complete. No application to the City Council shall be time-stamped by the City Clerk unless both the Inspector of Buildings and the Planning Director have certified that it is complete. No application to the Planning Board shall be time-stamped by the City Clerk unless the Planning Director has certified that it is complete. 
1.5.3 CITY COUNCIL: Application Form and Content 
(a)  In General : An application to the City Council for a special permit shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the council and issued by the City Clerk. The original application shall be accompanied by one original and one copy thereof provided that the applicant also provides the application and all required submissions in digital form. Digital submission is strongly preferred, otherwise eleven (11) 11" × 17" (11×17 inches) and five (5) copies 2' × 3' (2 feet × 3 feet) must be provided. The City Clerk shall advise the applicant of the information and documentation necessary to complete the application, including those requirements set forth in Appendix A, Rule 25 of the City Council Rules of Procedure, Special Permit Procedures. The application shall refer to the pertinent provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations, and set forth (1) the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, (2) the name, address and telephone number of the record owner of the lot, if different, (3) the street address of the lot, (4) the assessors map and lot number of the lot, (5) the zoning district in which the lot and all abutting property is located, (6) a list of the names and addresses of all property owners identified in Section 1.5.6, as certified by the Assessors Office, and (7) such other information as the City Council may require in its Special Permit Procedures . If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the application shall include a signed statement by the owner(s) thereof, authorizing the applicant to represent said owner(s) before the City Council. In addition, applications for special permits contain the following information: 
(b)  "CC" Special Permits : Where so indicated by "CC" in Section 2.3, Use Tables , an application for a special permit pursuant to Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3 shall be accompanied by five (5) full-sized sets and eleven (11) 11" × 17" sets of: 
(i)  A site plan, drawn to scale and showing: 
(1)  The dimensions of the lot to be built upon, including boundaries and lot area, 
(2)  The dimensions (including the square footage) of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(3)  The percentage of lot coverage of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(4)  All setback distances, 
(5)  All required off-street parking and loading spaces, and 
(6)  All screening and landscaping, existing or proposed; and 
(ii)  Building and floor plans, drawn to scale and showing exterior elevations of all proposed buildings or structures. 
(c)  "CCS" Special Permits : Where so indicated by "CCS" in Section 2.3, Use Tables , an application for a special permit pursuant to Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3 shall be accompanied by one original and one copy thereof provided that the applicant also provides the application and all required submissions in digital form. Digital submission is strongly preferred, otherwise eleven (11) 11" × 17" (11 × 17 inches) and five (5) copies 2' [×] 3' (2 feet × 3 feet) must be provided of: 
(i)  A site plan, stamped by a professional surveyor or engineer, drawn to scale and showing: 
(1)  The dimensions of the lot to be built upon, including boundaries and lot area, 
(2)  The dimensions (including the square footage) of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(3)  The percentage of lot coverage of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(4)  All setback distances, 
(5)  All required off-street parking and loading spaces, 
(6)  All screening and landscaping, existing or proposed, 
(7)  The use, zoning, buildings and parking lots of adjacent parcels, 
(8)  Existing and proposed topography, 
(9)  All existing and proposed drives, 
(10)  All nearby parks and recreation areas, and 
(11)  Water service, sanitary sewers and storm drainage; and 
(ii)  Building plans, floor plans and architectural elevations of all proposed buildings at a scale of 1/8" equals one foot or larger, indicating major building materials and at least one section through the building and site. 
(d)  Major Projects : An application for a Major Project, as defined in Section 5.7.1, shall include all of the information and documentation required for a CCS special permit and the additional information and documentation required by Sections 5.7.2 and 5.7.5. 
(e)  Personal Wire Service Facilities : An application for a Personal Wireless Service Facility, as defined in Section 5.13, shall include all of the information and documentation required for a CCS special permit and the additional information and documentation required by Section 5.13.5. 
(f)  Assisted Living Facilities : An application for an Assisted Living Facility, as defined in Section 5.14.3, shall include all of the information and documentation required for a CCS special permit and the additional information and documentation required by Sections 5.7.5 and 5.14.4. 
(g)  Drive-Through Facilities : An application for Drive-Through Facility, as defined in Section VI, shall include all of the information and documentation required for a CCS special permit and the additional information and documentation required by Section 5.17. 
(h)  Commercial Land-based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities : An application for a Commercial Land-based Wind Energy Conversion Facility, as defined in Section 5.22.2, shall include all of the information and documentation required for a CCS special permit and the additional information and documentation required by Section 5.22. 
(i)  Protein Recovery Plants : An application for a Protein Recovery Plant (see Section 2.3.4, Use No. 14) shall include all of the information and documentation required for a CCS special permit and a full environmental impact study. Said study shall be performed at the applicant's expense, and prior to the public hearing on said application the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission shall review said study and shall submit their respective comments thereon to the City Council. 
(j)  Miscellaneous Special Permits : An application for a miscellaneous special permit pursuant to Section 1.10.1 (a) shall be accompanied by the plans and other data required for CC special permits; see Section 1.5.3(b) above. 
1.5.4 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: Application Form and Content 
(a)  General : Applications for appeals, special permits or variances shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals and issued by the Building Department. The original application shall be accompanied by seven copies thereof. The application shall refer to the pertinent provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations, and shall set forth (1) the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, (2) the name, address and telephone number of the record owner of the lot, if different, (3) the street address of the lot, (4) the assessors map and lot number of the lot, (5) the zoning district in which the lot and all abutting property is located, (6) a list of the names and addresses of all property owners identified in Section 1.5.6, as certified by the Assessors Office, and (7) such other information as the board may specify in the prescribed form. In addition, applications for appeals, special permits and variances shall contain the following information: 
(b)  Appeals : An application for appeal shall set forth in detail the grounds upon which the appeal is taken. If the appellant is not the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal, the appellant shall also submit certification that a copy of the appeal notice has been sent to said owner by certified mail, postage prepaid. 
(c)  "SP" Special Permits : Where so indicated by "SP" in Section 2.3, Use Tables , an application for a special permit pursuant to Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3 shall be accompanied by two (2) full-sized sets and seven (7) 11" × 17" sets of: 
(i)  A site plan, drawn to scale and showing: 
(1)  The dimensions of the lot to be built upon, including boundaries and lot area, 
(2)  The dimensions (including the square footage) of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(3)  The percentage of lot coverage of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(4)  All setback distances, 
(5)  All required off-street parking and loading spaces, and 
(6)  All screening and landscaping, existing or proposed; and 
(ii)  Building and floor plans, drawn to scale and showing exterior elevations of all proposed buildings or structures. 
Provided, however, that the Inspector of Buildings may waive one or more of the above requirements for those minor projects which are deemed to have negligible neighborhood impact. 
(d)  "SPS" Special Permits : Where so indicated by "SPS" in Section 2.3, Use Tables , an application for a special permit pursuant to Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3 shall be accompanied by two (2) full-sized sets and seven (7) 11" × 17" sets of 
(i)  A site plan, stamped by a professional surveyor or engineer, drawn to scale and showing: 
(1)  The dimensions of the lot to be built upon, including boundaries and lot area, 
(2)  The dimensions (including the square footage) of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(3)  The percentage of lot coverage of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures on said lot, 
(4)  All setback distances, 
(5)  All required off-street parking and loading spaces, 
(6)  All screening and landscaping, existing or proposed, 
(7)  The use, zoning, buildings and parking lots of adjacent parcels, 
(8)  Existing and proposed topography, 
(9)  All existing and proposed drives, 
(10)  All nearby parks and recreation areas, and 
(11)  Water service, sanitary sewers and storm drainage; and 
(ii)  Building, floor plans and architectural elevations of all proposed buildings at a scale of 1/8" equals one foot or larger, indicating major building materials and at least one section through the building and site. 
(e)  All Other Types of Special Permits : Applications for all other types of special permits shall be accompanied by the plans and other data required for SP special permits; see Section 1.5.4(c) above. 
(f)  Variances : An application for a variance pursuant to Section 1.7 shall be accompanied by the plans and other data required for SP special permits; see Section 1.5.4(c) above. 
1.5.5 PLANNING BOARD: Application Form and Content 
(a)  General : An application to the Planning Board for a special permit shall be made in writing, on forms prescribed by the Planning Board and issued by the Community Development Department. The original application shall be accompanied by 11 copies thereof. The Community Development Department shall advise the applicant of the information and documentation necessary to complete the application , including those requirements set forth in the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester . The application shall refer to the pertinent provisions of this ordinance and all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations, and set forth (1) the name, address and telephone number of the applicant, (2) the name, address and telephone number of the record owner of the lot, if different, (3) the street address of the lot, (4) the assessors map and lot number of the lot, (5) the zoning district in which the lot and all abutting property is located, (6) a list of the names and addresses of all property owners identified in Section 1.5.6, as certified by the Assessors Office, and (7) such other information as the Planning Board may require in its rules. If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the application shall include a signed statement by the owner(s) thereof, authorizing the applicant to represent said owner(s) before the Planning Board. 
(b)  "PB" Special Permits : Where so indicated by "PB" in Section 2.3, Use Tables , an application for a special permit pursuant to Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3 shall be accompanied by five (5) full-sized sets and eleven (11) 11" × 17" sets of: 
(i)  A site plan, stamped by a professional surveyor or engineer, drawn to scale and showing; 
(1)  The dimensions of the lot to be built upon, including boundaries and lot area, 
(2)  All setback distances, 
(3)  All required off-street parking and loading spaces, 
(4)  All screening and landscaping, existing or proposed, 
(5)  The use and zoning of adjacent parcels, 
(6)  Existing and proposed topography, 
(7)  All existing and proposed drives, 
(8)  All nearby parks and recreation areas, and 
(9)  Water service, sanitary sewers and storm drainage; and 
(ii)  All additional information required by the applicable provisions of Sections 5.9, 5.10, 5.15, 5.16, 5.19 and 5.20. 
1.5.6 Notice 
Neither the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals nor the Planning Board shall take any action on an application until proper notice has been given and a public hearing held. For purposes of this section, proper notice shall consist of notice of the time and place of said hearing and of the subject matter thereof, published once in each of two successive weeks in the Gloucester Daily Times or other newspaper of general circulation in the city, the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in City Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of such hearing, and notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant or applicant, as the case may be, abutters to the property that is the subject of the appeal or application, owners of property directly opposite the subject property on any public or private street or way and abutters to the above-mentioned abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the subject property. Notice shall also be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the Planning Board and the planning boards of Rockport, Essex and Manchester. Where the mailing address of any person entitled to notice is a bank or other lending institution, written notice shall also be sent to the street address of the property owned by such person. The notice required pursuant to this section shall be given notwithstanding the fact that the abutting property is located in another town. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board from postponing consideration of the merits of an appeal or application for the purpose of giving notice to other parties deemed materially affected by the matter. 
1.5.7 Identification of those Persons Entitled to Notice; Failure to Receive Notice 
For purposes of the preceding section, the term "owners of property" and "abutters" shall mean those persons appearing on the most recent applicable tax list, as certified by the Assessor's Office, which certification shall be conclusive for all purposes. The failure of a person identified in the preceding section to receive actual notice of the public hearing shall not invalidate any action taken at said hearing and shall not require another hearing. 
1.5.8 Referral to Other Boards, Commissions and Departments 
(a)  Zoning Board of Appeals : The Zoning Board of Appeals may request the Planning Board, the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, the City Engineer, the Building Inspector or any other city agency, commission or board to review and comment upon an appeal or application. Any response to such request shall be sent to the applicant or appellant and the board, and shall be made within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the request, but in any case no later than at the public hearing on such appeal or application. Failure to reply within said thirty-five (35) day period or prior to the public hearing shall be deemed a statement of no opposition. Reviews under this section may be conducted jointly by two or more city agencies, commissions or boards. 
(b)  City Council : On all Major Projects, as defined at Section 5.7.1, departmental and Planning Board reviews shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 5.7.3 and 5.7.4. 
1.5.9 Endorsement of Plans and Sketches 
Upon approval of an application the plans and sketches upon which said approval was given shall be stamped and endorsed by the presiding officer. The stamped and endorsed plans and sketches shall be transmitted directly from the ZBA to the Building Department. 
1.5.10 Time Limits for Holding a Public Hearing and Issuing a Written Decision; Filing with the City Clerk; Consequences of Rendering a Decision in an Untimely Manner 
(a)  Appeals and Variances : The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an appeal or application for a variance within sixty-five (65) days of the date of filing of a complete appeal or application with the City Clerk. The board shall render a decision in writing on such appeal or application for a variance within one hundred (100) days of the date of filing of said complete appeal or application; provided, however, that either of said periods may be extended by written agreement between the appellant or applicant and the board, a copy of which agreement shall be filed with the City Clerk. Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 15, and provided that the appellant or applicant complies with the procedures set forth therein, the board's failure to act within said one hundred (100) day period or said extended period shall be deemed a constructive grant of the relief requested. 
(b)  Special Permits : A public hearing on an application to the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board for a special permit shall be held within sixty-five (65) days of the date of filing of a complete application with the City Clerk. A decision in writing on such application shall be issued within ninety (90) days of the close of said hearing; provided, however, that either of said periods may be extended by written consent of the applicant, a copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk. Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, and provided that the applicant complies with the procedures set forth therein, the failure to issue a decision act within said ninety (90) day period or said extended period shall be deemed to be a constructive grant of the special permit. 
(c)  Filing with City Clerk : Within fourteen (14) days of the issuance of a written decision, a copy thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall time-stamp it. 
1.5.11 Notice of Decision 
A copy of the time-stamped decision on an appeal, an application for a special permit or an application for a variance shall be transmitted to the Planning Department and the Inspector of Buildings, and shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the appellant or the applicant, as well as the owner of the subject property if other than the appellant or applicant. Notice of said decision shall also be sent to each of the parties designated in Sections 1.5.6 and 1.5.7, and to any person present at the hearing who requested such notice and provided his or her name and address. Each such notice, as well as the copy of the decision sent to the applicant, appellant or owner, shall specify the time limits and procedures for judicial appeal of the decision, as set forth at Section 1.5.16. 
1.5.12 Effective Date of Special Permit or Variance 
No special permit or variance shall take effect, nor shall any building permit be issued, until all of the following have occurred: 
1.  Twenty (20) days have elapsed after the filing of the decision with the City Clerk pursuant to Section 1.5.10(c); and 
2.  The City Clerk certifies that no appeal has been taken from said decision, and 
3.  Both the decision and certification have been recorded in the Essex County Registry of Deeds. 
1.5.13 Compliance with Approved Plans; Modification of Plans 
Failure to comply with any of the approved plans, or with any of the conditions, safeguards or limitations imposed on any special permit, variance or favorable ruling on appeal, shall be deemed sufficient grounds for revocation thereof, following due notice and a public hearing. The Inspector of Buildings (and, in the case of permits issued by the City Council and the Planning Board, with the consent of the Planning Director) may authorize minor, non-substantive changes to said plans in order to correct clerical errors or address conditions discovered after issuance of a special permit or variance; provided, however, that such changes are consistent with the original decision and do not detract from the protection provided to the neighborhood and the city by said decision. At the request of the applicant, the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board may make substantive changes to the plans it has approved or the conditions, safeguards or limitations it has imposed, provided that the interests of the neighborhood and the city are not impaired, and only after due notice and a public hearing, and only for good cause shown. 
1.5.14 Withdrawal of Applications 
An appeal pursuant to Section 1.6 may be withdrawn at any time; provided, however, that such withdrawal will not toll the time limit within which such appeal may be taken. An application for a special permit or variance may be withdrawn without prejudice at any time prior to the first publication of notice of the public hearing. Thereafter, and until such time as a vote is taken thereon, such application may be withdrawn without prejudice only at the discretion of the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board. 
1.5.15 Repetitive Applications 
(a)  City Council : No application for a special permit which has been denied by the City Council shall be resubmitted within two years of the date of said denial unless: 
(i)  Such resubmission is allowed by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the council, upon a finding that there have been specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous denial was based, which changes shall be described in the record of the council's proceedings; and 
(ii)  Such resubmission is subsequently consented to by all but one member of the Planning Board, after written notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings when the question of such consent will be considered. 
(b)  Zoning Board of Appeals : No appeal or application for a variance or special permit which has been denied by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted within two years of the date of said denial unless: 
(i)  Such resubmission is allowed by a vote of four members of the board, upon a finding that there have been specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous denial was based, which changes shall be described in the record of the Board's proceedings; and 
(ii)  Such resubmission is subsequently consented to by all but one member of the Planning Board, after written notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings when the question of such consent will be considered. 
(c)  Planning Board : No application for a special permit which has been denied by the Planning Board shall be resubmitted within two years of the date of said denial unless such resubmission is allowed by a vote of all but one of the members of the board, after written notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings, and upon a finding that there have been specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous denial was based, which changes shall be described in the record of the board's proceedings. 
1.5.16 Appeal from the Decision of the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board, whether or not previously a party to the proceedings, or any municipal officer or board of the city, may appeal to the Essex County Land Court Department, the Essex County Superior Court Department, the Essex County Division of the Housing Court or the Essex County District Court, as appropriate, by bringing an action within twenty (20) days after said decision has been filed with and time-stamped by the City Clerk, and by otherwise complying with the provisions of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 17. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 11-29-2011(1)) 
1.6 - APPEALS FROM A DECISION OF THE INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS 
1.6.1 Who May Appeal 
Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 15, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and vote upon appeals taken by: 
Any person or entity aggrieved by reason of a decision by the Inspector of Buildings to either issue or not issue a building permit or other permit authorized by MGL Chapter 40A or this ordinance; or 
Any person or entity aggrieved by reason of a decision by the Inspector of Buildings to either issue or not issue an order enforcing the provisions of MGL Chapter 40A or this ordinance. 
For purposes of this section the term "person or entity" shall include the Metropolitan Area Planning Council, an officer or board of the City of Gloucester or an officer or board of any abutting town. An appeal pursuant to this section may be taken by any of the foregoing persons or entities, whether or not previously a party to the order or decision in question. 
1.6.2 Time Limit for Appeal 
Within thirty (30) days of (a) the date of any written decision, ruling or order of the Inspector of Buildings, or (b) the date by which the Inspector of Buildings was required by this ordinance to have issued a written decision but failed to do so, an aggrieved person may submit a notice of appeal to the City Clerk, subject to the procedure set forth at Sections 1.5.1(b), 1.5.2, and 1.5.4(b). 
1.6.3 Modification of the Decision of the Inspector of Buildings 
In acting on an appeal the Zoning Board of Appeals may modify the order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings and impose such conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems necessary to protect the neighborhood and the city. Any such condition, safeguard or limitation so imposed may thereafter be modified by the board, in the interests of the appellant, the neighborhood and the city, but only after due notice and a public hearing, and only for good cause shown. 
1.6.4 Vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals 
The order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings may be reversed or modified only upon a vote of at least four members or associate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
1.7 - VARIANCES 
1.7.1 Jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals 
Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 10, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and vote upon applications for variances from the terms and requirements of this ordinance, including variances for use. 
1.7.2 Standard to be Applied 
Variances are to be granted only upon a written determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals that: 
Literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would involve substantial hardship to the applicant, financial or otherwise; and 
Said hardship arises from circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography of the land or structure(s) in question, which circumstances particularly affect such land or structure(s) but which do not generally affect the zoning district in which they are located; and 
The desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this ordinance; and 
In the case of a requested variance from the requirements of Section 2.3, Use Tables , that no other feasible and economic use of the subject property can be made, either as of right or by special permit. 
1.7.3 Conditions, Safeguards and Limitations 
A variance may contain such conditions, safeguards and limitations as the Zoning Board of Appeals deems necessary to protect the neighborhood and the city, including conditions, safeguards and limitations relating to time, use and the continued existence of any particular structure or structures; provided, however, that the board may not impose conditions, safeguards or limitations based upon the continued ownership, by the applicant or any other person, of the land or structure to which the variance pertains. 
1.7.4 Modification of Variance 
At the request of the applicant, a variance may be subsequently modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that the interests of the neighborhood and the city are not impaired, and only after due notice and a public hearing, and only for good cause shown. 
1.7.5 Lapse of Variance 
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the issuance thereof, such rights shall lapse; provided, however, that if written request is made prior to the expiration of said one-year period the board, the Zoning Board of Appeals, in its discretion, may extend said period for up to six (6) months. 
1.7.6 Vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals 
A variance, and any modification thereof, shall require the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members or associate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
1.8 - USE TABLE SPECIAL PERMITS 
1.8.1 Jurisdiction 
Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, and Sections 2.2.1 and 2.3 of this ordinance, the City Council shall hear and vote upon applications for a special permit for those uses identified as "CC" and "CCS" in the Use Tables set forth at Section 2.3; the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and vote upon applications for a special permit for those uses identified as "SP" and "SPS" in the Use Tables; and the Planning Board shall hear and vote upon applications for a special permit for those uses identified as "PB" in the Use Tables. 
1.8.2 Title 
When acting pursuant to this Section 1.7, the City Council, the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning Board shall each be referred to as the Special Permit Granting Authority (hereinafter, "SPGA"). 
1.8.3 Standard to be Applied 
A special permit pursuant to this section or Section 5.30 shall be granted only upon a written determination by the SPGA that the proposed use will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and that it will not adversely affect the neighborhood, the zoning district or the city to such an extent as to outweigh the beneficial effects of said use. In reviewing special permit applications, SPGA shall consider, but not be limited to, the following six factors: 
(a)  The social, economic and community needs that will be served by the proposed use; 
(b)  Traffic flow and safety; 
(c)  Adequacy of utilities and other public services; 
(d)  Neighborhood character and social structure; 
(e)  Qualities of the natural environment; 
(f)  Potential fiscal impact. 
1.8.4 Additional Standards to be Applied in Certain Cases 
In addition to the above-referenced general factors, the SPGA shall consider the supplementary standards set forth at Section V for each of the following uses: 
(a)  City Council : 
Earth Fill and Removal Regulations, see Section 5.2. 
Lowlands Regulations, see Section 5.5. 
Major Projects, as defined at Section 5.7.1, see Section 5.7.5. 
Personal Wireless Service Facilities (cell towers), see Section 5.13. 
Assisted Living Residences, see Section 5.14. 
Drive-through facilities, see Section 5.17. 
Any use proposed in the Marine Industrial (MI) District which is within 200 feet of the water's edge, see Section 5.18. 
Gas Stations and Other Motor Vehicle Services in certain zoning districts, see Section 5.21. 
Commercial Land-based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities, see Section 5.22. 
(b)  Zoning Board of Appeals : 
Home Occupations, see Section 5.3. 
Any use in the Marine Industrial (MI) District which is within 200 feet of the water's edge, see Section 5.18. 
Gas Stations and Other Motor Vehicle Services in the GI District, see Section 5.21. 
Residential Land-based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities, see Section 5.23. 
Accessory In-Law Apartments, see Section 5.24. 
Multi-family buildings subject to use number 22 of Section 2.3.1, see Section 5.30. 
(c)  Planning Board : 
Cluster Developments, see Section 5.9. 
Certain uses in the Watershed Protection Overlay District, see Section 5.10. 
Uses in the Village Development Overlay District, see Section 5.16. 
Pork Chop Lots, see Section 5.19. 
Common Driveways, see Section 5.20. 
1.8.5 Conditions, Safeguards and Limitations; Modification 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section may contain such conditions, safeguards and limitations as the SPGA deems necessary to protect the neighborhood and the city. At the request of the applicant, a special permit granted pursuant to this section may be subsequently modified by the SPGA, provided that the interests of the neighborhood and the city are not impaired, and only after due notice and a public hearing, and only for good cause shown. 
1.8.6 Lapse of Special Permit 
Except for good cause found by the SPGA after due notice and a public hearing, or except as provided by MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, if construction or use under a special permit is not substantially commenced within two (2) years of the issuance of said permit, or if said construction or use is discontinued for a period of two (2) years or more, said permit shall lapse. 
1.8.7 Compliance with Subsequent Amendment of Zoning Ordinance 
Construction or operations under a special permit granted by the City Council, Zoning Board of Appeals or Planning Board shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this ordinance, unless such use or construction is commenced within six months of the issuance of said permit, and in the case of construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
1.8.8 Vote of the SPGA 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section, and any modification thereof, shall require the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the City Council, or at least four (4) members or associate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or at least two-thirds of the members of the Planning Board. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 8-22-2017(1), §§ III, IV) 
1.9 - SPECIAL PERMITS FOR THE ALTERATION OR EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
1.9.1 Jurisdiction 
Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6 and Section 2.4 of this ordinance, and subject to the special procedures, exemptions and standards set forth at Section 2.4, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon applications for a special permit for: 
The change, extension or alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming use; 
The change, extension or alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming structure; 
The alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming structure to enable it to be used for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent; or 
The change, extension, alteration or reconstruction of a single or two-family dwelling in those cases under Section 2.4.4 where a determination is made that the proposed work will increase the nonconforming nature of the building. 
1.9.2 Standard to be Applied 
A special permit pursuant to this section shall only be granted upon a written determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals that such change, extension, reconstruction or alteration will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use or structure; provided, however, that in the case of a single or two-family dwelling the board (or, in certain cases, the Inspector of Buildings) may decide that a special permit is not required because the proposed change, extension, reconstruction or alteration of said dwelling does not increase its nonconformity. See Section 2.4.4. 
1.9.3 Conditions, Safeguards and Limitations; Modification 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section may contain such conditions, safeguards and limitations as the Zoning Board of Appeals deems necessary to protect the neighborhood and the city. At the request of the applicant, a special permit granted pursuant to this section may be subsequently modified by the board, provided that the interests of the neighborhood and the city are not impaired, and only after due notice and a public hearing, and only for good cause shown. 
1.9.4 Lapse of Special Permit 
Except for good cause found by the Zoning Board of Appeals after due notice and a public hearing, or except as provided by MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, if construction or use under a special permit is not substantially commenced within two (2) years of the issuance of said permit, or if said construction or use is discontinued for a period of two (2) years or more, said permit shall lapse. 
1.9.5 Compliance with Subsequent Amendment of Zoning Ordinance 
Construction or operations under a special permit granted under this Section 1.8 shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this ordinance, unless such use or construction is commenced within six months of the issuance of said permit, and in the case of construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
1.9.6 Vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section, and any modification thereof, shall require the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members or associate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
1.10 - MISCELLANEOUS SPECIAL PERMITS 
1.10.1 Jurisdiction of the City Council and Zoning Board of Appeals 
(a)  City Council : The City Council shall hear and decide upon applications for the following miscellaneous special permits: 
(1)  Special permits pursuant to Section 3.1.6, authorizing an increase in building height over 35 feet in certain zoning districts, subject to the standards set forth therein; 
(2)  Special permits pursuant to footnote (e) of Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.6, authorizing a decrease in the required distance between buildings used for multi-family dwellings, hotels, motels and motor inns, subject to the standards set forth therein; 
(3)  Special permits pursuant to footnote (a) of Section 3.2.2, authorizing a decrease in minimum lot area and minimum open space per dwelling unit for multi-family dwellings, subject to the requirements and standards set forth therein; 
(4)  Special permits pursuant to footnote (a) of Section 3.2.6, authorizing a decrease in minimum lot area and minimum open space per two guest unit for hotels, motels and motor inns, subject to the requirements and standards set forth therein; 
(5)  Special permits pursuant to Section 5.6, authorizing a decrease in the off-street parking, lot area and open space requirements for elderly housing, subject to the standards set forth therein. 
(b)  Zoning Board of Appeals : The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide upon applications for the following miscellaneous special permits: 
(1)  Special permits pursuant to Section 3.1.5, for the division of certain lots on which more than one building exists, subject to the requirements and standards set forth therein; 
(2)  Special permits pursuant to Section 3.1.6, authorizing an increase in building height of up to 35 feet in certain zoning districts, subject to the requirements and standards set forth therein; 
(3)  Special permits pursuant to Section 4.1.2, authorizing a decrease in the number of required off-street parking spaces for various uses, subject to the requirements and standards set forth therein; 
(4)  Special permits pursuant to Section 4.4.1, authorizing exceptions from the noise, litter and smoke standards of Section 4.4, subject to the requirements and standards set forth therein. 
1.10.2 Standard to be Applied 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section shall only be granted upon a written determination by the City Council or the Zoning Board of Appeals that the proposed use will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, based upon the standards and requirements set forth in the applicable section of this ordinance, as referenced above. 
1.10.3 Conditions, Safeguards and Limitations; Modification 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section may contain such conditions, safeguards and limitations as the City Council or the Zoning Board of Appeals deems necessary to protect the neighborhood and the city. At the request of the applicant, a special permit granted pursuant to this section may be subsequently modified by the City Council or the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that the interests of the neighborhood and the city are not impaired, and only after due notice and a public hearing, and only for good cause shown. 
1.10.4 Lapse of Special Permit 
Except for good cause found by the City Council or the Zoning Board of Appeals after due notice and a public hearing, or except as provided by MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, if construction or use under a special permit is not substantially commenced within two (2) years of the issuance of said permit, or if said construction or use is discontinued for a period of two (2) years or more, said permit shall lapse. 
1.10.5 Compliance with Subsequent Amendment of Zoning Ordinance 
Construction or operations under a special permit granted under this Section 1.8 shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this ordinance, unless such use or construction is commenced within six months of the issuance of said permit, and in the case of construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
1.10.6 Vote of the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals 
A special permit granted pursuant to this section, and any modification thereof, shall require the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of the City Council, or at least four (4) members or associate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
1.11 - AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE 
1.11.1 Authorization 
The Zoning Ordinance may be amended by vote of the City Council, following hearings and the other procedures prescribed by MGL Chapter 40A, Section 5 and this ordinance. 
1.11.2 Initiation 
Amendment of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated in any of the following ways: 
(a)  By submission to the City Council of a proposed amendment by the Planning Board, the Board of Appeals or the Metropolitan Area Planning Council; 
(b)  By submission to the City Council of a proposed amendment by the owner(s) of property that will be directly affected by the proposed change, accompanied by an application fee in the amount as set forth at Appendix B, Schedule of Fees Under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance, payable by check or money order to the order of the City of Gloucester. 
(c)  By petition of ten registered voters to the City Council, such petition to be certified by the City Clerk as provided by MGL Chapter 43, Section 38, accompanied by an application fee in the amount as set forth at Appendix B, Schedule of Fees Under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance, payable by check or money order to the order of the City of Gloucester. 
(d)  By other methods provided for in the City of Gloucester Charter; 
(e)  By motion of the City Council on any matter it deems appropriate, including, but not limited to, amendments to this ordinance proposed in a manner other than those prescribed above. 
1.11.3 Informal Planning Board Review 
In determining whether or not to initiate formal action on a proposed amendment to this ordinance, the City Council may request informal review of the matter by the Planning Board and a recommendation thereupon. Such informal review, even if conducted at a meeting or hearing open to the general public, shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirement, of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 5 and Section 1.11.4(b) of this ordinance, that the Planning Board hold a public hearing after formal submission of the proposed amendment to the board by the City Council pursuant to Section 1.11.4(a) hereof. Any meeting or hearing of the Planning Board conducted in response to the City Council's request for informal review and recommendation need not comply with the public notice requirements of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 5 and Section 1.11.5(b) of this ordinance. 
1.11.4 Hearings and Notices 
(a)  Submission to the Planning Board : Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a proposed amendment, the City Council shall submit it to the Planning Board for review. 
(b)  Public Hearings : The Planning Board and the City Council, or a subcommittee of the City Council appointed for the purpose by the City Council, shall each hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, together or separately. Such hearing shall be held within sixty-five (65) days after the proposed amendment is submitted to the Planning Board by the City Council pursuant to Section 1.11.4(a). Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given as provided in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 5. In addition, the Council shall give notice by mail to the owners of all property included in and abutting the area of the city to be affected by such amendment, said owners being those persons against whom real estate taxes are currently assessed, as certified by the Assessors Office. Said notice shall state the general nature of the proposed amendment, as well as the text, and shall quote in full Section 1.11.5 pertaining to the vote required for passage of the proposed amendment. Provided, however, that such notice may be waived by vote of the City Council at the time of fixing the time and place of the public hearing, upon the Council's determination that the proposed amendment affects so many properties as to make such notice impracticable. A non-resident property owner may annually request that notice of public hearings under this Section 1.11.4 be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to said non-resident property owner; such request shall be made to the City Clerk before January first of each year, together with a fee of $10.00. 
1.11.5 Vote of the City Council 
(a)  Recommendation of the Planning Board : No City Council vote on a proposed amendment to this ordinance shall be taken until a report and recommendations have been submitted by the Planning Board to the council, or twenty-one (21) days have elapsed after the Planning Board's hearing pursuant to Section 1.11.4(b) without submission of such report. 
(b)  Action by the City Council : After notice pursuant to Section 1.11.4(b) has been given, a report has been submitted by the Planning Board to the City Council [or after twenty-one days have elapsed since the Planning Board's hearing pursuant to Section 1.11.4(b) without submission of such report], and a public hearing has been held by the City Council, it may adopt, reject or amend and adopt a proposed amendment to this ordinance. 
(c)  Failure to Vote within 90 Days of the Close of the Public Hearing : If the City Council fails to vote on a proposed amendment to this ordinance within ninety (90) days of the close of its public hearing, it shall not act thereon until after it holds another public hearing, preceded by notice as required by Section 1.11.4(b). 
(d)  Required Majority : No proposed amendment shall be adopted except by a two-thirds vote of all members of the City Council (i.e., six members); provided, however, that no proposed amendment shall be adopted except by a three-fourths vote of all the members of the City Council (i.e., seven members) if a written protest is filed with the City Clerk prior to final action of the City Council. Such written protest shall state the reasons for the protest and shall be signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of land proposed to be included in or affected by said proposed amendment, including the area of land immediately adjacent thereto and extending three hundred (300) feet outward from said adjacent land. 
1.11.6 Repetitive Petitions 
No proposed amendment to this ordinance which has been unfavorably acted upon by the City Council shall be considered again by the City Council for a period of two years from the date of such unfavorable action, unless the adoption of such proposed amendment had been recommended by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 1.11.5(a). 
1.11.7 Incorporation of Map Amendments 
Whenever a duly adopted and recorded amendment of the Zoning Ordinance requires a revision of the Zoning Map, as defined in Section 2.1.2, a notation shall be made on the appropriate page or pages of the master copy of said map, giving the date of the amendment and the grid location of the change(s); this notation shall be signed by the City Clerk. Copies of the amended map shall be kept on file as provided in Section 2.1.2. 
1.11.8 Effective Date 
The effective date of an amendment to this ordinance shall be the date of its final passage by the City Council. 
1.11.9 Appeal from the Action of City Council 
Appeal from the action of City Council pursuant to this Section 1.7 shall comply with the time limitations and other procedural requirements of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 5. 
1.11.10 Severability 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this ordinance shall not be held to invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
SECTION II - USE REGULATIONS 

2.1 - ZONING DISTRICTS 
2.1.1 Enumeration of the Zoning Districts 
The City of Gloucester is divided into fifteen zoning districts, the broad definitions and minimum lot area of which are set forth in this Section 2.1.1. The boundaries of the districts can be determined by reference to the Zoning Map, as described in Section 2.1.2 of this ordinance; the allowed uses in each of the districts can be determined by reference to Section 2.3, Use Tables; the dimensional requirements for each of the districts can be determined by reference to Section 3.2, Dimensional Tables. The following definitions are intended for guidance only; where there is a conflict between these definitions and the Zoning Map, the map shall control; where there is a conflict between these definitions and Sections 2.3 and 3.2, the latter sections shall control: 
R-80 (formerly R-RB) Rural Residential (minimum lot area: 80,000 sf) 
The R-80 Rural Residential District is located north of Goose Cove in North Gloucester and north of Route 128 in West Gloucester. This district is rural in character and encompasses those areas where limited services and access suggest low-intensity use, where present and anticipated future development is and will continue to be compatible with the environs of low residential density, and where those select non-residential uses identified in Section 2.3 can be accommodated without conflict with the predominant nature of the district. 
R-40 (formerly R-RA) Rural Residential (minimum lot area: 40,000 sf) 
The R-40 Rural Residential District is located north and west of the R-80 district in North Gloucester and both north and south of the R-80 district in West Gloucester. This district encompasses those areas where limited services and access suggest low-intensity use, where present and anticipated future development is and will continue to be compatible with the environs of low residential density, and where those select non-residential uses identified in Section 2.3 can be accommodated without conflict with the predominant nature of the district. This district is intended to provide a transition from the rural R-80 district to the higher density residential districts. 
RC-40 (formerly R-1) Coastal Residential (minimum lot area: 40,000 sf) 
The RC-40 Coastal Residential District consists of Eastern Point and that area on the southeast side of the middle portion of Hesperus Avenue. It encompasses those areas where limited services and access suggest low-intensity development, and where existing development consists of single family detached residential uses. 
R-30 (formerly R-2A) Low Density Residential (minimum lot area: 30,000 sf) 
The R-30 Low Density Residential District is located in West Gloucester. It is suburban in nature, and is an area where limited services and access suggest low-intensity use, and where present and anticipated future development is and will be compatible with the environs of low residential density. This district is intended to accommodate single family residential development and, where appropriate, two family and multi-family development. This district contains large portions of the watershed protection area and is intended to help protect this resource. 
R-20 (formerly R-2) Low/Medium Density Residential (minimum lot area: 20,000 sf) 
The R-20 Low/Medium Density Residential District is located east and north of downtown, along significant portions of the west side of the Annisquam River, and along the southwest (oceanside) corridor between the Annisquam River and Magnolia. This district is intended to accommodate single family residential development and, where appropriate, two family and multi-family development. This district provides a transition from the rural districts to the high density districts of the city. 
R-10 (formerly R-3) Medium/High Density Residential (minimum lot area: 10,000 sf) 
The R-10 Medium/High Density Residential District is located along both sides of the western portion of Essex Avenue, on both sides of the Mill River, on a portion of the Annisquam River and in that area extending in a northeasterly direction from downtown to the Rockport line. This district is characterized by suburban residential development in existing neighborhoods, and provides a transition from the suburban areas of the city to the more densely populated areas of downtown. This district is intended to accommodate single family residential development and, where appropriate, two family and multi-family development . 
R-5 (formerly R-4) High Density Residential (minimum lot area: 5,000 sf) 
The R-5 High Density Residential District is located in the downtown area of the city and is the highest density residential zone in the city. This district allows for a mix of single family, two-family and multi-family residential dwellings. 
CCD Civic Center (no minimum lot size) 
The Civic Center District consists of those existing civic buildings in the immediate vicinity of City Hall. This district is intended to include civic uses that serve the entire city, although limited types of commercial and residential uses are allowed 
CB Central Business (no minimum lot size) 
The Central Business District is located on either side of Main Street. A broad range of business, retail, office and institutional uses are allowed, as are residential units above retail establishments. This is the city's most intensely commercial district, and retail stores and restaurants predominate. This district is intended to include uses that serve all of Cape Ann. 
VB Village Business (minimum lot area: 5,000 sf) 
Village Business Districts are located in Lanesville, Magnolia and the area off Essex Avenue around Lower Banjo Pond. Certain business, retail, office, and institutional uses are allowed, and primarily serve the residents of the immediate neighborhood. Limited residential use is also allowed. 
NB Neighborhood Business (minimum lot area: the same as the abutting residential district with the smallest required minimum lot area) 
Neighborhood Business Districts are located throughout the city. Residential uses are allowed, as are consumer service and retail businesses serving the residents of the immediate neighborhood. 
EB Extensive Business (minimum lot area: 10,000 sf) 
Extensive Business Districts are located along collector streets in various areas of the city. Business, service and retail uses serving a regional clientele are allowed; residential uses are generally not allowed. 
MI Marine Industrial (minimum lot area: where the subject property abuts one or more residential districts, the minimum lot area is the same as the abutting residential district with the smallest required minimum lot area; otherwise, no minimum lot area) 
The Marine Industrial District is located along Gloucester's Inner Harbor, where utilities and access roads can support high-intensity industrial and commercial activities that are primarily marine-related. Residential uses are generally not allowed. 
GI General Industrial (minimum lot area: 10,000 sf) 
General Industrial Districts are primarily located along arterial and collector streets. Manufacturing, assembling, processing and other industrial uses are allowed, as are certain businesses. Residential uses are generally not allowed. 
BP Business Park (minimum lot area: 40,000 sf) 
The Business Park district is located off Blackburn Circle, and accommodates offices, warehousing, limited service uses and light industrial uses in a business-park setting. It has ready accessibility and utility capacity to accommodate the demands of business park development. Residential uses are generally not allowed. 
2.1.2 The Zoning Map 
(a)  Delineation of Zoning Districts : The zoning districts enumerated in Section 2.1.1 of this ordinance are shown on the "Zoning Map of the City of Gloucester", adopted by the City Council and issued on July 24, 1975 (as amended from time to time, the "Zoning Map"). The Zoning Map is hereby incorporated in and made part of this ordinance. 
(b)  Custody of Zoning Map : The Zoning Map and all amendments thereto shall be endorsed by the City Clerk and shall be kept on file at the City Clerk's Office; collectively, they shall be deemed the official Zoning Map of the City of Gloucester. Current copies of the Zoning Map shall also be kept on file at the Engineering Department and the Building Department. 
(c)  Drafting Masters : The drafting masters of the Zoning Map and all amendments thereto shall be maintained by the City Engineer's Office. 
(d)  Zoning Map Index; Grid System : Each page of the Zoning Map shall include a distinctive number in the lower right hand corner thereof and by such means shall be identified on an index map. In addition, a grid system shall be superimposed on each page and shall consist of horizontal rows numbered (1) through (6), and vertical columns lettered (A) through (D). 
2.1.3 Resolution of Ambiguities and Conflicts in Zoning District Boundaries 
Where ambiguities or conflicts exist with respect to the zoning district boundary lines, the following rules of interpretation shall apply: 
(a)  In general, zoning district boundary lines are the center lines of streets, ways, alleys, parkways, waterways and the rights of way of public utilities and railroads. 
(b)  If the Zoning Map indicates that the zoning district boundary line is not a center line of a street, way, etc., it may be a line perpendicular thereto, at the location specified on said map. 
(c)  If the Zoning Map indicates that the zoning district boundary line is not a center line of a street, way, etc., and is not a line perpendicular to such street, way, etc., it may be a line parallel to a street, way, etc. at a distance from the side lines of such street, way, etc. specified on said map. 
(d)  If the Zoning Map indicates that the zoning district boundary line is not a center line of a street, way, etc. and is not a line perpendicular to such street, way, etc., and is not a line parallel to such street, way, etc., it may be a line following a lot line or lot lines. 
(e)  If the Zoning Map indicates that the zoning district boundary line is not a center line of a street, way, etc., and is not a line perpendicular to such street, way, etc., and is not a line parallel to such street, way, etc., and is not a line following a lot line or lot lines, it may be a line dividing a lot or lots at such approximate location as shown on the Zoning Map. In such cases, the following rules of interpretation apply: 
(1)  Where a lot is divided in such manner that the frontage thereof lies entirely within one zoning district and said frontage is in the district with the smaller required minimum lot area, the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to the frontage district shall apply both to that portion of the lot lying in said district and to an area extending twenty-five (25) feet into the other district. From that point to the rear of the lot the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to the other district shall apply. 
(2)  Where a lot is divided in such manner that the frontage thereof is entirely within one zoning district and said frontage is in the district with the larger required minimum lot area, the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to the frontage district shall apply to the entire lot. 
(3)  Where the frontage of a lot lies in two zoning districts, the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to district with the larger required minimum lot area shall apply to the entire lot. 
(f)  Where none of the above-described rules of interpretation apply, or where other ambiguities exist, the zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the Inspector of Buildings. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 7-12-2016(1)) 
2.2 - USE REGULATIONS 
2.2.1 Allowed, Prohibited and Conditional Uses 
No building or structure shall be erected, used or changed in use, and no land shall be used or changed in use, except as set forth in Section 2.3, Use Tables, or as exempted by statute or Section 2.4. The symbols employed in the Use Tables have the following meanings: 
Y -  A permitted use 
N -  An excluded or prohibited use 
CC -  A use which may be authorized by Special Permit issued by the City Council pursuant to Section 1.8 of this ordinance, the application for which shall comply with the filing requirements of Section 1.5.3(b). 
CCS -  A use which may be authorized by Special Permit issued by the City Council pursuant to Section 1.8 of this ordinance, the application for which shall comply with the filing requirements of Section 1.5.3(c); if the proposed use is a Major Project (see Section 5.7.1), the application shall comply with the filing requirements of 1.5.3(d). 
SP -  A use which may be authorized by Special Permit issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.8 of this ordinance, the application for which shall comply with the filing requirements of Section 1.5.4(c). 
SPS -  A use which may be authorized by Special Permit issued by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.8 of this ordinance, the application for which shall comply with the filing requirements of Section 1.5.4(d). 
PB -  A use which may be authorized by Special Permit issued by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 1.8 of this ordinance, the application for which shall comply with the filing requirements of Section 1.5.5(b). 
New, or expansion of, commercial, industrial uses and other site alterations, may be subject to Site Plan Review. See Section 5.8 for applicability. 
2.2.2 Resolution of Conflicts in Use Categories 
Where an activity might be classified under more than one of the use categories set forth in Section 2.3, Use Tables, the more specific use category shall control; if said categories are equally specific, the more restrictive of the categories shall control. 
2.2.3 Mixed Uses 
Where a building or structure or land is proposed to be used for more than one principal use, whether the uses are in separate buildings or in the same building either vertically or horizontally connected, all of which uses are permitted in the zoning district in question and none of which is accessory to one another, such mixed uses shall be allowed. In the event that a provision of this ordinance applying to one of such uses is inconsistent with a provision applying to another, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
2.2.4 Appeal 
An applicant aggrieved by the interpretation or ruling of the Inspector of Building with respect to any of the provisions of this Section II may appeal said interpretation to the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.6 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 3-30-2010(1); Ord. of 6-14-2011(3)) 
2.3 - USE TABLES 
2.3.1 RESIDENTIAL USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 One-family detached dwelling 3 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y N N N N 2 Conversion of one-family dwelling to two-family, without changes to the exterior dimensions of the building 3 Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y SP SP SP N N N N 3 Conversion of one-family dwelling to two-family, with changes to the exterior dimensions of the building 3 Y SP N SP SP SP Y Y SP SP SP N N N N 4 New two-family dwelling 3 Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y SP SP SP N N N N 5(a) Conversion to or new mixed use building with not more than one (1) dwelling unit. 4, 8 N N N CC SP SP SP SP Y(5) Y(5) SP N N N N 5(b) Conversion to or new multi-family or apartment dwelling, up to two dwelling units. 4, 8 N N N CC SP SP SP SP Y(5) Y(5) SP N N N N 6 Conversion to or new multi-family or apartment dwelling, three dwelling units 4, 8 N N N CC SP SP SP SP Y(5) SP SP N N N N 7 Conversion to or new multi-family or apartment dwelling, four to six dwelling units N N N CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC N N N N 8 Conversion to or new multi-family or apartment dwelling, seven or more dwelling units (see Section 5.7.1) N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS N N N N 9 Cluster Development (see section 5.9) PB PB PB PB PB PB N N N N N N N N N 10 Boarding house, rooming house, lodging house or hostel, licensed by the Licensing Board 3 N N N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N N N N 11 Hotel, motel, motor inn, under 30 guest units N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS Y Y N Y N N N 12 Hotel, motel, motor inn, 30 or more guest units (see Section 5.7.1) N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS N CCS N N N 13 Mobile home park CCS CCS N CCS CCS CCS N N N N N N N N N 14 Mobile homes, except those at mobile home parks or campgrounds (see Section 5.1) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 15 Campground CCS CCS N CCS CCS CCS N N N N N N N N N 16 Camping or tenting, except within a campground or by children in their own yard N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 17 Temporary use of mobile home following fire or other natural disaster (see Section 5.1.5) 6 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 18 Assisted Living Residences, up to 10 units (see Section 5.14) CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC N N N 19 Assisted Living Residences, 11 or more units (see Sections 5.7, Major Projects, and 5.14) CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS N N N 20 Open Space Residential Development (see Section 5.15) Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N N 21 Village Development Project (see Section 5.16) 7 PB PB N PB PB PB N N N N N N N N N 22 Continuation of pre-existing multi-family uses, one to six dwelling units 9 N N N N N SP SP N N N N N N N N  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.1, RESIDENTIAL USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
(3)  Not more than one principal building per lot, with the exception of wind energy conversion facilities. 
(4)  In CB and VB Districts: 
[i]  A retail store or other business must be maintained on the street level floor; and 
[ii]  Unless the Board of Appeals authorizes a lesser number of off-street parking spaces pursuant to Section 4.1.2, the residential units on the upper floors and the business on the ground floor must satisfy all current and applicable off-street parking requirements. 
(5)  SP if exterior of the existing building is expanded. 
(6)  Y for one year from the date of the fire or other natural disaster; if an extension of time is needed, SP. 
(7)  Limited to Targeted Village Development Areas, as defined at Section 5.16.3.6. 
(8)  Special permit standard applies without regard to Sections 2.4.4(a) through 2.4.4(b). For dimensional standards see Section 3.2.1. 
(9)  See Section 5.30 
2.3.2 COMMUNITY SERVICE USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Public, religious, or other non-profit school, building or use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 2 Municipal use not elsewhere more specifically covered Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 3 Personal wireless service facility (see Section 5.13) CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS 4 Public utility facility exclusively servicing the immediate neighborhood (5 square miles or less) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y N N Y CCS Y Y 5 Public utility facility exclusively servicing a broader area N N N N N N N N SPS N N Y Y Y Y 6 Nursing home, convalescence or rest home, hospital N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS N N N CCS N N N N 7 Cemetery CC CC CC CC CC CC CC N CC CC CC CC N N N 8 Club or lodge, registered as a nonprofit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code CCS CCS N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CC CC CC CC CC N N 9 Animal hospital, animal shelter 3 CC CC N CC CC CC N N N N N CC N CC CC 10 Nursery school, day care center Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 11 Trade school, industrial training center N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 12 Business or commercial school, other than Use Nos. 2.3.2 (1), 2.3.2 (10), 2.3.2(11) and 2.3.3(5) N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y N N N 13 Philanthropic institution CCS CCS N CCS CCS CCS CCS Y Y CCS CCS Y CCS N CCS 14 Airport, heliport N N N N N N N N N N N CCS N CCS CCS 15 Medical Marijuana Treatment Center * N N N N N N N N N N N N N N CC  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.2, COMMUNITY SERVICE USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
(3)  Provided that any outdoor structure or pen shall be located no closer than 100 feet from a lot line and 200 feet from a dwelling on another lot. 
(4)  In accordance with restrictions set out in section 5.27. 
2.3.3 OPEN USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, including farms, greenhouse and gardens, on lots larger than five acres. Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 2 Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, including farms, greenhouses and gardens, on lots less than five acres Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N N N 3 Sale of products grown pursuant to Use Nos. 1 and 2 above, provided that all such items are produced on-site Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 4 Wildlife area, reservation or similar use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N Y N N Y 5 Riding school, stable 3 CC CC CC CC CC CC N N N N N N N N N 6 Golf driving range, drive-in theater, amusement park, race track or similar commercial outdoor recreation 4 N N N N N N N N N N N Y N N N 7 Miniature golf and baseball or softball batting cages 4 N N N N N N SP SP N N N N N N N 8 Golf course, standard or par-three 4 Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N N 9 Commercial picnic or outing area 4 SP SP N SP SP SP N N N N N N N N N 10 Supervised camping 4 SPS SPS N SPS SPS SPS N N N N N N N N N 11 Outdoor recreation, other than the above, operated by a governmental agency or authority 4 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N 12 Boat launching, docking or docking structures 5 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 13 Docking and operation of casino ships 6 N N N N N N N N N N N N CCS N N 14 Other commercial outdoor recreation activities 4 CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC Y Y Y Y Y N N 15 Seasonal sale of Christmas trees, wreaths Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.3, OPEN USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
(3)  Provided that any outdoor structure or corral shall be located no closer than 100 feet from a lot line and 200 feet from a dwelling on another lot. 
(4)  Provided that no active use area is located within required setbacks, other than the water's edge. 
(5)  In the MI District, boat launching and docking shall be limited to vessels that are primarily used for commercial fishing. 
(6)  Provided that the docking and operation of casino ships shall be limited to the following area: in the north channel of the harbor, moving easterly: Assessor's Map 10, Lot 5; Map 11, Lots 6,5,4,1; Map 53, Lots 3, 4. 
2.3.4 BUSINESS USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Office building containing less than 2500 square feet of floor area, either new or conversion of dwelling N N N N N N SPS Y Y Y Y Y N Y N 2 Office building containing more than 2500 square feet of floor area and less than 6000 square feet, either new or conversion of dwelling N N N N N N SPS SPS Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 3 Office building containing more than 6,000 square feet of floor area, either new or conversion of dwelling N N N N N N N SPS Y N N Y Y Y Y 4 Bank, automatic teller machines N N N N N N SPS Y Y Y Y Y CC Y Y 5 Funeral home N N N N N N SPS Y SPS SPS SPS SPS N N N 6 Animal daycare, animal grooming - daytime only 3 CC CC N CC CC CC N N N N N CC N CC CC 7 Animal boarding, kennel - 24 hour operations 3 CC CC N CC CC CC N N N N N CC N CC CC 8 Restaurant, without outdoor seating and with takeout constituting no more than 20% of total business. N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y CCS Y Y 9 Restaurant, with outdoor seating or with takeout constituting more than 20% of total business, or both N N N N N N N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS CCS SPS SPS 10 Motor vehicle sales or rental (see Section 5.21) N N N N N N N N Y N N Y N Y Y 11 Motor vehicle service, fueling, storage or repair (see Section 5.21) N N N N N N N N CC CC CC CC N SP N 12 Marine related sales or rental, limited primarily in the MI District to commercial fishing vessels N N N N N N N N Y N N Y Y Y Y 13 Marine related service, storage or repair, limited primarily in the MI District to commercial fishing vessels N N N N N N N N CC CC CC CC Y SP N 14 Protein recovery plant N N N N N N N N N N N N CCS CCS CCS 15 Building tradesman or contractor, without outdoor storage of materials or heavy equipment other than one truck with a GVW of not more than 12,000 pounds Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y CC Y Y CC Y Y 16 Contractor's yard N N N N N N N N N N N CC Y Y N 17 Stone mason's yard N N N N N N N N N N N CC CC Y N 18 Fuel or ice establishment, other than gas stations N N N N N N N N N N N CC Y Y N 19 Feed or building materials establishment N N N N N N N N Y CC Y Y Y Y Y 20 Laundry, laundromat or dry cleaning establishment under 4,000 sq ft N N N N N N N N CC Y Y Y N N N 21 Laundry or dry cleaning plant over 4,000 square feet N N N N N N N N N N N CC N Y N 22 Shopping center (See Sections 3.2.4 and 5.7) N N N N N N N N CCS N N CCS CCS N N 23 Automatic amusement devices, five or more N N N N N N N N CC CC N N N N N 24 Drive-through facility N N N N N N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS 25 Recreational marijuana retailer CC N N 26 Conversion of a medical marijuana treatment center to a recreational marijuana retailer N N Y 27 Retail, consumer service or other non-industrial business use, other than those set forth in Section 2.3.4, Use Nos. 1-26 4 N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y SP N 28 Facilities for water transportation loading and unloading Y  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.4, BUSINESS USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
(3)  Provided that any outdoor structure or pen shall be located no closer than 100 feet from a lot line and 200 feet from a dwelling on another lot. 
(4)  The following exceptions and qualifications apply to this use category: 
(a)  If a business use contains both a retail and a consumer service operation, for the purpose of this ordinance the use shall be classified as a consumer service establishment. 
(b)  Except Y in the GI District, if the use is: 
(1)  Related to an industrial, manufacturing or wholesaling use located on the same lot or on a contiguous lot, or 
(2)  Is located on a lot having frontage on an arterial street. 
(c)  Except Y in the BP District if the use is incidental to an industrial, manufacturing, or wholesaling use. 
2.3.5 INDUSTRIAL USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Junk yard N N N N N N N N N N N CC N CC N 2 Fill or removal of soil, stone or other earth products (see Section 5.2) N N N CC CC CC N N N N N CC N CC N 3 Manufacturing, processing or research N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y 4 Processing or cooling not conforming to the performance criteria of Section 4.4 N N N N N N N N N N N N Y CCS N 5 Trailer truck park, freight or transportation terminal facilities (see Section 5.8) 3 N N N N N N N N N N N N CCS CCS CCS 6 Bulk storage, warehousing N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y 7 Storage of toxic or hazardous materials or wastes incidental to industrial operations conducted on-site, as authorized by the Massachusetts DEP pursuant to MGL Chapter 21C N N N N N N N N N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS 8 Marijuana cultivator N Y Y 9 Marijuana product manufacturer N Y Y 10 Marijuana testing facility Y Y Y 11 Self-storage service facility 4 N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.5, INDUSTRIAL USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
(3)  No trailer truck park shall be located within 100 feet from the lot line of an established residence in a residential zone, and such potential development must be assessed in terms of its impact on the environment. 
(4)  With the exception of the MI District, no self-storage service facility may be permitted on land with an elevation less than 13 relative to the North Atlantic Vertical Datum (NAVD). 
2.3.6 OTHER PRINCIPAL USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Parking of motor vehicles to service a use permitted in the same district CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC CC 2 Parking of motor vehicles to service a use located and permitted in the NB District N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS Y N Y Y Y N N 3 Temporary structures or temporary uses not conforming to this ordinance SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 4 Arts, crafts and sale of arts or crafts if made on the premises CC CC N CC CC CC CC CC Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 5 Commercial radio transmission N N N N N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP 6 Noncommercial radio transmission, with wire antenna or roof-mounted tower extending no higher than 10 feet above the roofline Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 7 Noncommercial radio transmission, with free standing tower or roof-mounted tower extending higher than 10 feet above the roof line SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP 8 Commercial land-based wind energy conversion facilities (See Section 5.22) CCS CCS N CCS N N N N N N N N N N N 9 Commercial land-based wind energy conversion facilities on city-owned land (See Section 5.22) CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS N N N N N N CCS N 10 Temporary monitoring tower for use numbers 8 & 9 above (See Section 5.22) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N Y N  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.6, OTHER PRINCIPAL USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
2.3.7 ACCESSORY USES 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Garage or storage shed, accessory to allowed or permitted use Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 2 Parking or storage of agriculture machinery used on the premises Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y 3 Signs (see Section 4.3) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 4 Manufacturing accessory to retailing, employing up to ten persons, with major portion of products sold on the premises N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 5 Manufacturing accessory to retailing, employing more than ten persons, with major portion of products sold on the premises N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y 6 Employee dwelling accessory to industry Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y 7 Office for one professional in his or her residence (see Section 5.3) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Y Y Y Y Y Y N N 8 Home occupation (see Section 5.3) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Y SP SP SP N N 9 Home office, including use of computer, telephone and other such devices, but excluding employment of others, exterior signs and visits by customers, clients or other persons in conjunction with the business Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y 10 In dwellings of 2,000 square feet of gross floor area or more, the renting of not more than three rooms as lodging, without separate cooking facilities, to not more than three lodgers 3 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N 11 In dwellings of less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, the renting of not more than three rooms as lodging, without separate cooking facilities, to not more than three lodgers 3 N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N 12 Dining halls or shops, wholly within a motel or hotel N N N CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS Y Y Y Y N N N 13 Automatic amusement devices, four or less N N N N N N N N SP SP N N N N N 14 Recreational use accessory to a dwelling, for use of residents and nonpaying guests 4 Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N N 15 Commercial land-based wind energy conversion facilities (See Section 5.22) N N N N N N N N N N N N CCS CCS CCS 16 Commercial land-based wind energy conversion facilities on city-owned land (See Section 5.22) CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS CCS 17 Monitoring tower for Use Number 15, above (See Section 5.22) N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y 18 Residential land-based wind energy conversion facilities (See Section 5.23) SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N N SPS N N N N N 19 Yard sales lasting no more than two days, including set-up and take-down time, conducted no more than two times in a calendar year Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N 20 Accessory In-law Apartments (see Section 5.24) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP N N N N N N N N 21 Customary accessory uses other than those listed in this Section 2.3.7 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP  
FOOTNOTES TO SECTION 2.3.7, ACCESSORY USES 
(1)  In the MI District, Supporting Designated Port Area (DPA) Uses, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, shall not in the aggregate occupy more than 50% of the ground level area on filled tidelands on a lot within the DPA. Such uses shall also be subject to dimensional requirements of 310 CMR 9.0. Within the water-dependent use zone, as defined in 310 CMR 9.02, in the MI District no use shall be permitted unless it provides access to water-borne vessels. 
(2)  See Section 5.12. 
(3)  In the case of a dwelling occupied by unrelated persons (see Section VI, definition of "family"), there shall be a total of no more than five such persons and lodgers. 
(4)  Provided that no swimming pools or active use structures other than small children's swing sets and similar devices shall be located within required setbacks, other than the water's edge 
2.3.8 USES PROHIBITED IN ALL DISTRICTS 
Former Designations: R-RB R-RA R-1 R-2A R-2 R-3 R-4 R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. # 1 2 1 Any building or use not expressly permitted by this ordinance, either by right or by special permit N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 2 A building or use, whether or not otherwise permitted by right or by special permit, which in the opinion of the Building Inspector may create a safety or health hazard N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N 3 Billboards (see definition at Section VI) N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N  
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(3); Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 3-30-2010(1); Ord. of 3-30-2010(2); Ord. of 3-30-2010(3); Ord. of 4-27-2010(1); Ord. of 6-14-2011(1); Ord. of 8-27-2013(2); Ord. of 11-12-2013(1); Ord. of 6-23-2015(1); Ord. of 9-8-2015(1); Ord. of 5-10-2016(1); Ord. of 8-22-2017(1), §§ I, II; Ord. of 9-11-2018(2)) 
2.4 - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 
2.4.1 Effect of Enactment or Subsequent Amendment of the Zoning Ordinance on Pre-existing Nonconforming Uses and Structures 
(a)  Uses and Structures not affected : Subject to the conditions and exceptions set forth in Sections 2.4.2 through 2.4.9, the enactment or subsequent amendment of the Zoning Ordinance or any portion thereof shall not apply to: 
Any structure which was lawfully in existence at the time of such enactment or subsequent amendment (hereinafter, a "pre-existing nonconforming structure"); or 
The use of any land or structure which was lawfully ongoing at the time of such enactment or subsequent amendment (hereinafter, a "pre-existing nonconforming use"); or 
A building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing on such enactment or subsequent amendment; 
And such structure or use may be continued even though it would not be allowed under such enactment or subsequent amendment. 
(b)  Uses and Structures Affected : Subject to the conditions and exceptions set forth in Sections 2.4.2 through 2.4.9, the enactment or subsequent amendment of the Zoning Ordinance or any portion thereof shall apply to: 
Any change or substantial extension of a pre-existing nonconforming use; and 
A building or special permit issued after the first publication of notice of the public hearing on such enactment or subsequent amendment; and 
Any reconstruction, extension or structural change of a pre-existing nonconforming structure; and 
Any alteration of a structure begun after the first notice of said public hearing to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose, or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner, or to a substantially greater extent. 
2.4.2 Discontinuance of Pre-existing Nonconforming Uses 
A pre-existing nonconforming use of land which has been discontinued for a period of two years, shall lose all protection under this Section 2.4, and any future use of said land shall conform with the current provisions of this ordinance; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to land used for agriculture, horticulture or floriculture, where such nonconforming use had existed for a period of at least five consecutive years prior to its discontinuance. 
2.4.3 Special Permit Required for the Change, Extension, Reconstruction or Alteration of a Pre-existing, Nonconforming Use or Structure 
(a)  Jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Appeals : As authorized by Section 6 of MGL Chapter 40A and Section 1.9 of this ordinance, and subject to the exception for single and two-family residences set forth in Section 2.4.4, the following work may be allowed by special permit issued by the Board of Appeals: 
The change, extension or alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming use; or 
The change, extension or alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming structure; or 
The alteration of a pre-existing nonconforming structure to enable it to be used for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent; or 
The change, extension, alteration or reconstruction of a single or two-family residence or an accessory structure thereto, in those cases under Section 2.4.4 where a determination has been made by the Inspector of Buildings or the board that the proposed work will increase the nonconforming nature of the structure. 
(b)  Standard to be Applied : A special permit pursuant to this section shall only be granted upon a written determination by the Board of Appeals that the proposed change, reconstruction, extension or alteration will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use or structure. 
2.4.4 Single and Two-family Residence Exemption 
For purposes of this Section 2.4.4 the term "single and two-family residence" shall include accessory structures to such residences. 
Pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, first paragraph, a special permit under Section 2.4.3 shall not be required to alter, reconstruct, extend or structurally change a pre-existing nonconforming single or two-family residence, if such work will not increase the nonconforming nature of said residence. This determination may be made by either the Inspector of Buildings or the Zoning Board of Appeals in the following manner: 
(a)  Determination By the Inspector of Buildings : The Inspector of Buildings may rely on the following presumptions in considering whether to require a Board of Appeals special permit for work on: 
A pre-existing nonconforming single or two-family residence on a conforming lot; or 
A single or two-family residence which is on a nonconforming lot but which otherwise conforms to the dimensional requirements of Section III. 
(1)  Nonconforming Residence on Conforming Lot : On a lot which meets the current lot area, lot frontage and lot width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, the following work is presumed not to increase the nonconforming nature of a pre-existing nonconforming single or two-family residence and thus does not require a special permit from the Board of Appeals: 
(i)  A lateral addition to such residence, provided that the addition meets all current setback, height and lot coverage requirements and is no higher than the highest point of the existing structure; or 
(ii)  A vertical addition to such residence, provided that the addition meets all current setback and height requirements, does not increase the footprint of the existing structure and is no higher than the highest point of the existing structure; or 
(iii)  The demolition and replacement of such residence, provided that the replacement structure meets all current setback, height and lot coverage requirements. 
(2)  Conforming Residence on Nonconforming Lot : On a lot which does not meet current lot area, lot frontage or lot width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, the following work on a single or two-family residence which otherwise conforms to the dimensional requirements of Section III is presumed not to increase the nonconforming nature of said residence and thus does not require a special permit from the Board of Appeals: 
(i)  A lateral or vertical addition to such residence, provided that the addition meets all current setback, height and lot coverage requirements, is no higher than the highest point of the existing residence and does not exceed 110% of the footprint of the existing structure; or 
(ii)  The demolition and replacement of such residence, provided that the replacement structure meets all current setback, height and lot coverage requirements, is no higher than the highest point of the existing residence and does not exceed 110% of the footprint of the existing structure. 
Based on the foregoing presumptions, the Inspector of Buildings may determine that the proposed work will not result in an increase in the nonconforming nature of the single or two-family residence and not require the applicant to apply for a special permit from the Board of Appeals for said work. In the alternative, and notwithstanding the above-referenced presumptions, the Inspector of Buildings may determine that the proposed work will result in an increase in the nonconforming nature of the residence or may decline to make any determination; in either case, the applicant may then apply for a special permit from the board pursuant to Section 1.9. 
(b)  Determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to single and two-family residences : In the event that the Inspector of Buildings determines that the proposed work will result in an increase in the nonconforming nature of a single or two-family residence or declines to make a determination, upon application for a special permit the Board of Appeals shall make an independent and superseding determination as to whether the proposed work will result in such increase, and shall not be bound by either the determination of the Inspector of Buildings or the above-referenced presumptions. 
(c)  Determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to Three-Family Residences : The Zoning Board of Appeals, on a petition relating to a proposed alteration of [or] expansion of a three-family residence shall apply the Special Permit criteria without regard to Sections 2.4.4(a) and 2.4.4(b). 
2.4.5 Demolition and Replacement of a Pre-existing Nonconforming Single or Two-family Residence 
For purposes of Section 2.4.3 of this ordinance, the term "reconstruction" of a pre-existing nonconforming single or two-family residence or an accessory structure thereto shall include the complete demolition of the structure and construction of a replacement structure, provided that 
(a)  The Board of Appeals makes a written determination, as required by this ordinance and MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, that said replacement structure is not substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing structure; and 
(b)  Both demolition of the existing structure and the plans for the replacement structure are approved by the board in advance and in the same proceeding; and 
(c)  Construction of the replacement structure follows demolition of the existing structure as expeditiously as practicable, unless a delay is authorized by the board upon a showing that said delay is required by circumstances beyond the applicant's control; and 
(d)  Unless authorized by a variance from the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.7 of this ordinance, those portions of the replacement structure that constitute an increase in the footprint of the original structure comply with all provisions of this ordinance, and in particular the dimensional requirements of Section 3.2. 
2.4.6 Exemption for Vacant Land for Single and Two-family Residential Use: MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, Fourth Paragraph 
(a)  For purposes of the construction of a single or two-family residence on a vacant lot, any increase in lot area, frontage, width or setback requirements shall not apply to a lot zoned for such residences, provided that at the time of its recording at the Registry of Deeds or its ANR endorsement by the Planning Board, whichever came first, the lot conformed to the area, frontage, width and setback requirements in effect at that time, and further provided that at the time of the increase in said dimensional requirements the lot was vacant, was not held in common ownership with any adjoining lot and had at least 5,000 square feet of area and 50 feet of frontage. 
(b)  For the exemption of adjacent lots held in common ownership, see MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, para. 4. 
2.4.7 Subdivision Zoning Freeze: MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, Paragraph 5 
(a)  If a definitive plan, or preliminary plan followed within seven (7) months by a definitive plan, is submitted to the Planning Board for approval under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL Chapter 41, Sections 81-K through 81-GG [hereinafter, the Subdivision Control Law], and written notice of such submission has been given to the City Clerk before the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, the land shown on such plan shall be governed by the applicable provisions of this ordinance in effect at the time of such submission. If such plan, or the amendment thereof, is finally approved and endorsed by the Planning Board, the land shown on such plan shall be governed for a period of eight (8) years thereafter by the applicable provisions of this ordinance in effect at the time of such submission. See MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, paragraph 5. 
(b)  If a plan is submitted to the Planning Board for endorsement of Approval Not Required (ANR) under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL Chapter 41, Section 81-P, and written notice of such submission has been given to the City Clerk before the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, the land shown on such plan shall be governed by the applicable provisions of this ordinance in effect at the time of such submission. If such plan, or the amendment thereof, is given ANR endorsement by the Planning Board, the land shown on such plan shall be governed for a period of three (3) years thereafter by the applicable provisions of this ordinance in effect at the time of such submission. See MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, paragraph 6. 
(c)  The tolling of the above-referenced time periods during the pendency of appeals is as specified in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 6, paragraphs 7 and 8. 
2.4.8 Destruction or Damage by Fire or other Catastrophe 
In the case of destruction or damage of a structure by fire or other catastrophe, the following work may be authorized by a building permit: 
(a)  Within two years, the rebuilding of a pre-existing nonconforming structure or a conforming structure on a nonconforming lot in substantially the same form as it was at the time of said destruction or damage; provided, however, that there shall be no increase in total floor space; 
(b)  Within two years, the building of a replacement structure in compliance with applicable dimensional requirements but on a nonconforming lot, with no limitation as to increase in total floor space; 
(c)  At any time, the building of a replacement structure in compliance with applicable dimensional requirements and on a conforming lot, with no limitation as to increase in total floor space. 
2.4.9 Mobile Homes 
A mobile home located in any district where such homes are an allowed use, whether temporarily or permanently, but which is otherwise not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, may be replaced on the same site with a different mobile home, provided that there is no increase in nonconformity, but may not be relocated to another lot except in compliance with this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
SECTION III - DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 

3.1 - REQUIREMENTS, SPECIAL PROCEDURES AND DEFINITIONS RELATING TO SECTION 3.2 DIMENSIONAL TABLES 
3.1.1 Minimum Dimensional and Density Requirements 
(a)  Except upon a variance duly issued by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.7, or except as otherwise explicitly exempted by this ordinance or by general law, all buildings and other structure constructed in the city shall comply with the minimum dimensional and intensity requirements in effect at the time of such construction. Current minimum requirements are set forth at Section 3.2 Dimensional Tables. 
(b)  The dimensional and density requirements of Section 3.2 notwithstanding, in the granting of a special permit the City Council, the Board of Appeals or the Planning Board may impose such additional conditions as are deemed necessary to protect the public health and safety and to satisfy the criteria set forth at Sections 1.8.3 and 1.10.2. 
3.1.2 Pre-existing Nonconforming Lots, Buildings and Structures 
Certain pre-existing nonconforming lots, buildings and structures are exempt from certain of the minimum requirements set forth at Section 3.2; the nature of said exemptions are set forth at MGL c. 40A, s. 6 and Section 2.4 of this ordinance. 
3.1.3 Change in Size or Shape of Lot s 
Except upon a variance duly issued by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 1.7 or as may be allowed pursuant to Section 3.1.5, or as a result of a public taking, no existing lot shall be changed in size or shape, nor shall any new lot be created, unless such changed or new lot complies with the minimum requirements set forth at Section 3.2. 
3.1.4 State Building Code 
In addition to minimum requirements set forth at Section 3.2, all buildings and other structures in the city shall conform to the requirements of the State Building Code, 780 CMR, as most recently amended. 
3.1.5 Special Permit for the Division of Certain Lots 
(a)  Grounds for Special Permit : A lot on which more than one principal building currently exists, each of which also existed at the time of adoption by the City of Gloucester of the Subdivision Control Law, MGL Chapter. 41, Section. 81K et seq. (December 8, 1960) may be divided into lots on each of which one such building remains. Provided, however, that in the event that one or more of such resultant lots does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance, and in particular the dimensional requirements set forth at Section 3.2, such division must be authorized by special permit issued by the Board of Appeals upon a written determination that neither the proposed division of the original lot nor the proposed uses of the resultant lots will endanger public health and safety. 
(b)  Change in Use : Said special permit shall not be deemed to authorize a change in use of any of the resultant lots or of the principal buildings thereon; if such change in use is desired, it must be applied for pursuant to Section 1.3.2 of this ordinance. 
(c)  New Lots Not To Be Deemed Conforming : The issuance of a special permit pursuant to this section which creates one or more lots which do not satisfy the dimensional requirements of Section 3.2 shall not be deemed to render said lots conforming. 
(d)  Principal Building Defined : For purposes of this Section 3.1.5 only, the term "principal building" shall mean a building used for any of the principal uses identified in that version of the Zoning Ordinance in effect on December 8, 1960 and allowed at that time, either by right, by special permit or as a pre-existing nonconforming use. 
3.1.6 Special Permit for Building Heights in Excess of Section 3.2 Limits 
Building heights in excess of the limits set forth in Section 3.2 may be authorized pursuant to the following special permit procedures; provided, however, that in no case shall such increase in allowable height be greater than allowed by the State Building Code and other state and municipal regulations. 
(a)  Building Heights up to 35 Feet : Building heights up to 35 feet may be authorized by special permit issued by the Board of Appeals. Said permit shall contain such conditions as the board deems necessary, and shall only issue upon a written determination by the board that such increase in allowable height is consistent with neighborhood character and will not be substantially detrimental to the neighborhood because of obstruction of views, overshadowing of other properties, impairment of utilities or other adverse impacts. 
(b)  Building Heights in Excess of 35 Feet : Building heights in excess of 35 feet may be authorized by special permit issued by City Council. Said permit shall contain such conditions as the council deems necessary, and shall only issue upon a written determination by the council that such increase in allowable height is consistent with neighborhood character and will not be substantially detrimental to the neighborhood because of obstruction of views, overshadowing of other properties, impairment of utilities or other adverse impacts . 
3.1.7 Visibility at Intersections 
On a corner lot, as defined at Section 3.1.8, or on a lot which is located at the intersection of a street and a common driveway serving more than two lots, no visual obstruction between 2 1/2 and eight feet above the lowest elevation at the curb line shall be permitted within the area of a triangle formed on two sides by the intersecting ways and on the third side by a line drawn between points on each of said intersecting ways 25 feet from the corner. For the purpose of this section, the word "visual obstruction" shall mean any shrub, tree, wall, fence, sign, temporary building, pile of material, terrace or retaining wall, but shall not include permanent buildings or structures otherwise in compliance with this ordinance. 
3.1.8 Definitions of Terms used in Section III 
Building Height : In the case of a flat roof, the vertical distance measured from the average grade prior to building construction to the highest point of the roof assembly (including parapets). In the case of a sloping roof, the vertical distance measured from the average grade prior to building construction to the highest point of the peak or ridge. 
The average grade prior to building construction is established by determining the elevation of the building at all of its corners and deriving the average thereof. Included in the determination of height are widow's walks, towers or cupolas that are more than four feet long, four feet wide and four feet tall. Not included in the determination of height are accessory features such as chimneys, skylights, television antennae and building mechanicals in large commercial, apartment and condominium buildings. 
Corner Lot : A lot which fronts on two or more streets at their intersection(s). 
Lot : An area of land, all of which is in the same ownership, with definite boundaries ascertainable by recorded deed or plan. 
Lot Area : The horizontal area of a lot, exclusive of any area in a street or way open to public use. In calculating lot area for multi-family residential dwellings, not more than ten percent (10%) of the area required by Section 3.2 shall be a brook, stream, river, pond, water-filled quarry, lake, estuary, bank, fresh water wetland, coastal wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, wet meadow or swamp, or any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage, flooding or inundation, as defined at Section 12-11 of the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances. In calculating lot area for all other residential and non-residential buildings, and only in the case of the laying out of new lots, not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area required by Section 3.2 shall be a brook, stream, river, pond, water-filled quarry, lake, estuary, bank, fresh water wetland, coastal wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, wet meadow or swamp, or any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage, flooding or inundation, as defined at Section 12-11 of the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances. 
Lot Coverage : Percentage of lot area covered by structures of any kind, or otherwise roofed. 
Lot Frontage : That portion of a lot fronting upon and having access to a street or public way. Except as authorized by the Planning Board pursuant to section 5.20, compliance with the lot frontage requirement shall be determined by measuring the shortest distance, on a line parallel with the frontage street or way, within that portion of a lot between the frontage street or way and the principal building. Unless authorized by variance from the Board of Appeals, access to a lot must be over its frontage. 
Lot Width : The horizontal distance between side property lines of a lot, measured parallel to the front property line at that side of the principal building closest to the front property line. 
Yard : An open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from the ground upward, except for fences, walls, low profile cellar bulkheads and other customary yard accessories; or projections of not more than three feet into required yards for such architectural features of a building as unenclosed porches, steps, chimneys, cornices, eaves or canopies, but not for bay windows; or projections allowed to extend beyond setback lines by the State Building Code. In measuring a yard for purposes of determining compliance with the front, rear and side yard setback requirements, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building in question shall be used. 
Yard, Front : A yard extending between the side property lines of a lot and between the property line used to satisfy the Section 3.2 frontage requirement and the building in question (or any projection from said building other than those enumerated in the preceding definition of Yard). Corner lots fronting on two or more streets must comply with the front yard setback requirement for each yard adjacent to each of said streets 
Yard, Rear : A yard extending between the side property lines of a lot and between the rear property line and the building in question (or any projection from said building other than those enumerated in the preceding definition of Yard). Corner lots fronting on two or more streets must comply with the rear yard setback requirement for each of the rear yards that is opposite each of said streets. In the event that a corner lot consists of only four sides (i.e., two front yards and two side yards), the rear yard shall be considered that point at which the two side yards meet and the rear yard setback line shall be established by drawing an arc extended from that point and at a distance from that point along each of the side property lines equal to the minimum rear yard distance set forth in the relevant dimensional table of Section 3.2. 
Yard, Side : A yard extending from the inner line of the minimum front yard required pursuant to Section 3.2 to the inner line of the minimum rear yard required pursuant to Section 3.2 and extending between the side property line of a lot and the building in question (or any projection from said building other than those enumerated in the preceding definition of Yard). 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(2); Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 10-23-2012(2)) 
3.2 - DIMENSIONAL TABLES 
R-80 = Rural Residential; R-40 = Rural Residential; RC-40 = Coastal Residential; R-30 = Low Density Residential; R-20 = Low/Medium Residential; R-10 = Medium/High Density Residential; R-5 = High Density Residential; CCD = Civic Center District; CB = Central Business; VB = Village Business; NB = Neighborhood Business; EB = Extensive Business; MI = Marine Industrial; GI = General Industrial; BP = Business Park. 
3.2.1 Dimensional Requirements for Single, Two-Family and Three-Family Dwellings 
Single and two-family dwellings are not allowed in the EB, MI, GI and BP districts; any such dwellings in these districts are nonconconforming uses governed by Section 2.4. To the extent that the dimensional requirements for such a dwelling becomes relevant, they are those of the nearest residential district. 
Former Designations: [R-RB] [R-RA] [R-1] [R-2A] [R-2] [R-3] [R-4] R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB FN. e f g g f h For Principal Uses Minimum lot area (sf) 80,000 40,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 h Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sf) a 80,000 40,000 40,000 30,000 10,000 2,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 h Minimum lot width (ft) 150 150 150 100 100 80 50 50 50 50 h Minimum frontage (ft) 100 100 100 80 80 65 50 50 50 50 h Minimum front yard (ft) 40 40 40 30 30 20 15 15 15 15 h Minimum side yards (ft each) 30 30 30 20 20 10 7.5 7.5 7.5 7.5 h Minimum rear yard (ft) 30 30 30 30 30 20 20 20 20 20 h Maximum building height (ft) b 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 h For Accessory Uses (other than signs) Minimum distance from street (ft) c 40 40 40 30 30 20 15 15 15 15 h Minimum distance from side lot lines (ft) 15 15 15 15 15 10 5 5 5 5 h Minimum distance from rear lot line (ft) 15 15 15 15 15 10 5 5 5 5 h Minimum distance from principal building (ft) 20 20 20 20 20 10 5 5 5 5 h Maximum building height (ft) b, d 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 h Maximum Lot Coverage - Total of All Structures 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 30% 35% 35% 35% 35% h  
Footnotes to Section 3.2.1 
a.  This requirement pertains to two family dwellings only; see Section 3.2.2 for multi-family dwellings. Two family dwellings must also satisfy the general minimum lot area requirement. 
b.  Maximum height for buildings may be increased by special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6. 
c.  The accessory building may not be closer to the street than the principal building. 
d.  If the accessory building complies with the front, side and rear yard setbacks for the principal building, the maximum building height for the accessory building shall be that of the principal building. If the accessory building does not comply with said setbacks, the maximum height shall be 12 feet. In either case, footnote (b) shall apply. 
e.  The following dimensional requirements supersede those of Section 3.2.1 for single and two-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto which were in existence on or before March 9, 1999 or for which a building permit was issued on or before March 9, 1999: 
For Principal Uses For Accessory Uses Minimum front yard (ft) 30 Minimum distance from street (ft) 30 Minimum side yards (ft each) 20 Minimum side yards (ft each) 15 Minimum rear yard (ft) 30 Minimum rear yard (ft) 15  
f.  Two-family dwellings are not allowed in RC-40 districts and single family dwellings are not allowed in the CB District; any such dwellings in these districts are nonconforming uses governed by Section 2.4. To the extent that the dimensional requirements for such dwellings become relevant, they are as set forth in this section. 
g.  See Appendix 3.20 at the end of this Section 3.2 for the front, side are rear yard setback distances for single and two-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto which: 
(1)  were in existence on or before March 9, 1999 or for which a building permit was issued on or before March 9, 1999; and 
(2)  are located in those portions of R-20 and R-30 districts identified by the street lists in Appendix 3.20 at the end of this Section 3.2 
h.  Dimensional requirements shall be those of the abutting residential district. If the subject property abuts two residential districts, dimensional requirements shall be those of the residential district with the smaller required minimum lot area. 
3.2.2 Dimensional Requirements for Multi-family Dwellings and Their Accessory Uses (other than signs) 
Multi-family dwellings are not allowed in the RR-80, RR-40, RC-40, EB, MI, GI and BP districts; any such dwellings in these districts are nonconforming uses governed by Section 2.4. To the extent that the dimensional requirements for such a dwelling becomes relevant, they are those of the nearest residential district in which multifamily dwellings are allowed. 
Former Designations: [R-2A] [R-2] [R-3] [R-4] FN. R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB Minimum lot area (sf) 60,000 40,000 20,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 g Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sf) a 15,000 10,000 5,000 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 g Minimum open space per dwelling unit (sf) a 7,500 7,500 3,500 1,250 1,250 1,250 1,250 g Minimum lot width (ft) 150 150 100 80 80 80 80 g Minimum frontage (ft) 125 125 80 65 65 65 65 g Minimum front yard (ft) b 30 (d) 30 (d) 20 (d) 15 (f) 15 (f) 15 (f) 15 (f) g Minimum side yards (ft each) 40 (d) 40 (d) 20 (d) 7.5 (f) 7.5 (f) 7.5 (f) 7.5 (f) g Minimum rear yard (ft) 40 (d) 40 (d) 20 (d) 7.5 (f) 7.5 (f) 7.5 (f) 7.5 (f) g Maximum building height (ft) c 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 g Distance between principal buildings (ft) e e e e e e e e  
Footnotes to Section 3.2.2: 
a.  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit or minimum open space per dwelling unit, or both, may be decreased by special permit issued by the City Council, but only upon a finding that such lesser lot area or open space is in keeping with neighborhood character and structural density. 
b.  At least 65% of required front yard area shall consist of vegetative cover, to be established and maintained by the applicant or its successor in interest. 
c.  Maximum height for buildings may be increased by special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6. 
d.  Increase by one foot for each foot by which building height exceeds 15 feet. 
e.  No principal building shall be closer to another principal building on the same site than the sum of their respective heights; provided, however, that the City Council may by special permit authorize a reduction in said distance upon a finding that such reduction is not detrimental because of view obstruction, overshadowing, service access or visual crowding. 
f.  Increase by one-half foot for each foot by which building height exceeds 30 feet. 
g.  Dimensional requirements shall be those of the abutting residential district. If the subject property abuts two residential districts, dimensional requirements shall be those of the residential district with the smaller required minimum lot area. 
3.2.3 Dimensional Requirements for All Uses Other than Single and Two-family Dwellings (See Section 3.2.1); Multi-family Dwellings (See Section 3.2.2); Shopping Centers (See Section 3.2.4); Assisted Living Facilities (See Section 3.2.5); and Hotels, Motels and Motor Inns (See Section 3.2.6) 
Former Designations: [R-RB] [R-RA] [R-1] [R-2A] [R-2] [R-3] [R-4] R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB MI GI BP FN. g d, g e For Principal Uses Minimum lot area (sf) 80,000 40,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000 5,000 0 0 5,000 d 10,000 0 10,000 40,000 Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sf) 80,000 40,000 40,000 30,000 10,000 2,000 1,000 0 0 2,500 d na na na na Minimum lot width (ft) 150 150 150 100 100 80 50 0 0 40 d 80 0 80 100 Minimum frontage (ft) 100 100 100 80 80 65 50 0 0 40 d 65 0 65 100 Minimum front yard (ft) 40 40 40 30 30 20 15 0 0 0 d 30 10 10 40 Minimum side yards (ft each) 30 30 30 20 20 10 7.5 f f f d f f 15 25 Minimum rear yard (ft) 30 30 30 30 30 20 20 f f f d 15 f 15 40 Maximum building height (ft) a 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 d 30 40 40 40 For Accessory Uses (other than signs) Minimum distance from street (ft) b 40 40 40 30 30 20 15 0 0 0 d 10 0 15 40 Minimum distance from side lot lines (ft) 15 15 15 15 15 10 5 f f f d 15 f 15 20 Minimum distance from rear lot line (ft) 15 15 15 15 15 10 5 f f f d 15 f 15 20 Minimum distance from principal building 20 20 20 20 20 10 5 10 10 10 d 10 10 10 20 Maximum building height (ft) a,c 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 d 12 12 12 12 Maximum Lot Coverage - Total of All Structures 25% 25% 25% 25% 25% 30% 35% 100% 100% 75% d 50% 100% 50% 50%  
Footnotes to Section 3.2.3: 
a.  Except in the MI district, maximum height for buildings may be increased by special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6. 
b.  The accessory building shall not be closer to the street than the principal building. 
c.  If the accessory building complies with the front, side and rear yard setbacks for the principal building, the maximum building height for the accessory building shall be that of the principal building. If the accessory building does not comply with said setbacks, the maximum build height shall be 12 feet. In both instances, footnote (a) shall apply. 
d.  Dimensional requirements shall be those of the abutting residential district. If the subject property abuts two residential districts, dimensional requirements shall be those of the residential district with the smaller required minimum lot area. 
e.  A building built on a lot that adjoins the harbor shall be set back from one side lot line by a distance equal to one third of the building height but not less than ten feet. 
f.  When subject property abuts a residential district, the side and rear setback distances shall be 10 feet. Otherwise, no setback distances shall be required, provided that the rear of the structure and required off-street loading or parking spaces are accessible by other means. If side or rear yards must be provided for access, they shall be no less than 10 feet wide. 
g.  The front, side and rear yard setback distances for buildings used as of right for any of the business uses described in Section 2.3.4 of this ordinance or mixed use business as defined in the Ordinance thereto which (1) were in existence on or before March 9, 1999 or for which are building permit was issued on or before March 9, 1999; and 2) are located in those portions of R-20 and R-30 districts identified by the street lists in the Appendix to section 3.2 at the end of Section 3.2 of this Ordinance shall be the same as front, side and rear setbacks for single and two-family dwellings on the designated streets as set out in the said Appendix. 
3.2.4 Dimensional Requirements for Shopping Centers (See Section 5.7.5[f]) 
For Principal Uses CB EB MI Minimum lot area (sf) 15,000 30,000 15,000 Minimum open space per 1,000 sf of gross floor area (sf) 100 200 100 Minimum lot width (ft) 30 100 30 Minimum frontage (ft) 65 80 65 Minimum front yard (ft) 0 50 (a) 30 (b) Minimum side yards (ft each) 0 20 (a) 7.5 (b) Minimum rear yard (ft) 0 20 (a) 7.5 (b) Maximum building height (ft) 30 (c) 30 (c) 40 (c)  
Footnotes to Section 3.2.4: 
a.  Increase the setback by one foot for each foot by which building height exceeds 20 feet. 
b.  Increase the setback by 1/2 foot for each foot by which building height exceeds 20 feet. 
c.  Maximum building height may be increased by special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6 of this ordinance. 
3.2.5 Dimensional Requirements for Assisted Living Residences (See Sections 5.7.5 and 5.14) 
Former Designations: [R-RB] [R-RA] [R-1] [R-2A] [R-2] [R-3] [R-4] For Principal Uses FN. R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB NB EB Minimum lot area (sf) 100,000 80,000 80,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 a a a Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sf) 2,000 2,000 2,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 500 500 500 a a a Minimum open space per dwelling unit (sf) 1,000 1,000 1,000 500 500 250 100 100 100 a a a Minimum lot width (ft) 150 150 150 125 125 80 65 65 65 a a a Minimum frontage (ft) 150 150 150 125 125 80 65 65 65 a a a Minimum front yard (ft) 40 40 40 30 30 20 15 15 15 a a a Minimum side, rear yard (ft) 40 40 40 30 30 20 10 10 10 a a a Maximum building height b 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 a a a  
Footnotes to Section 3.2.5: 
a.  Dimensional requirements shall be those of the abutting residential district with the smaller minimum required lot area, as shown on this table. 
b.  Maximum building height may be increased by City Council special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6 (b). 
3.2.6 Dimensional Requirements for Hotels, Motels and Motor Inns and Their Accessory Uses (other than signs) 
Former Designations: [R-2A] [R-2] [R-3] [R-4] FN. R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 CCD CB VB EB Minimum lot area (sf) 60,000 40,000 20,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 20,000 Minimum lot area per two guest unit (sf) a 15,000 10,000 5,000 2,500 2,500 2,500 2,500 5,000 Minimum open space per two guest unit (sf) a 7,500 7,500 3,500 1,250 1,250 1,250 1,250 3,500 Minimum lot width (ft) 150 150 100 80 80 80 80 100 Minimum frontage (ft) 125 125 80 65 65 65 65 80 Minimum front yard (ft) b 30 (d) 30 (d) 20 (d) 0 0 0 0 20 (d) Minimum side yards (ft each) 40 (d) 40 (d) 20 (d) 0 0 0 0 20 (d) Minimum rear yard (ft) 40 (d) 40 (d) 20 (d) 0 0 0 0 20 (d) Maximum building height (ft) c 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 Distance between principal buildings (ft) e e e e e e e e  
Footnotes to Section 3.2.6: 
a.  Minimum lot area per two guest unit or minimum open space per two guest unit, or both, may be decreased by special permit issued by the City Council, but only upon a finding that such lesser lot area or open space is in keeping with neighborhood character and structural density. 
b.  At least 65% of required front yard area shall consist of vegetative cover, to be established and maintained by the applicant or its successor in interest. 
c.  Maximum height for buildings may be increased by special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6 of this ordinance. 
d.  Increase by one foot for each foot by which building height exceeds 15 feet. 
e.  No principal building shall be closer to another principal building on the same site than the sum of their respective heights; provided, however, that the City Council may by special permit authorize a reduction in said distance upon a finding that such reduction is not detrimental because of view obstruction, overshadowing, service access or visual crowding. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(1); Ord. of 9-2-2008(4); Ord. of 6-14-2011(2); Ord. of 9-8-2015(1)) 
APPENDIX TO SECTION 3.2: - Identification of those properties with superseding setback distances, as established by Zoning Ordinance amendments dated: March 9, 1999, April 27, 1999 and October 12, 1999. 
Please note that best efforts have been made to list all North Gloucester and West Gloucester streets affected by the 1999 zoning amendments. Any questions as to inclusion/exclusion should be resolved by reference to the master zoning map, which is available at both the Planning Department and Building Department. This map shall be final and conclusive as to whether a property falls within scope of the 1999 amendments and thereby is entitled to the benefit of the superseding setback distances. 
I.  NORTH GLOUCESTER superseding setback distances for certain streets in the R-20 Zoning District. 
For Principal Uses For Accessory Uses Minimum front yard (ft) 20 Minimum distance from St (ft) 20 Minimum side yards (ft each) 10 Minimum side yards (ft each) 10 Minimum rear yard (ft) 20 Minimum rear yard (ft) 10  
The above dimensional requirements supersede those of Section 3.2.1 for single and two-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto which: 
(1)  Were in existence on or before March 9, 1999 or for which a building permit was issued on or before March 9, 1999; and 
(2)  Are located in the R-20 zoning district; and 
(3)  Are located on one or more of the following streets: 
Albion Ct 
Ames Dr 
Anchor Ln 
Andrews St 
Barberry Hghts Rd 
Bayfield Rd 
Bayview Ln 
Bennet St * 
Bianchini Rd 
Bittersweet Rd 
Brierwood St 
Burns Way 
Butman Ave 
Butternut Ln 
Ciaramitaro Ct 
Coggeshall Rd 
Colburn St 
Cole Ave 
Compass Way 
Costa Dr 
Crane Way 
Crowell Ave 
Day Ave 
Days Ave 
Dennison St * 
Dorset Dr 
Driftwood Ln 
Duley St 
Emerald St 
Folly Point Rd 
Hesperus Ave * 
Hesperus Cir 
Hickory St * 
High St * 
High St Pl 
Hillside Ct 
Hilltop Rd 
Homan's Ct 
Jussila Ln 
Lane Rd 
Lane's Cove Rd 
Langsford St 
Langsford Way 
Leonard St * 
Leverett St * 
Linwood Pl 
Mason Square 
McLellan St 
Mechanic Pl 
Morgan Ave 
Mt. Locust Pl 
Munsey Ln 
Nashua Ave * 
Nikolane Way 
Norseman Ave 
North Kilby St 
Old Farm Ln 
Pigeon Ln 
Plum Ct 
Quarry St * 
Revere St * 
Rockwood Ln 
Rowley Shore 
Sanderson Ct 
Ship's Bell Rd 
Sunset Point Rd 
Tucker St 
Vale Ct 
Viking St 
Vulcan St 
Washington St 
Wishart Rd 
Woodbury Hill 
Woodbury St * 
Young Ave 
Youngs Rd * 
*  Only a portion of this street is subject to the superseding setback distances. Please consult with the Building Department as to the dividing line. 
II.  WEST GLOUCESTER superseding setback distances for certain streets in the R-20 Zoning District. 
For Principal Uses For Accessory Uses Minimum front yard (ft) 20 Minimum distance from St (ft) 20 Minimum side yards (ft each) 10 Minimum side yards (ft each) 10 Minimum rear yard (ft) 20 Minimum rear yard (ft) 10  
The above dimensional requirements supersede those of Section 3.2.1 for single and two-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto which: 
(1)  Were in existence on or before March 9, 1999 or for which a building permit was issued on or before March 9, 1999; and 
(2)  Are located in the R-20 zoning district; and 
(3)  Are located on one or more of the following streets: 
Anchor Ln 
Anderson Way 
Atlantic Ave 
Atlantic St 
Banjo Way 
Bayberry Lane 
Bayfield Rd 
Bayle Ln 
Beachmont Ave 
Becker Cir 
Becker Ln 
Bond St 
Boulder Ave 
Brookfield Dr 
Brooks Ln 
Brooks Rd 
Bungalow Rd 
Causeway St 
Cedarwood Rd 
Chickadee Rd 
Clearview Ave 
Cliff Ave 
Clover Ln 
Cole Ave 
Concord St * 
Cononicus Rd 
Cottage Ln 
Cove Ledge Ln 
Crane Way 
Crowell Ave 
Curlew Ct 
Dalton Ave 
Day Ct 
Dolliver Neck Dr * 
Dowitcher Dr 
Dublin Ln 
Dune Cir 
Dune Ln 
Edgewood Rd 
Elmo Ln 
Essex Ave * 
Eveleth Rd 
Fenley Rd 
Ferncliff Hghts * 
Fleetwood Dr 
Flume Rd 
Fuller Ln 
Fuller St 
Gibbs Hill Dr * 
Gull Ln 
Harbor Hghts 
Heath Hghts 
Hghts at Cape Ann 
Heron Cir 
Hesperus Ave * 
Hesperus Cir 
Hidden Way 
Hilltop Rd 
Homan's Ct 
Homestead Dr 
Hough Ave 
Hunter Rd 
Julian Rd 
Julie Ct 
Kent Cir 
Kent Rd 
King Philip Rd 
Lake Rd 
Larose Ave * 
Lexington Ave 
Linden Ave 
Linden Rd 
Linwood Ave 
Lobster Ln 
Longview Rd 
Longview Ter 
Lowe Dr 
Lyndale Ave 
Malcolm Rd 
Maple Rd 
Marshfield St 
Massasoit Rd 
Mt. Ann Rd 
New Way Ln * 
Newton Rd 
Norman Ave 
Oakes Ave 
Ocean Ave 
Old Salem Path 
Old Salem Rd * 
Park Ln 
Pew Ave 
Pine Rd 
Plover Way 
Point Rd 
Presson Point Rd 
Raymond St 
Ridgewood Ln 
Samoset Rd 
Sandy Way 
Saville Rd 
Sawyer Ave 
Shore Rd 
Skipper Way 
Skipper Way Ter 
Sleepy Hollow Rd 
Somes Ave * 
South Bend Ave * 
Stage Fort Ave 
Stanwood Ave 
Stanwood Point 
Stillington Dr * 
Strawberry Cove 
Stuart Rd 
Thompson St 
Tolman St 
Treetop Ln 
Uncas Rd 
Valley Rd 
Village Rd 
Waban Rd 
Waterman Rd 
Waterside Ln 
Wauketa Ln 
West Parish Ln 
White's Mtn Rd 
Windsor Ln 
Winthrop Ave 
Woodward Ave 
Wyoma Rd 
*  Only a portion of this street is subject to the superseding setback distances. Please consult with the Building Department as to the dividing line. 
III.  WEST GLOUCESTER superseding setback distances for certain streets in the R-30 Zoning District. 
For Principal Uses For Accessory Uses Minimum front yard (ft) 20 Minimum distance from St (ft) 20 Minimum side yards (ft each) 10 Minimum side yards (ft each) 10 Minimum rear yard (ft) 20 Minimum rear yard (ft) 10  
The above dimensional requirements supersede those of Section 3.2.1 for single and two-family dwellings and accessory structures thereto which: 
(1)  Were in existence on or before March 9, 1999 or for which a building permit was issued on or before March 9, 1999; and 
(2)  Are located in the R-30 zoning district; and 
(3)  Are located on one or more of the following streets: 
Blossom Ln 
Buena Vista Ave * 
Butler Ave 
Carter Hill Rd 
Chateau Hghts 
Edmonds Way * 
Emily Ln 
Englewood Rd 
Herd's Hill 
Kettle Cove Ln 
Lawndale Cir 
Lisa Dr 
Long Hill Rd 
Magnolia Ave * 
Pinecrest Ave 
Rockmoor Ter 
Ryan Rd 
St. Joseph 
St. Peter 
Story Rd 
Westbrook Ln 
Western Ave * 
*  Only a portion of this street is subject to the superseding setback distances. Please consult with the Building Department as to the dividing line. 
(Ord. of 9-2-2008(4)) 
SECTION IV - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

4.1 - OFF-STREET PARKING 
4.1.1 Intent and Application of Parking Requirements 
(a)  It is the intention of this Ordinance that all new structures and new building and land uses be provided with sufficient off-street parking spaces to meet the needs of persons making use of such structures and land uses. No permit shall be issued for the erection of a new structure or the enlargement or change of use of an existing structure unless the plans show the specific location and size of the off-street parking required to comply with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance and the means of access to such space from public streets. In the event of the enlargement or change of use of an existing structure, the regulations set forth in this section shall apply only to the area added to the existing structure or to the building or part thereof having a change of use. 
(b)  Buildings, structures and land uses in existence on the effective date of this ordinance are not subject to these off-street parking requirements and may be rebuilt, altered or repaired, but not enlarged or changed in use without becoming subject to these requirements. 
(c)  Except for business and municipal uses which occupy more than 10,000 square feet of space and are located in buildings constructed after February 1, 1990, business and municipal uses need not provide off-street parking if they are located within 400 feet of a Municipal Parking Lot/Facility. 
(d)  Residential uses situated above the ground floor in a structure which existed as of February 1, 1990, contains one or more permitted non-residential uses on the ground floor, and which is located in a Central Business (CB) Zoning District, need not provide off-street parking. 
4.1.2 The following minimum number of parking spaces must be provided except as exempted above, and except that the Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a Special Permit for a lesser number upon demonstration by the applicant that such lesser number will serve the intent of these provisions: 
(a)  For residential structures: at least one off-street parking space shall be provided for each dwelling unit in the CB, VB, R-5 or CCD district and at least one and one-half off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit located in other districts. Such spaces shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling they serve. When the off-street parking space is in the form of a private garage, its location on the lot shall conform with the provisions of this Ordinance governing the erection of a structure intended for an accessory use. 
(b)  For hotels, motels, motor inns, boarding, lodging, or tourist homes: one space per guest unit plus one space per three employees. For dormitories or similar group living quarters, one space per bed. 
(c)  Places of assembly, not including churches and places of worship, but including all other places customarily involving assembly, such as, but not in limitation thereof, auditoriums, theaters, assembly halls, funeral homes, bowling alleys, fraternal quarters, and other places of assembly, shall provide for each 100 square feet of floor area exclusive of basement or for each four seats, whichever shall be greater, one off-street parking space. 
(d)  For every retail store, professional and public building, and private educational building, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 200 square feet of ground floor area not used for bulk storage, and one off-street parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area not used for bulk storage above the ground floor. For restaurant or food-service uses, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided on or adjacent to the site for every three (3) persons that may be served by the establishment at one time. 
(e)  For industrial establishments, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each motor vehicle in connection with the operation of such establishment, and in addition, one off-street parking space for each three (3) employees on the largest shift. 
(f)  For Schools, Hospitals, Sanitaria, Nursing Homes, and similar places, one off-street parking space shall be provided for each 500 square feet of floor space exclusive of basements. 
(g)  Casino boat water uses: one off-street parking space required for every four passengers (including crew) based on the maximum allowable occupant load of the vessel. 
4.1.3 Location of Parking Facilities 
(a)  Required off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same lot as the principal use they are required to serve, with the following exceptions: 
1)  Required parking facilities for office buildings may be located on other lots if all spaces are within five hundred (500) feet of the entrance to the building to be served. 
2)  Industrial districts and in the case of institutional uses in any district, the required parking facilities may be provided on other lots within a reasonable distance from the building to be served. The reasonable distance to be determined by the Building Inspector. 
3)  In the case of a dormitory of a non-profit educational institution, the required parking facilities may be provided on other lots not more than three thousand (3,000) feet away from the dormitory to be served. 
4.1.4 Design and Layout of Required Parking Facilities 
(a)  General Provisions: 
1.  The following are not subject to the design and layout standards set forth in this Section 4.1.4: 
a)  Parking spaces required for single-family and two-family dwellings; 
b)  Parking spaces required for the expansion of a building in existence on April 1, 1991 if: 
i)  The expansion is less than 50% of the floor area of the existing building, or 
ii)  The expansion would require the creation of no more than ten additional spaces. 
2.  No accessory off-street parking space shall be permitted within the required front yard of a lot in any residential district. 
3.  Parking areas shall be designed so as to allow each vehicle to enter and leave each parking space without requiring the moving of any other vehicle (except for an area providing valet parking or a parking lot in which spaces are assigned to occupants of the building served by that lot) and so as not to require the backing of a vehicle onto a collector street. 
4.  Required off-street parking facilities may be enclosed or may be open. If such facilities are open, they shall be graded, surfaced with bituminous concrete, cement concrete or other non-dusting all weather surface, drained and suitably maintained to the extent necessary to avoid the nuisance of dust, erosion or excessive water flow onto public ways or adjoining property. 
5.  Parking areas shall not be used for automobile sales, gasoline sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or the servicing of vehicles of any kind. 
6.  Any light fixture used to illuminate parking areas shall be shielded so as not to shine on streets or adjacent properties. 
7.  No parking stall, except those contained in a parking structure that is below the mean original grade of the lot (determined at the street line), shall be located within one foot of a sidewalk, street, or external property line. 
8.  Parking areas which contain more than five off-street parking spaces and which are located within ten feet of the boundaries of the property shall be equipped with a barrier, curbing, fence or low wall sufficient to confine vehicles entirely within the property and to protect any plantings and landscaping. 
9.  Parking areas containing more than five off-street spaces shall be marked so as to clearly indicate the space to be occupied by each motor vehicle, in accordance with the dimensions specified in 4.1.4(b). Such markings shall be maintained so as to be plainly visible. 
(b)  Parking Stall Dimensions: 
Parallel Parking Angle and Perpendicular Parking Width Length Width Length Standard 8 22 9 18 Compact 7 20 8 16 Handicapped 10 22 12 18  
Parking spaces for compact automobiles shall be permitted only in parking lots or garages having 10 spaces or more, shall be appropriately and clearly marked, and shall comprise not more than 30% of the spaces provided. 
(c)  Parking Aisle Dimensions: 
For one-way traffic, the minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls shall be 12 feet for parallel and angle parking, and 14 feet for perpendicular parking. For two-way traffic, the minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls shall be 20 feet for parallel and angle parking, and 24 feet for perpendicular parking. 
(d)  Access: 
1.  The minimum width for entrance and exit drives to parking areas shall be the same as required for parking aisles, per 4.1.4(c) of this section. The maximum width for entrance and exit drives is 25 feet. 
2.  No portion of any entrance or exit driveway to or from a parking area shall be closer than 20 feet to the curb line of an intersecting street, and all such driveways shall be separated from each other by at least 30 feet. 
(Amended 3-2-1999; adopted [amended] 7-6-1999) 
4.2 - OFF-STREET LOADING 
4.2.1 Intent 
(a)  All new business and industrial buildings and all enlargements of existing buildings requiring the delivery of goods as a substantial part of their function must be provided with necessary space for off-street loading as hereinafter set forth. No application for a permit for the erection of such new buildings shall be approved unless it includes a plan for off-street loading facilities in accordance with the regulations set forth in this Ordinance. 
(b)  Buildings, structures and land uses in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance, are not subject to these off-street loading requirements, and such buildings may be rebuilt, altered or repaired, but not expanded, without becoming subject to these requirements. 
(c)  Where a building existing on the effective date of this Ordinance is altered or extended in such a way as to increase or enlarge the gross floor area, only the additional gross floor area shall be counted in computing the off-street loading requirements. 
(d)  Where the computations of required loading bays result in a fractional number only the fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one. 
4.2.2 Table of Loading Requirements 
Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for the following specified uses: 
Types of Uses Number of Bays (a) Retail, wholesale and industrial operations except freezers, cold storage holding buildings, and warehouses with gross floor area of more than 5000 square feet but not more than 40,000 square feet. One Loading Bay  Hospitals, institutions and similar buildings requiring delivery and with a floor area of 30,000 square feet or less. One Loading Bay  For each additional 50,000 square feet of floor area in each case One Loading Bay  
(b)  Freezers, cold storage holding buildings and Warehouses shall provide off-street loading bays as follows: One bay for buildings of less than 5,000 square feet of storage space; two bays, from 5,000 to 10,000 square feet; three bays; 10,001 to 18,000 square feet; four bays, 18,001 to 35,000 square feet; and one bay for each additional 50,000 square feet. Loading bays shall conform to the following minimum measurements: 15 feet by 50 feet on the ground with a clear height of 14 feet. 
4.2.3 Location and Layout of Loading Facilities 
(a)  Each loading bay, except as above specifically provided, shall have a minimum dimension of not less than 10 feet in width, 25 feet in length, 12 feet in height and may be located either within a building or outside and adjoining an opening in the building. 
(b)  In case trucks, trailers, or other vehicles larger than the dimensions of the minimum requirements habitually serve freezers, warehouses, or other commercial buildings, additional parking spaces shall be provided so that such vehicles park or stand completely off the street while waiting to be loaded or unloaded. 
(c)  All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, surfaced, drained and suitably maintained to the extent necessary to avoid the nuisance of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across public ways. 
(d)  Loading facilities shall not be reduced in total extent or usability after their installation, except when such reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as at no time to constitute a nuisance or hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic. 
4.3 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for a wide range of signage by right; to encourage safe, effective, informative signage; to protect property values, and to minimize the visual impact of signage. 
4.3.1 Administration 
1.  Sign Permits. Except as otherwise herein provided, no person shall erect, alter, modify or move any signs as herein defined without first applying for and obtaining a sign permit from the Building Inspector. 
2.  Prohibited Signs. All signs not expressly permitted under this section or exempted from regulations under this section are prohibited. Billboards and signs painted on roofs are prohibited in all Districts. 
3.  Nonconforming Signs. All signs lawfully existing at the time of passage of this section that do not conform to the terms of this section may be continued subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Determination of Conformance. In the event of a dispute whether a sign was lawful at the time of passage of this section, the Building Inspector shall determine the facts and the law governing use of such sign, which written determination shall be final. 
(b)  Maintenance and Repair of Existing Nonconforming Signs. No sign existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be substantially altered or enlarged in any way, except for routine maintenance or repair of damage or minor change permitted by the Building Inspector. Routine maintenance or repair of damage shall not include replacement of the entire sign, which shall be treated as a substantial alteration prohibited under this subsection. The changing of letters on nonconforming signs designed for changeable messages shall not be considered an alteration as long as no other change is made to the sign. 
(c)  Conformity or Removal of Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall be made to conform or shall be removed whenever a Major Project Review is sought for a property to which the nonconforming signs are appurtenant. 
4.  Maintenance of Signs. The sign must be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose fastenings, and must be maintained at all times in such safe conditions so as not to be detrimental to the public health or safety; or constitute a distraction or obstruction that may contribute to traffic accidents. 
5.  Illumination. Signs that are internally illuminated or externally illuminated or whose light source is part of the sign display, as is the case with exposed-tube, gaseous-type signs and signs with letters or decorations comprising rows of incandescent bulbs are regulated as follows: 
(a)  Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary light without causing harmful glare for motorist, pedestrians, or neighboring premises. 
(b)  Except for indicators of time and temperature, no sign or part of any sign shall either be illuminated more than one hour after the premises is closed, or 11:00 p.m., whichever is later, nor shall any illuminated sign flash, move or make noise. 
(c)  An illuminated sign is allowed to have an average face brightness not to exceed thirty (30) feet. The applicant may be required to provide an engineer's report to verify the average face brightness. 
6.  Awning Signs. An awning shall be made of solid or opaque woven material which does not consist of fluorescent or transparent material. The awning may be indirectly illuminated in a manner not distractive to motorist or pedestrian. 
7.  Off-Premise Signs. A business is allowed to advertise an off premise activity, event or business pursuant to the sign provisions required in a district or for any business. 
8.  Roof Signs. A roof sign shall not have a vertical dimension exceeding three (3) feet, shall not project above the highest part of the roof ridge line and shall not exceed the maximum permitted area for a single sign in the zoning district. 
9.  Detached Sign Setbacks. Signs shall be located within the required front yard, but not within a required side yard, rear yard or within or over any street either public or private. 
4.3.2 Regulations Applicable to Signs in Nonresidential Districts 
CCD CB NB EB VB MI GI BP 1. Single-tenant Building or Single Use Lot: a. Maximum Sign Area (sf) for a single sign, one attached and one detached for each street orientation. 16 30 16 30 16 30 30 30 b. Maximum Total Sign Area (sf). 32 60 32 60 32 60 60 60 c. Maximum Detached Sign Height (sf). 12 20 12 20 12 20 20 20 2. Multi-tenant Building or Multiple Use Lot: a. Maximum Sign Area (sf) for a single sign, attached or detached. 16 30 16 30 16 30 30 30 b. Maximum Total Sign Area (sf), one detached sign for each street orientation, attached signs not to exceed ten (10%) of the total surface area of the building facade parallel to the front yard. 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% c. Ladder Sign for each tenant or use, attached to the main permitted detached sign, Maximum Sign Area (sf). 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 d. Maximum Detached Sign Height (f). 12 20 12 20 12 20 20 20 3. Illumination: a. Maximum Sign Area (sf) for a single sign, internally illuminated sign N 12 N 12 N 12 12 12 b. Maximum Sign Area (sf) for a single sign, externally illuminated sign 16 30 16 30 16 30 30 30  
4.3.3. Signs and Murals Permitted in Addition to the Total Maximum Signage allowed in Nonresidential Districts 
CCD CB NB EB VB MI GI BP 1. Bulletin or Message Sign, one attached. Maximum Sign Area (sf). 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 2. Gloucester Harbor or waterfront orientation, one attached sign. Maximum Sign Area (sf). N 30 16 30 N 30 N N 3. Temporary Sign, allowed with permission of Building Inspector up to thirty consecutive days. Maximum Sign Area (sf). 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 4. Mural, one painted or attached to a building wall, intended for advertising. Maximum Area (sf). 32 32 32 32 32 32 32 32  
4.3.4 Regulations Applicable to Signs in Residential Districts 
R-80 R-40 RC-40 R-30 R-20 R-10 R-5 1. Maximum Sign Area (sf) for a single sign. a. Residential Use. 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 b. Non-residential Use. 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 2. Maximum Total Sign Area (sf). 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 3. Maximum Detached Sign Height (f). 12 12 12 12 12 12 12  
4.3.5. Other Permitted Signs and Devices 
All Districts 1. Federal, state, county, or municipal flags or insignias of any government, public safety, identification not to exceed one square foot. Historical markers. Yes 2. On or in rolling stock, on fuel pumps. Yes  
4.3.6 Appeals 
Appeals of the Building Inspector's decision and provisions of this section are referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4.4 - NOISE, LITTER AND SMOKE STANDARDS 
4.4.1  No activity shall be permitted in any district unless it can be demonstrated that its operation will be so conducted that the following standards will be met, or unless specifically exempted from some of the standards by Section 2.3 or elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
Where future compliance with these standards is questionable, the Building Inspector shall require a report on probable compliance, to be furnished at the expense of the applicant. Estimates of compliance shall be based upon engineering analysis, example of similar facilities or other acceptable method prepared and certified by a qualified professional engineer. Where indicated by such report, permits may be issued subject to conditions limiting operations and equipment. 
However, the Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit for an exception for activities not meeting these standards, in cases where the Board determines that no objectionable conditions are thereby created for the use of other affected properties. 
4.4.2  No noise, sound from public address or other amplification systems, vibration, odor or flashing shall be normally perceptible more than 400 feet from the premises if in the GI or BP district, more than 200 feet from the premises if in the CB, VB or EB districts, and more than forty (40) feet from the premises if in a NB, CCD or Residential District. Interferences originating in business or industrial districts shall not normally be perceptible more than 100 feet within a residential district. 
4.4.3  Cinders, dust, fumes, gases, radiation or trash, or other waste, shall be effectively confined to the premises or disposed of. 
4.4.4  Smoke density shall not exceed #2 on the Ringelmann scale for more than 10% of the time, and at no time shall exceed #3 on that scale. 
4.4.5  No process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
4.4.6  Operation at any time such that these standards are violated, subsequent to issuance of a permit on the grounds that they would be met, shall constitute a zoning violation. 
4.5 - SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 
4.5.1  The following uses shall be screened from any adjacent residential district or use or public way from which they would otherwise be visible. 
(a)  Junk Yards. 
(b)  Contractor's Yards. 
(c)  Mobile Home Park or Campground. 
4.5.2  The following uses shall be screened from any adjacent residential district or use or State Highway from which they would otherwise be visible: 
(a)  Parking area for four or more automobiles, or two or more commercial vehicles, except for retail sale of such vehicles. 
(b)  Open storage, whether as principal or accessory use of premises. 
(c)  Loading or service areas. 
4.5.3  The following uses shall be screened from any adjacent residential district or use from which they would otherwise be visible: 
(a)  Outdoor sales display area. 
(b)  Commercial outdoor recreation, such as golf driving ranges or drive-in theaters. 
4.5.4  "Screening" in this context shall mean a wall, sightly fence, or an area four feet wide or more, densely planted with trees or shrubs five feet or more in height. 
SECTION V - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

5.1 - MOBILE HOMES, TRAILERS AND CAMPERS 
5.1.1  Placement and occupancy of mobile homes, trailers and campers shall be in accordance with Section 2.3 and with the following: 
Mobile Home May be stored: In Mobile Home Park May be occupied: In mobile home park or for a period not to exceed 30 days in any 12 months, either accessory to a residence, observing yard requirements for accessory structures, or in conjunction with a carnival, blood bank or like function. Minimum space 
lease term: One month Travel Trailer Camper May be stored: In campground, or accessory to a residence, observing yard requirements for accessory structures; or in a public area designated for such use. May be occupied: In campground; or in a public area designated for such use; or for a period not to exceed 30 days in any 12 months, residence, observing accessory structures, or in conjunction with a carnival, blood bank, or like function. Minimum space 
lease term: None Boat Trailer, Horse Trailer & Utility Trailer May be stored: In a public area designated for such use; or accessory to a residence, observing yard requirements for accessory structures. May be occupied: Not applicable Minimum space 
lease term: Not applicable Boat May be stored: In a public area designated for such use; or accessory to a residence, except that no boat over twenty-five feet (25') in length may be stored within the front yard setback for a residential lot. May be occupied: Not applicable Minimum space 
lease term: Not applicable  
5.1.2  Mobile Home Parks 
Mobile home parks shall be operated only under license from the Board of Health and shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Parcel minimum area to be ten acres. 
(b)  Each plot shall be serviced with electricity, water, and sanitary drainage suitable for permanent connection. 
(c)  No mobile home shall be placed within 200 feet of a street line, or within 60 feet of any other lot line. 
5.1.3  Camp grounds shall be operated only under license from the Board of Health, and shall conform to the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Parcel minimum area to be ten acres. 
(b)  If each plot is not serviced with water and sanitary drainage, common sanitary facilities meeting all requirements of the Gloucester Board of Health shall be provided. 
(c)  No unit for overnight occupancy shall be placed within 200 feet of a street line, or 60 feet of any other lot line. 
(d)  The development shall comply with all requirements of Article VIII of the Sanitary Code for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
5.1.4  Mobile Home Parks and Camp Grounds shall be reachable via right-of-way not less than 40 feet in width. Pavement widths within a Mobile Home Park or Camp Ground shall be not less than 20 feet in width. 
5.1.5  This Ordinance shall not prohibit the owner and occupier of a residence which has been destroyed by fire or other natural holocaust from placing a mobile home for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, while the residence is being rebuilt, subject to the provisions of the State Sanitary Code. 
(Ord. of 11-13-2018(2)) 
5.2 - EARTH FILL AND REMOVAL REGULATIONS 
5.2.1 General 
The removal or filling of topsoil, borrow, rock, sod, loam, peat, humus, clay, sand or gravel shall be allowed only by special permit from the City Council in accordance with sections 5.2.2 through 5.2.8, except under the following circumstances: 
(a)  When such removal or placement is necessarily incidental to or in connection with the following: 
i)  Construction on the same site of a structure for which a building permit has been issued within the past six months; or 
ii)  For grading or otherwise improving the premises of which such building is a part; or 
iii)  For construction pursuant to an approved subdivision; 
(b)  When such removal or placement involves the removal from the premises or redistribution within the premises of less than 50 cubic yards during any twelve month period; or a greater amount if, in the opinion of the Building Inspector, the nature of the activity is such that it will not pose a detriment to the abutting properties; in no instance, however, shall the amount of material be greater than 200 cubic yards; 
(c)  When such removal or placement is in accordance with the terms of an Order of Conditions or Determination of Applicability issued by the Conservation Commission pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 131, s.40, and Article 12 of the Gloucester Code of Ordinances; 
(d)  When placement is for landscaping or gardening purposes and the material to be placed consists of peat moss, tree bark, wood chips, or other vegetative mulch, loam, or crushed stone or gravel in a walkway, driveway, or parking area. 
All fill and removal operations shall conform to the national standards for the stabilization of slopes and materials (Soil & Water Conservation guidelines), a copy of which is available in the office of the Community Development Department and the Building Inspector's Office. 
5.2.2 Permit from the City Council 
Written application for a Special Permit must be made to the City Council. The following shall be conditions for such issuance: 
(a)  The application shall be accompanied by a plan describing the premises and the proposed operation. If involving more than three acres or 1,000 cubic yards, the plan shall be prepared by a registered Land Surveyor or Engineer, showing all man-made features, property lines, names and addresses of all abutters, topography at 5 foot contour intervals of the site and all land within 100 feet of the area from which the above material is to be removed, together with the grades below which no excavation shall take place, and above which no filling shall take place, and the proposed cover vegetation and trees. The application shall also be accompanied by a soils engineering report. 
(b)  A performance bond in an amount determined by the City Council has been posted in the name of the City assuring satisfactory performance in the fulfillment of the requirements of this Ordinance and such other conditions as the City Council may impose as conditions to the issuance of its permit. 
(c)  Before granting a permit, the City Council shall give due consideration to the location of the proposed earth removal or fill operation, to the general character of the neighborhood surrounding such location and to the general safety of the public on the public ways in the vicinity. 
5.2.3 Fill 
Temporary stockpiling of fill may be allowed prior to the issuance of a special permit, upon the finding of the Building Inspector that such temporary stockpiling will not be detrimental to the abutting properties; in no instance, however, will such stockpiling be allowed for a period exceeding ninety (90) days. 
During fill operations no slope shall exceed one (1) foot vertical rise to one and one-half foot horizontal distance or the natural angle of repose of the material in a dry state, whichever is the lower, except undisturbed ledge. Provision shall be made for safe drainage of water, and for prevention of wind or water erosion carrying material onto adjoining properties. 
5.2.4 Removal 
Removal operations shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Earth removal shall take place at the grades specified on the plan accompanying the permit application. 
(b)  During removal operations no slope shall exceed one (1) foot vertical rise to one and one-half foot horizontal distance or the natural angle of repose of the material in a dry state, whichever is the lower, except undisturbed ledge. 
(c)  Provision shall be made for safe drainage of water, and for prevention of wind or water erosion carrying material onto adjoining properties. 
(d)  Soil shall not be disturbed within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the premises, excepting at the conclusion of operations if required in order to improve the overall grading. 
(e)  All trucking routes and methods will be subject to approval by the Chief of Police. 
(f)  All roads leading from earth removal areas to City streets shall be treated with oil, stone, or other suitable material to reduce dust and mud for a distance of 200 feet from said street. Roads leading from earth removal areas to City streets shall be constructed with a curve so as to help screen the operation from view. 
5.2.5 Restoration 
Forthwith following the expiration or withdrawal of a permit, or upon voluntary cessation of operations, or upon completion of removal in a substantial area, that entire area shall be restored as follows: 
(a)  All land shall be so graded that no slope exceeds one (1) foot vertical rise in three (3) feet horizontal distance and shall be so graded as to safely provide for drainage without erosion. 
(b)  All boulders larger than one-half cubic yard shall be removed or buried. 
(c)  The entire area excepting exposed ledge rock shall be covered with not less than four (4) inches of good quality loam, which shall be planted with cover vegetation adequate to prevent soil erosion, using either grasses or ground cover, depending upon conditions. 
(d)  Bond shall not be released until sufficient time has lapsed to ascertain that the vegetation planted has successfully been established and that drainage is satisfactory. 
5.2.6 Additional Conditions 
The City Council may set conditions in addition to the above, including but not limited to: duration of the permit, hours of the day during which removal may take place, hours during which vehicles may leave the premises, and trees to be planted. 
5.2.7 Renewal or Renovation of Permit 
Permits will be issued for one year periods only, but a permit may be renewed upon application without a public hearing. Prior to renewal, inspection of the premises shall be made by the Building Inspector to determine that the provisions of this Ordinance are being complied with. The City Council, after hearing and proof of violation of this Ordinance, shall withdraw the permit, after which the operation shall be discontinued and the area restored in accordance with Section 5.2.5. 
5.2.8 Removal Activities Prior to this Ordinance 
Earth removal activities in lawful operation at the time this Ordinance is adopted may continue until abandoned for more than 12 consecutive months, provided that within 60 days after the effective date of this Ordinance the owners of such premises shall submit to the City Council a plan and application as required in Section 5.2.2. 
5.3 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
Customary home occupations are permitted if conforming to the following conditions: 
5.3.1  No more than 25% of the floor area of the residence shall be used for the purpose of the home occupation or the professional use. 
5.3.2  Not more than one person, not a member of the household, shall be employed on the premises in the home occupation. 
5.3.3  There shall be no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation except for an identification sign not in excess of two (2) square feet in area, nor shall there be any other variation from the residential character of the principal building. 
5.3.4  No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced. (See Section 4.4) 
5.3.5  Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally expected in a residential neighborhood. 
5.3.6  Parking generated shall be accommodated off-street, other than in a required front yard. 
5.3.7  A Special Permit shall be required and may be issued only by the Zoning Board of Appeals after Public Hearing and with such restrictions as the Board deems proper. 
5.4 - DUMPING AND FILLING 
No garbage, rubbish, refuse or other waste material shall be dumped or incinerated in any District, home incineration excepted, and no land shall be used as a dump or fill area, without authorization for any use covered by the provisions of Section 150A of Chapter III of the General Laws, as inserted by Chapter 310 of the Acts of 1955, with respect to any site unless it has been assigned by the Board of Health to such use in accordance with the provisions of said Section. 
5.5 - LOWLAND REQUIREMENTS 
5.5.1  Sections 5.5.2 and 5.5.3 shall not apply to lands bordering Gloucester Harbor north and east of a line from the mouth of Blynman Canal to the intersection of Farrington Avenue and Eastern Point Boulevard. 
5.5.2  No building permit for a principal building shall be issued for construction on land less than 10 feet elevation above U.S.G.S datum except on approval of a Special Permit for an exception by the City Council. Such Special Permit shall be issued only if it is demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed development will pose no hazard to the health or safety of the occupants thereof. 
5.5.3  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following are presumed to be hazardous to health or safety: 
(a)  Floor level of any structure for human occupancy less than 12 feet elevation. 
(b)  Individual sewage disposal systems subject to inundation in the event of coastal flooding to ten feet elevation. 
(c)  Methods of filling or excavation subject to displacement by coastal flooding to ten feet elevation. 
(d)  Water supplies subject to interruption or contamination in the event of coastal flooding to ten feet elevation. 
5.5.4  Reserved. 
(Adopted 4-25-1970; amended 10-26-1999; Ord. of 8-27-2013(1)) 
5.6 - HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY 
On Special Permit from the City Council, the requirements of this Ordinance may be reduced as follows for multi-family dwellings in which two-thirds or more of the units are reserved through contract, covenant or other binding legal device for occupancy by persons 62 years or older, and where construction provides features specifically designed for the elderly, including all public areas and entrances and at least 5% of all units designed to accommodate wheel chairs and provision of special function rooms such as clinics or social rooms. Reductions shall apply only to units having two or fewer bedrooms, equipped with bathtub and toilet grab bars, emergency signals, out-swinging doors and other features for the elderly. 
5.6.1  Parking requirements per elderly dwelling unit may be reduced to not less than one-third that otherwise required by Section 4.1. 
5.6.2  Required lot area and open space shall be reduced to (1 - .65 E/T) times that required by Section 3.2, where E is the number of dwelling units reserved and equipped for the elderly and T the number of dwelling units. 
5.7 - MAJOR PROJECTS 
5.7.1 Applicability 
Any application for a multi-family dwelling is required on a Special Permit and involving 21 or more bedrooms, or 11 or more dwelling units, or if abutting a parcel for which a permit for multi-family dwelling has been issued in the past 36 months, shall be considered a Major Project, and shall comply with all requirements below. Any application for a hotel, motel, or motor inn resulting in 30 or more guest units (existing plus proposed) shall also be considered a Major Project, and shall comply with all requirements below. A Shopping Center (as defined herein) shall be considered a Major Project and shall comply with all requirements below. Assisted Living projects of 11 dwelling units or greater shall be considered a Major Project and shall comply with all requirements in Section 5.7 [except 5.7.5(f)] and Section 5.14. 
A Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center shall be considered a Major Project and shall comply with all requirements as set forth in Section 5.7 pertaining to Major Projects. 
5.7.2 Application 
Major Project applications shall be submitted in conformance with the requirements of Section 1.5.3. 
(a)  In addition to the information required under that Section, the developer shall submit photographs of the premises in relation to adjoining structures and to natural features, and for projects involving 50 or more dwelling units a simple block model of proposed buildings and topography. For projects not to be connected to municipal sewerage, percolation test reports shall be submitted. Required plans shall have been prepared by a registered Engineer, bear their respective seals and signatures, and also bear certifications by each that the materials were prepared by them or under their supervision for the site in question, and comply with all state statutes and local ordinances and regulations. Eight copies of the application and plans shall be submitted, plus a reproducible copy of the site plan. 
5.7.3 Departmental Reviews 
Forthwith upon their receipt, one copy of Major Project applications and plans submitted to the City Clerk for approval shall be transmitted by the City Clerk to the following for their review and report: 
City Building Department Fire Department Conservation Commission Public Works Department Engineering Department Public Health Department  
The above shall report in writing to the Council regarding compliance of the proposal to existing state statutes and local rules, regulations, and ordinances, and regarding relationship of the proposal to matters within the Department or Commission's area of concern. No Special Permit shall be decided upon within twenty-one days of forwarding such plans without receipt of an advisory report thereon from all of the above Departments or Commissions. 
5.7.4 Planning Board Review 
Forthwith upon their receipt, one copy of Major Project applications and plans submitted to the City Council for approval shall be transmitted by the City Clerk to the Planning Board for their review and report regarding the Special Permit criteria below. The Planning Board may, when they deem it advisable, engage professional assistance, at the applicant's expense, for such review and report. 
No Special Permit shall be decided upon within thirty-five (35) days of forwarding such plans without receipt of an advisory report thereon from the Planning Board. The Planning Board may require of the developer submission of sufficient data on hydrology, traffic, or other environmental impacts to allow determination of compliance with the Special Permit criteria of Sections 1.8.3 and 1.8.4. 
5.7.5 Special Permit Criteria 
The following criteria shall be considered as guidelines by the Council in addition to those of Sections 1.8.3 and 1.8.4 in acting upon Major Projects: 
(a)  Major Projects should have access from an arterial or collector street via ways serving not more than ten single-family homes. 
(b)  Where not connected to municipal sewerage, assisted living facilities, multi-family or hotel, motel or motor inn major projects should be so located that there is minimal danger of pollution, evidenced by reasonable grades at leaching areas, a percolation rate of ten minutes per inch drop or less, maximum ground water table at least four feet below the bottom of the disposal field, and location not less than 100 horizontal feet distant from the bank of any pond, stream, river, swamp, or marsh or from the Mean High Water line of adjoining tidal waters. All projects must comply with Gloucester Board of Health regulations and meet Massachusetts Title V Requirements. 
(c)  The site plan shall include the following: Access, drainage and utilities serving each structure meet functional standards equivalent to those established in the Gloucester Planning Board's adopted Subdivision Regulations; access via minor streets servicing single-family homes is avoided; parking areas are screened from public ways by building location, grading, or screening; lighting of parking areas avoids glare on adjoining properties; egress does not require backing onto any public way; major topographic changes or removal of existing trees are avoided. 
(d)  All other requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and of all applicable building codes must have been satisfied. Specific attention is drawn to the requirements of the Subdivision Control Law, and the necessity of obtaining occupancy permits prior to occupancy of any building or portion thereof. 
(e)  Where a multi-family residential or assisted living facility use is proposed in a non-residential district a Special Permit will only be granted if the Council finds that: 
1.  The public good will be served; 
2.  The non-residentially zoned area would not be adversely affected; and, 
3.  That the uses permitted in the zone would not be noxious to the multi-family or assisted living use. 
(f)  The following criteria, in addition to the above, shall apply to Shopping Centers: 
1.  Shopping Centers should be so located that not more than ten residential structures existing at the time of application shall be within 300 feet of the proposed buildings, parking areas, and access drives. 
2.  Shopping Centers should be so located that annual average daily traffic is not increased 50% or more above current levels at any point more than 1000 feet from an expressway interchange, current levels as determined by the Gloucester Department of Public Works; and should be so located that resultant traffic is not above the capacity of roads and interchanges at level of service "C" at any point within one (1) mile of the premises using definitions and methods of estimation as outlined by the Highway Research Board Highway Capacity Manual, 1935, or later editions. 
3.  No part of any parking area or structure of a Shopping Center shall be built within 100 feet of the right-of-way line of Route 128 (but not ramps) or within 30 feet* of any other street. At least 75% of these reserved areas shall be planted or retained in vegetative cover. *Except in CB district, none required. 
4.  Storm water leaching (recharge) basins, retention basins, or other devices as necessary should be employed in order that peak flows through existing drainage structures or channels are not in a 15 year storm increased more than 15% above current flows or caused to exceed design capacity of structures or channel capacity of streams or to cause flooding. 
5.  No egress onto an existing street shall be within 250 feet (centerline to centerline) of any other egress on the same side of street is serving 20 or more parking spaces or within 250 feet of the nearest point of an expressway interchange right-of-way or within 100 feet of the intersection of sidelines of intersecting streets. Egressing vehicles should have at least 400 feet visibility in each travel direction. 
6.  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall not be higher than 20 feet. No light overspill shall be bright enough to create discernible shadows off the premises. 
7.  All banks exceeding 15 degrees in slope resulting from site grading shall either be retained with a non-bituminous retaining wall, or covered with loam to a depth of four inches and planted with vegetative cover reasonably sufficient to initially prevent erosion. 
8.  The requirements of Section 5.2 Earth Removal Regulations and Section 5.5 Lowlands Requirements shall be met. 
9.  Parking shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.1 Off-Street Parking. 
10.  All open storage, parking, and loading or service areas shall be screened in accordance with the requirements in Section 4.5. 
11.  Shopping Center parking areas shall contain or be bordered within five feet by a least one tree per eight cars, trees to be of two inch caliper or larger, and if within the parking area to be planted in curbed soil plots allowing not less than 36 square feet of unpaved soil area per tree. 
12.  On the shopping center premises there shall be not more than one freestanding sign, plus not more than one building sign per business. All signs must comply with the requirements of Section 4.3. No sign shall be located within required setbacks from Route 128. 
(g)  In addition to the above-stated criteria, except 5.7.5(f), the following criteria shall apply to Assisted Living Facilities: 
1.  Twenty (20)% of the units of all assisted living facilities, twenty (20) units or greater in size, shall be designated for low to moderate income persons. Low and moderate income persons shall be defined by the most recent income guidelines established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
2.  The developer/manager of the Facility shall annually certify to the Gloucester Community Development Director that the income of the residents meets the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development qualifications. 
At the discretion of the SPGA, this requirement will be fulfilled in one of the following ways: 
(A)  20% of the units on-site shall be designated for low to moderate income persons; 
(B)  The equivalent value of these units will provide for housing services for low to moderate income persons offsite. 
3.  Gloucester residents or their relatives shall be given priority in admission so long as all federal, state or local rules, laws, regulations, or ordinances are satisfied. 
4.  Parking Requirements: One off-street parking space for every two dwelling units, one visitor parking space for every ten units, plus one parking space for each two hundred square feet of nonresidential area. 
5.  Assisted Living Residences shall comply with the dimensional requirements as shown in Sections 2.3.1 Residential Use No. 19 and 3.2.5 Dimensional Requirements for ALR. 
5.7.6 Council Action 
Indication of City Council approval shall be placed upon approved Special Permits and upon all supporting documentation on which such approval is based. The Special Permit shall be made conditional upon project execution not deviating from supporting documentation without explicit Council authorization, which may be granted without further public hearing if deviations are minor. 
(Adopted [amended} 6-20-2000; Ord. of 5-10-2016(1)) 
5.8 - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
5.8.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to facilitate individual detailed review of development proposals which have an impact on the natural or built environment of the City in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community; to ensure adequate parking, safe and accessible pedestrian and vehicular circulation; and to minimize traffic impact on city streets. 
5.8.2 Applicability 
The following types of activities and uses require site plan review by the Planning Board: 
A)  Any new industrial or commercial construction or expansion over two thousand (2,000) gross square feet, or any new or expanded industrial or commercial use which requires more than five (5) additional parking spaces; 
B)  In the MI district and new industrial or commercial projects or additions, change of use, or project requiring a special permit or variance. 
C)  The construction or creation of any new parking lot or the expansion, or redesign of any existing parking lot. 
D)  Driveways in residential districts, which propose more than one curb cut. 
5.8.3 Pre-Application 
Applicants are invited to submit a pre-application sketch of proposed projects to the Planning Division and are encouraged to schedule a pre-application meeting with the Planning Director and the Inspector of Buildings. 
5.8.4 Procedures 
Applicants for site plan approval shall submit five (5) copies of the site plan and a digital copy including any supporting materials, to the Planning Board. Application materials shall be distributed to City departments their review and comment. The Planning Board shall review and act upon the site plan at a regularly scheduled meeting within forty five (45) days of the meeting after a project appears on a Planning Board agenda. The Planning Board may impose such conditions as may be deemed appropriate. The decision of the Planning Board shall be a vote of a majority of a quorum of the Planning Board. A written decision reflecting the vote of the Planning Board shall be filed with the City Clerk within 14 days of the vote. 
No building permit or occupancy permit, for activities requiring site plan approval, shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings without the written approval of the site plan by the Planning Board. Any work done in deviation from an approved site plan shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Approval of a site plan pursuant to Section 5.8 et seq. shall be in addition to any required special permit or other forms of relief as required by the Zoning Ordinance. 
5.8.4.1  Relation of Site Plan Approval to Applications for Special Permit or Variance Applications for projects requiring special permit or variance which also requires site plan approval, shall be accompanied by an approved site plan. In the alternative, any special permit or variance granted also requiring site plan approval shall contain the following condition: 
"The work described herein requires the approval of a site plan by the Gloucester Planning Board pursuant to Section 5.8 of the Zoning Ordinance. Any conditions imposed in such site plan approval shall be incorporated herein by reference." 
5.8.4.2  Where the Planning Board approves a site plan with conditions, and said approved site plan accompanies a special permit or variance application to the City Council or Zoning Board of Appeals, the conditions imposed by the Planning Board shall be incorporated into the issuance, if any, of a special permit or variance. 
5.8.4.3  Where the Planning Board shall consolidate its site plan review with special permit procedures including but not limited to Major Project reviews. 
5.8.4.4  The applicant may request, and the Planning Board may grant by majority vote, an extension of the time limits set forth herein. 
5.8.4.5  No deviation from an approved site plan shall be permitted without approval of modifications by vote of the Planning Board. 
5.8.4.6  Site plan approval does not constitute a certification that the proposed plan conforms to applicable zoning regulations, wetland regulations and/or any other City, State or Federal requirements that must be obtained prior to implementation of the elements of the site plan. 
5.8.5 Preparation of Plans 
Site Plans shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. Plans shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer, Registered Land Surveyor, Architect, or Landscape Architect, as appropriate. Dimensions and scales shall be adequate to determine that all requirements are met and to make a complete analysis and evaluation of the proposal. All plans shall have a minimum scale of 1"-40'. 
5.8.5.1  Plan Contents. Plan sheets prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet or such other scale as may be approved by the Planning Board. Composite plans may be submitted provided details can be easily analyzed. In the case of change of use permits with limited site alterations, the required submission of one or more plans may be waived by the Planning Board upon recommendation by City department staff. Minimum plan requirements shall be outlined on the Site Plan Review Application. The plans to be submitted are as follows: 
(A)  Site layout plan, which shall contain the boundaries of the lot(s) in the proposed development, proposed structures, general circulation plan for vehicles and pedestrians, drive-thru windows, curb cut locations, parking, fences, walls, walkways, outdoor lighting including proposed fixtures, loading facilities, solid waste storage locations, and areas for snow storage after plowing. The plan shall contain an inset locus plan, at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, showing the entire project and its relation to existing areas, buildings and roads for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from the project boundaries or such other distance as may be approved or required by the Planning Board. 
(B)  Topography and drainage plan, which shall contain the existing and proposed final topography at two-foot intervals and plans for handling storm water runoff drainage. 
(C)  Utility plan, which shall include all facilities for refuse and sewerage disposal or storage of all these wastes, the location of all hydrants, fire alarm and firefighting facilities on and adjacent to the site, all proposed recreational facilities and open space areas, and all wetlands including floodplain areas. 
(D)  Architectural plan, which shall include the ground floor plan, proposed exterior building materials, treatments and colors and architectural elevations of all proposed buildings and a color rendering where necessary to determine the proposal's affect on the visual environment. Such plan shall also include the design of any freestanding signs. 
(E)  Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing tree lines as well as those tree lines to remain, and all proposed landscape features and improvements including screening, planting areas with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree, and including proposed erosion control measures during construction. 
(F)  Lighting plan, showing the location and orientation of all existing and proposed exterior lighting, including building and ground lighting. The plan shall note the height, initial foot-candle readings on the ground and the types of fixtures to be used. 
5.8.5.2  The site plan shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the estimated time required to complete the proposed project and any and all phases thereof. There shall be submitted a written estimate, showing in detail the costs of all site improvements planned. 
5.8.5.3  A written summary of the contemplated projects shall be submitted with the site plan indicating, where appropriate, the number of dwelling units to be built and the acreage in residential use, the evidence of compliance with parking and off-street loading requirements, the forms of ownership contemplated for the property and a summary of the provisions of any ownership or maintenance thereof, identification of all land that will become common or public land or provide public access, and any other evidence necessary to indicate compliance with this ordinance. 
5.8.5.4  The site plan shall be accompanied by drainage calculations by a registered professional engineer as well as wetland delineations, if applicable. Water utilities, sewer infrastructure and stormwater drainage shall be design to conform to Gloucester Subdivision Rules and Regulations and standards of the Department of Public Works. 
5.8.5.5  Certification that the proposal is in compliance with the provisions, if applicable, of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Massachusetts Architectural Barriers Board. 
5.8.6 Waivers 
The Planning Board may, upon written request of the applicant and recommendation by City department staff, waive any of the submittal or technical requirements of Section 5.8.5 where the project involves relatively simple development plans. 
5.8.7 Review Guidelines and Approval 
Site Plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the plan meets the following objectives. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the applicant to promote these objectives. New building construction or other site alteration shall be designed in the Site Plan, after considering the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design of building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of the development, so as follows: 
A)  A reasonable effort shall be made to conserve and protect natural features that are of some lasting benefit to the site, it environs and the community at large. 
B)  Slopes, which exceed ten (10%) percent, shall be protected by appropriate measures against erosion, runoff, and unstable soil, trees and rocks. Measures shall be taken to stabilize the land surface from unnecessary disruption. Such stabilization measures shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
C)  The placement of buildings, structures, fences, lighting, signs, and fixtures on each site shall not interfere with traffic circulation, safety, appropriate use and enjoyment of adjacent properties. Adequate illumination shall be provided to parking lots and other areas for vehicular and pedestrian circulation. All illumination shall be directed and/or shielded so as not to shine beyond the perimeter of the site or interfere with traffic. 
D)  All areas designed for vehicular use shall be paved with a minimum of either a three (3") inch bituminous asphalt concrete, a six (6") inch Portland cement concrete pavement, or other surface, such as brick, cobblestone or gravel, as approved by the Department of Public Works. 
E)  All parking spaces shall be arranged and clearly marked in accordance with the design and layout standards contained in Section 4.14 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
F)  All utility service transmission systems, including but not limited to water, sewer, natural gas, electrical and telephone lines, shall, whenever practicable, be placed underground. 
G)  All surface water runoff from structures and impervious surfaces shall be disposed of on site; but in no case shall surface water drainage be across sidewalks or public or private ways. In no case shall surface water runoff be drained directly into wetlands or water bodies. Drainage systems shall be designed to minimize the discharge of pollutants by providing appropriately designed vegetated drainage channels and sedimentation basins that allow for adequate settling of suspended solids and maximum infiltration. Dry wells, leaching pits and other similar drainage structures may be used only where other methods are not practicable. Oil, grease, and sediments traps to facilitate removal of contaminants shall precede all such drainage structures. All calculations shall be for a one hundred (100) year storm. Drainage design shall be in accordance with Department of Public Works regulations as amended. 
H)  In the MI district development proposals shall comply with the standards and requirements with regard to the placement and dimensions of structures as regulated by G.L. c.91 and 310 CMR 9.00 et seq. 
I)  Pedestrian safety and vehicular safety to and from the site shall be maximized provided it does not interfere with the proposed use. 
J)  Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places. 
K)  Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
L)  Promote orderly and reasonable internal circulation within the site so as to protect public safety and not unreasonably interfere with access to a public way or circulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public way. 
5.8.8 Lapse 
Site plan approval shall lapse after one year from the final approval if a substantial use in accordance with such approved plans has not commenced except for good cause. Such approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the Planning Board upon the written request of the applicant, within this one year period. 
5.8.9 Regulations 
The Planning Board may adopt, and from time to time amend, reasonable regulations for the administration of this Site Plan ordinance. 
5.8.10 Fee 
The Planning Board may, from time to time, adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for site plan review. 
5.8.11 Appeal 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board rendered pursuant to section 5.8 may appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in G.L. c. 40A section 8. 
(Ord. of 3-30-2010(4)) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 3-30-2010(4), repealed § 5.8, in its entirety and enacted a new § 5.8 to read as set out herein. Former § 5.8 pertained to freight, transportation terminal facilities and was derived from original code. 
5.9 - CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 
5.9.1 Purpose 
The cluster development is intended to accomplish all of the following: 
(a)  Encourage the efficient and creative use of land in harmony with its natural features; 
(b)  Minimize the consumption of open space by limiting the network of streets and utilities; 
(c)  Preserve natural topography and wooded areas within developed areas; 
(d)  Provide usable open space and, where appropriate, recreational facilities; 
(e)  Preserve the visual character of the neighborhood; 
(f)  Ensure high-quality design and site planning of developments to enhance the neighborhoods in which they occur and the city as a whole; 
(g)  Preserve sites and structures of historical importance. 
5.9.2 Applicability 
The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a Cluster Development on a parcel of land of a size equivalent to five times the minimum lot size in the District, but no less than three acres of contiguous land not separated by a roadway or utility easement at the time of application, in the R-80, R-40, RC-40, R-30, R-20 and R-10 residential districts, subject to Section 5.11 and the following regulations and conditions. 
5.9.3 Preliminary Cluster Development Plan 
5.9.3.1 Submittal Requirements 
To facilitate the review process, applicants are encouraged to submit a Preliminary Cluster Development Plan and application to the Planning Board. Such submittal shall include the following information: 
(a)  A plan prepared in accordance with the requirements for a preliminary subdivision plan, as described in Section 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, whether or not the development constitutes a subdivision, and shall include proposed location, bulk, and height of all proposed buildings and structures. 
(b)  An evaluation of the open space proposed within the cluster, with respect to size, shape, location, natural resource value and accessibility by residents of the city or of the cluster. 
5.9.3.2 Review By Other Boards 
Upon its receipt of the Preliminary Cluster Development Plan, the Planning Board shall transmit one copy each to the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Fire Department, and the Building Inspector for review and comment. 
5.9.3.3 Approval or Disapproval 
The Board shall act on the Preliminary Cluster Development Plan within forty-five (45) days of the date of submission. The Board may approve the Plan, with or without modification, or disapprove it, in accordance with section 3.1.4 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester. 
5.9.4 Definitive Cluster Development Plan 
5.9.4.1 Submittal Requirements 
An applicant seeking approval of a Definitive Cluster Development shall submit a plan and application to the Planning Board. Such submittal shall include the following: 
(a)  A plan prepared in accordance with the requirements for a definitive subdivision plan, as described in Section 3.2.2, 3.2.3, and 3.2.4 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, whether or not the development constitutes a subdivision, and shall include proposed location, bulk, and height of all proposed buildings and structures. 
(b)  An evaluation of the open space proposed within the cluster, with respect to size, shape, location, natural resource value and accessibility by residents of the city or of the cluster. 
(c)  All materials required by Section 3.2.1 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester. 
(d)  A program for the permanent maintenance of all open space. 
(e)  A development schedule which, at minimum, describes the phases of construction, proposed commencement dates, and the anticipated completion date for all road and utility improvements. 
5.9.4.2 Review By Board of Health 
At the time of filing the Definitive Cluster Development Plan, the applicant shall also file two copies of the Plan with the Board of Health. In accordance with the requirements of Section 3.3 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, the Board of Health shall, within 45 days of the Plan's filing, report to the Planning Board its approval or disapproval of the Plan. 
5.9.4.3 Review By Other City Officials 
The Planning Board shall transmit copies of the Definitive Cluster Development Plan to the Department of Public Works, Fire Department, Building Inspector, and the Conservation Commission, in accordance with section 3.4 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester. 
5.9.4.4 Approval or Disapproval 
The Board shall hold a public hearing and act on the Definitive Cluster Development Plan within ninety (90) days of the date of submission, or within one hundred thirty-five (135) days if such Plan did not properly evolve from a Preliminary Cluster Development Plan. The Board may approve the Plan, with or without modification, or disapprove it, in accordance with Sections 3.5 and 3.6 of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester. 
5.9.5 Design Criteria 
(a)  The Planning Board, in order to grant a special permit for a Cluster Development, must find that the proposed design and layout of the development is superior to a conventional one in preserving open space for conservation and recreation; in preserving natural features of the land; and in allowing more efficient provision of streets, utilities and other public services. 
(b)  In its consideration of a Cluster Development, the Planning Board shall give particular attention to, and shall use as a basis for its decision, all of the following: 
1.  Lots, streets, off-street parking, sidewalks, pathways and buildings which achieve the harmonious integration of the proposed development with surrounding properties; 
2.  The overall layout and design that achieves the best possible relationship between the proposed development and the land; 
3.  Appropriately sized and configured open spaces for active or passive recreation; 
4.  Protection of natural features such as streams, mature trees or clusters of trees, rock outcrops, bluffs, slopes, and historic or archeological features; 
5.  Provision of access to open spaces for the physically handicapped, elderly, and children; 
6.  Use of open spaces for preserving, enhancing, or providing scenic vistas; 
7.  Preservation and protection of historic resources; 
8.  Adequacy of provisions for public safety, protection from fire and flood, and maintenance of public facilities, streets, utilities, and open space. 
5.9.6 Allowable Uses 
A Cluster Development may include any residential use permitted in that zoning district. The Planning Board may grant special permits required for any such structures located in a Cluster Development. These structures may be situated on separate lots, or situated on a single lot together with open space. Lots created under this provision with more than one dwelling unit under separate ownership thereon shall be in compliance with applicable M.G.L. c. 183A, or with the charter and by-laws of a land trust whose purpose is the provision of affordable housing. Cluster Developments that do not involve the subdivision of land shall comply with all of the design criteria and improvement requirements of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, MA. 
5.9.7 Development Density 
(a)  The maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a Cluster Development shall be derived by dividing 90% of the Applicable Land Area by 90% of the required minimum lot area in that district. Applicable Land Area equals the total area encompassed by the Cluster Development, minus land defined as resource areas in Article 12 of the Gloucester Code of Ordinances, and minus land otherwise prohibited from development by other local ordinances or regulations which shall not include any protion of the buffer zone as defined in Article 12 of the Gloucester Code of Ordinances. Applicable Land Area shall be calculated by a registered land supveyor. Such density calculation shall not apply to approved Cluster Development Plans filed within seven (7) months prior to the adoption of this amendment. 
(b)  Where the Cluster Development includes more than one ownership and/or lies in more than one district, the number of units allowed shall be calculated as above for each district and summed to give an overall allowable total, which may be located on the plan without respect to allowable subtotals by district or ownership areas. 
5.9.8 Density Bonus 
The Planning Board may authorize an increase in lots or dwelling units up to 20% above that allowed under Section 5.9.7 of this Ordinance, if either of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The applicant deeds to the city or restricts under a conservation restriction a portion of the Applicable Land Area, if that land is determined by the Planning Board to be of critical importance for the public good. 
(b)  The applicant sets aside a portion of the dwelling units on the site as affordable units, as defined by Section 5.11.4 of this Ordinance. For each affordable unit the applicant shall receive a density bonus of one added lot or dwelling unit for each 1.5 permanently affordable dwelling units built. 
5.9.9 Dimensional Requirements 
(a)  The minimum size of lots in a Cluster Development shall be 10,000 square feet for a single or two-family house, and 20,000 square feet for a multi-family dwelling. 
(b)  The Planning Board may waive up to fifty percent of the minimum requirements for frontage and/or yard requirements of each lot in the Cluster Development in order to achieve maximum open space area. 
(c)  More than one single or two-family dwellings may be located on a lot in a Cluster Development, provided that the minimum lot area per dwelling unit is no less than 10,000 square feet. 
(d)  Clusters of housing shall contain no more than ten single-family or two-family dwellings, and no more than four multi-family dwellings. 
(e)  The minimum width of open space between clusters of dwellings, and between the Cluster Development and adjacent property, shall be fifty feet in each case. 
(f)  Except as noted above, each lot in a Cluster Development shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the district within which it is located. 
5.9.10 Common Open Space 
(a)  Common open space is that land so designated by the applicant and approved by the Planning Board. 
(b)  Common open space shall comprise not less than 30% of the Applicable Land Area within the Development Plan. 
(c)  Such open space may be in one or more parcels of a size and shape appropriate for its intended use as determined by the Planning Board and shall be within easy access to its intended users. 
(d)  Common open space land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
1.  Conservancy in its natural, undisturbed state. At least fifty percent of the common open space must be used in this manner; 
2.  grazing and agriculture; 
3.  walking, horseback riding and/or bicycle riding; 
4.  playing fields and courts; 
5.  swimming pools and other recreational facilities and structures for the use of the owners of the building lots; or 
6.  any combination of the above. 
7.  structures and parking specifically for the maintenance and use of the open space, provided that they occupy no more than five percent of said open space. 
(e)  The common open space shall be conveyed in one of the following ways, as approved by the Board: 
1.  To a corporation or trust comprising a homeowners association whose membership includes the owners of all lots or units contained in the development. The developer shall include in the deed to owners of individual lots beneficial rights in said open land, and shall grant a conservation restriction to the city of Gloucester over such land to insure that it be kept in an open state and not be built upon for residential use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways. 
2.  To a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space. The developer or non-profit organization shall grant a conservation restriction as set out above. 
3.  To the city for park or open space use, subject to the approval of the City Council, for management by the Conservation Commission, with a trust clause insuring that it be maintained as open space. 
(f)  The removal of material, including groundwater, minerals and trees over four inches basal diameter, except as necessary to comply with conditions of the Planning Board's approval, is prohibited. 
5.9.11 Future Change 
Any Cluster Development approved by the Planning Board under the provisions of this Section shall incorporate by reference the Cluster Development Plan and development schedule submitted by the developer with application. Minor amendments to such Cluster Development may be approved by the Planning Board, upon application and for good cause shown, but without necessity of public hearing; provided, however, that any of the following shall be considered a major amendment, and shall be acted upon only under the procedures applicable to the initial approval for a Cluster Development: 
(a)  Reduction in the amount or change in the use of common open space, or any change in the general location of the common open space as provided in the permit; or 
(b)  Any change in the general layout of the ways as provided in the permit; or 
(c)  Any increase in the number of lots or dwelling units as provided in the permit; or 
(d)  Altering the location of any building or structure by more than ten feet. 
5.9.12 Changes Not Permitted 
Lots and dwelling units created under this provision shall not be modified in any manner other than as indicated in Section 5.9.11. 
(Adopted May 27, 1986; amended December 3, 1991; August 22, 2006) 
5.10 - WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT 
5.10.1 Purpose of District 
To promote the health, safety and welfare of the community by protecting and preserving the surface and groundwater resources of the City from any use of land or buildings which may reduce the quality of its water resources. 
5.10.2 Scope of Authority 
The Watershed Protection Overlay District is considered as overlaying other zoning districts. Uses not permitted in the portions of the districts so overlaid shall also be prohibited in this district. 
This district does not limit the existing authority of the Conservation Commission pursuant to Section 40 of Chapter 131 of the General Laws and Article 12 of the Local Code of Ordinances. 
5.10.3 Establishment and Definition of District 
(a)  The Watershed Protection Overlay District includes all lands lying adjacent to water courses and surface water bodies which contribute to the city's water supply, and which create the catchment or drainage areas of such water courses and bodies, as part of their natural drainage system. The map defining the Watershed Protection Overlay District boundaries, entitled "Public Water Supply Watershed Boundary Maps, City of Gloucester" drawn at a scale of 1 inch to 100 feet, are hereby adopted by the City Council and are incorporated herein by reference and are on file in the City Planning Office. 
(b)  Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden of proof shall be upon the owner of the land in question to show where they should properly be located. If the property owner can prove, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, the Board of Health, and the City Engineer, that his property does not drain into the watershed of the public water supply, then this district shall not apply. At the request of the owner the city may engage a geologist, hydrologist or other qualified professional to determine more accurately the location and extent of a watershed or recharge area, and may charge the owner for all or part of the cost of the investigation. 
5.10.4 Prohibited Uses 
The following land uses, activities, devices, structures, and/or substances are prohibited within the Watershed Protection Overlay District: 
(a)  Dry cleaning establishments. 
(b)  Junk and salvage yards. 
(c)  Car washes, except when located on public water and sewer. 
(d)  Boat and motor vehicle service, storage and repair establishments. 
(e)  Any industrial use that discharges processed wastewater. 
(f)  Commercial removal or relocation of earth materials, including but not limited to sand, gravel, topsoil, metallic ores, or bedrock. 
(g)  Any animal feedlots or pastures less than 5 acres in size lying within 100 feet of the center line of all brooks, streams and rivers or within 100 feet of the normal highwater line of lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps and bogs. 
(h)  Landfills and the storage of salt and road de-icing chemicals. 
(i)  The outdoor storage of fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides and outdoor uncovered storage of manure. 
(j)  Burial in any cemetery or other place within 100 feet of the high water mark of a course of public water supply or tributary thereto. Lands shall not be taken or used for cemetery purposes until a plan and sufficient description of the lands is presented to the DEQE and until such taking or use is expressly approved in writing by the DEQE. 
(k)  The disposal of solid wastes other than brush or stumps. 
(l)  The disposal of leachable wastes. 
(m)  The dumping of snow contaminated by de-icing chemicals which is brought in from outside the district. 
(n)  The storage or disposal of hazardous materials, as defined by the Hazardous Waste Regulations promulgated by the Hazardous Waste Board, and Water Resources Commission, and the Division of Water Pollution Control, except for the storage of chemicals for use associated with the operation of public water supply facilities. 
(o)  The storage and/or sale of petroleum and other hydrocarbons other than that normally associated with residential use, except for the storage of fuel for use associated with the operation of public water supply facilities. Heating oil shall be stored within the buildings which it will heat. Underground storage of any petroleum product is expressly prohibited. 
(p)  Any discharge of water which has been used for washing, cooking or otherwise altered and devices for the collection, storage and disposal of said wastes, unless that water is of household origin and is processed, prior to discharge, through a treatment system that satisfies the minimum requirements of the state environmental code, known as 310 CMR 15, Title V, or the regulations of the Gloucester Board of Health. 
(q)  Privy, dry well, or other place for the collection, storage or disposal of human excrement that does not satisfy the minimum requirements of the state environmental code, known as 310 CMR 15, Title V, or the regulations of the Gloucester Board of Health. 
(r)  Public or private hospital or other establishment intended for the treatment of persons afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease. 
(s)  Hitching or standing place for horses, cattle or other animals. 
(t)  Storage or disposal of any human excrement or compost containing human excrement, or any municipal, commercial or industrial refuse or waste product or polluting liquid or any substance which in the opinion of the Massachusetts DEQE is of a nature that is poisonous or injurious either to human beings or animals, or other putrescible organic matter whatsoever, at any place from which such liquid or substance may flow or be washed or carried into said source of water supply or tributary thereto. 
(u)  Manufacturing or processing plant producing wastes which are toxic or injurious either to human beings or animals, unless the location thereof has been expressly approved in writing by the DEQE. 
(v)  Any building or structure lying within 50 feet of the banks of all brooks, streams and rivers or within 50 feet from the normal highwater line of lakes, ponds, marshes, swamps and bogs. 
5.10.5 Special Permit Uses 
The Planning Board, under the authority of Section 3.4.2 of this ordinance, may allow the following uses within the Watershed Protection Overlay District, upon issuance of a special permit in accordance with Section 5.10.6 hereof and subject to any additional conditions the Board may impose. 
(a)  Those business and industrial activities permitted in the underlying district and not specifically prohibited in Section 5.10.4 of this ordinance, provided that a plan to prevent compaction and siltation, loss of recharge, seepage from sewer pipes and contamination by oil, chemicals, nutrients, etc. is submitted and determined to be satisfactory. 
(b)  The incidental removal of gravel, sand, loam or other earth material from new and existing excavations. 
5.10.6 Procedures for Issuance of Special Permits 
(a)  Each application for a special permit shall be filed with the Planning Board and shall be accompanied by 3 copies of the plan. In addition to submittal requirements listed in section 1.5.5, the following additional information should be provided: 
i)  Provisions to control soil erosion and sedimentation, soil compaction, and to prevent seepage from sewer pipes. 
ii)  Drainage recharge features and provisions to prevent loss of recharge. 
iii)  Amount of impervious surface proposed for the lot. 
(b)  Said application and plan shall be prepared in accordance with the data requirements of the proposed development (e.g., site plan review, erosion and sedimentation control plan, etc.). 
(c)  The Planning Board shall refer copies of the application to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission and the City Engineer, which shall review, either jointly or separately, the application and shall submit their recommendation to the Planning Board within 35 days of the referral of the application. 
(d)  The Planning Board shall hold a hearing, in conformity with the provision MGL Chapter 40A Section 9, within 65 days after the filing of the application, in accordance with the procedures defined in section 1.5. 
Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication and posting and by first-class mailings to "parties in interest" as defined in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 11. The decision of the Planning Board and any extension, modification or renewal thereof, shall be filed with the Planning Board and City Clerk within 90 days following the closing of the public hearing. Failure of the Board to act within 90 days shall be deemed a granting of the permit. However, no work shall commence until a certification is recorded as required by Section 11. 
(e)  After notice and public hearing, and after due consideration of the reports and recommendations of the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and the City Engineer, the Planning Board may grant a special permit provided that it finds that the proposed use is consistent with the criteria set forth in 1.8.3 and further meets the following criteria: 
i)  is consistent with the purpose and intent of this ordinance; 
ii)  is appropriate to the natural topography, soils, and other characteristics of the site to be developed; 
iii)  will not have a significant adverse effect, during construction or thereafter, on the existing or potential quality or quantity of water that is available in the Water Supply Protection District, and; 
iv)  is designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage, vegetation and other water-related natural characteristics of the site to be developed. 
5.10.7 Application of Fertilizers, Pesticides and Herbicides 
For any use involving the application of fertilizers, pesticides, or herbicides, the applicant must obtain a report from the Board of Health Agent stating that all necessary precautions shall be taken to prevent hazardous concentrations of pesticides in the water and on the land within the district as a result of such application and submit it to the permit granting authority. Such precautions include, but are not limited to, erosion control techniques, the control of runoff water (or the use of pesticides having low solubility in water), the prevention of volatilization and redeposition of pesticides and the lateral displacement (i.e. wind drift) of pesticides. The application of fertilizers for non-domestic or non-agricultural uses will be approved only if the applicant can prove that such application shall be made in such manner as to minimize adverse impacts on surface and groundwater due to nutrient transport and deposition and sedimentation. 
(Adopted January 10, 1989) 
5.11 - INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS 
5.11.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to enhance the public welfare by increasing the production of housing affordable to income-eligible households. Accordingly, the provisions of this section are designed: 
(1)  To increase the supply of rental and ownership housing in the City of Gloucester that is permanently available to income-eligible households; 
(2)  To meet and exceed the 10% affordable housing threshold established by the Commonwealth in MGL Chapter 40B, Section 20; 
(3)  To encourage a greater diversity and distribution of housing to meet the needs of families and individuals. 
To achieve the above-stated goals and to encourage utilization of the city's developable land in a manner consistent with local housing policies and needs, the City requires newly created housing developments to include a proportion of housing units that shall be affordable to income-eligible households. 
5.11.2 Definitions 
Affordable Housing: Housing available to those earning at or below 80% of the area median income, and for which income-eligible households will spend no more than 30% of their income on annual housing costs as indicated in the annual U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Income Guidelines. For owners the aggregate annual charges shall include mortgage and interest, real estate taxes, homeowner's insurance, and condominium fees if applicable. For tenants the aggregate annual charges shall include rent, utilities (except telephone and other telecommunications), and renter's insurance. 
Area Median Income (AMI): Income for the Boston-Cambridge-Quincy Metropolitan Statistical Area (BCQMSA) with adjustments for household size, as reported by the most recent information from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or by a similar federal agency created to replace it, as adopted by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). 
Deed Restriction: A provision, acceptable in form and substance to City General Counsel of Gloucester, in a deed of real property that runs with the land in perpetuity or for the longest period of time allowed by law, so as to be binding on and enforceable against any person claiming an interest in the property. The Deed Restriction shall limit the resale price of any ownership units, and shall bind all subsequent purchasers in perpetuity, consistent with DHCD regulations and guidelines under MGL Chapter 40B. 
Eligible Household: Household whose total income does not exceed 80% of the area median income (AMI). 
Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund: Pursuant to the Gloucester Code of Ordinances, Article VI, Division 4, Section 2-601, the Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The Board shall dedicate its objective to maintaining continuity and consistency in managing and monitoring funds, deed restrictions and covenants. 
Granting Authority: The City Council grants special permits for multi-family dwellings, and the Planning Board grants permits for cluster developments and approvals for conventional subdivisions and Open Space Residential Developments. 
5.11.3 Applicability 
The Inclusionary Housing Requirements shall apply to all residential developments involving eight (8) or more dwelling units whether rental or ownership. 
(a)  Location: The provisions of this Section shall apply to all residential developments in the R-80, R-40, RC-40, R-30, R-20, R-10, R-5, CB, CCD, NB, VB zoning districts. 
(b)  Types of Developments: Residential developments shall include single, two-family and multi-family dwelling units, Cluster Developments (Section 5.9), Open Space Residential Developments (OSRD, Section 5.15), and conventional subdivisions. 
5.11.4 Requirements for Developments 
(a)  Number of Units to be Provided: All residential developments involving 8 or more dwelling units shall set aside a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of units as affordable. In conventional subdivisions, the number of affordable units to be provided shall be based upon the maximum number of dwelling units allowed by this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Fractions: If the resulting number of affordable units includes a fraction of a unit, which is three-fourths (3/4) or greater it shall be rounded up to the next whole number, and if less than three-fourths (3/4), the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 
(c)  Compliance: As a condition of granting special permits or approvals for any residential development, the City Council or the Planning Board shall require Applicants for any such permits/approvals to comply with the obligation to provide affordable housing pursuant to this ordinance. The requirements of this ordinance shall be satisfied prior to the issuance of 50% of the occupancy permits for market-rate units requiring the creation of an affordable unit in a multi-family development or prior to the issuance of 50% of the building permits for market-rate units requiring the creation of an affordable unit in a conventional subdivision, OSRD or cluster development, to in accordance with a written agreement approved by the City Council or Planning Board as a condition of a special permit or approval. 
(d)  Preference for City Residents and Persons Employed within the City :Unless otherwise prohibited by a federal or state agency under a financing or other subsidy program, not less than seventy percent (70%) of the affordable dwelling units within the development shall be offered to eligible households who are current residents of the City of Gloucester or who are currently employed in Gloucester. 
(e)  Segmentation: Developments may not be intentionally segmented or phased to avoid compliance with the requirements of this ordinance: subdividing a large tract into smaller tracts, each of which will contain fewer than eight (8) units, or phasing a development such that each phase will contain fewer than eight (8) units. 
5.11.5 Requirements for Eligible Households 
(a)  Selection and Marketing Plan: The affordable units must be rented or sold to eligible households, whose total income does not exceed 80% of the Area Median Income, using HUD Selection Guidelines and DHCD Affirmative and Fair Housing Marketing Guidelines, including but not limited to marketing and advertising, as administered and monitored by the Gloucester Housing Authority. Such guidelines shall be in compliance with all other applicable city, state and federal housing assistance programs. 
(b)  Maximum Rent: As defined in Section 5.11.2, rents for the affordable units, including utilities, shall not exceed 30% of the annual income of eligible households. 
(c)  Maximum Mortgage: As defined in Section 5.11.2, Housing costs, including monthly housing payments, principal and interest payments, and insurance and condo fees, shall not exceed 30% of the annual income of eligible households. 
5.11.6 Provisions of Affordable Units 
(a)  On-site: Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, affordable units shall be provided on-site of the development. 
(b)  Sale or Rental of Units to Eligible Households: Dwelling units set aside for sale, lease or rental shall be restricted for occupancy by income-eligible households. 
(c)  Duration of Affordability: The affordable units shall be subject to deed restrictions providing that they shall be conveyed subject to restrictions, which to the extent allowed by applicable laws shall guarantee the affordability of units to eligible households in perpetuity. 
(d)  Relationship to Subsidized Housing Inventory: It is intended that the affordable dwelling units serving income-eligible households that result from this ordinance shall be considered as Local Initiative Units in compliance with the requirements of DHCD for the purposes of listing in the City's subsidized housing inventory under MGL Chapter 40B, Sections 20-23. 
(e)  Relationship to Public Funding Programs: Developers may participate in public subsidy programs for their projects and still meet the requirements of this section. In case of conflicting price limitations, the lower price requirement shall prevail. This inclusionary housing requirements ordinance is not intended to supersede applicable state and federal regulations. 
5.11.7 Development Standards 
(a)  Comparability: All affordable dwelling units constructed under this ordinance shall be dispersed throughout the development so as to ensure a true mix of market-rate and affordable housing. Affordable units shall be comparable to the extent possible and indistinguishable from market-rate units in design, external appearance, construction, and quality of materials. 
(b)  Rights and Privileges: The owners or renters of affordable units shall have all rights, privileges and responsibilities accorded to market-rate owners or renters, including access to all non-fee amenities within the development. 
5.11.8 Alternative Methods of Affordability 
(a)  City of Gloucester City Council or Planning Board, when either is acting as the granting authority may allow an alternative method of compliance with this section at the formal written request of the developer. In granting such authorization, the City Council or Planning Board must find that the developer has demonstrated that building the required affordable units on-site would create an economic hardship. Approval of alternative methods of compliance shall be only for the methods described below in subsection (b). 
(b)  The following alternative methods of compliance may be allowed by the City Council or Planning Board as granting authorities, and any alternative authorized by them shall comply in all other respects with the requirements of this ordinance: 
(1)  Off-site Location: With authorization by the City Council or Planning Board as described above, affordable units may be constructed by the developer on an alternative site. The alternative site must be suitable for residential development within the City of Gloucester, and the newly constructed units must be added to the City's stock of affordable dwelling units. Off-site units shall be no fewer than the number of units that would have otherwise been provided on-site, shall be comparable in design, external appearance, construction, and quality of materials to the on-site units, and shall be subject to the same construction schedule as required for on-site units as set forth in Section 5.11.10(d). The location and construction of the off-site units to be provided shall be reviewed by the City Council or Planning Board as an integral element of the special permit and approval process. 
(2)  Cash Contribution: With authorization by the City Council or Planning Board as described above, developers may make a cash payment in lieu of affordable units to the Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund as outlined below: 
For rental units , the financial contribution for each affordable unit shall be equal to the difference between the average market rental price for the market-rate units in the subject development and the rent affordable to an income-eligible household as defined by this ordinance and HUD, calculated over a term of ten (10) years. 
For ownership units , the financial contribution for each affordable unit shall be equal to the difference between the average market sales price for the market-rate units in the subject development and the purchase price affordable to an income-eligible household as defined by this ordinance and HUD. 
Off-site affordable units or cash contributions must be constructed or made prior to the issuance of 50% of the occupancy permits for market-rate units requiring the creation of an affordable unit in a multi-family development, or prior to the issuance of 50% of the building permits for market-rate units requiring the creation of an affordable unit in a conventional subdivision, OSRD or cluster development, or in accordance with a written agreement approved by the City Council or Planning Board as a condition of a special permit or approval. 
(c)  Administration of Funds: Funds paid to the City in-lieu of providing the required affordable housing units shall be maintained in a separate account, known as the Gloucester Affordable Housing Trust Fund, and restricted solely for the creation of affordable housing located in the City of Gloucester, as defined by this ordinance. 
5.11.9 Enforcement 
(a)  Legal Restrictions: All agreements with the City of Gloucester, including restrictive instruments and other documents necessary to ensure compliance with this section, shall be subject to prior written review and approval by the City General Counsel, and shall be executed prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. 
(b)  Affordability: To ensure affordability, all dwelling units shall be rented or sold subject to deed covenants, contractual agreements, condominium documents and fees, or other mechanisms restricting the use, occupancy, rent levels and sales prices. Such deed restriction with any related requirements shall be recorded at the Southern Essex District Registry of Deeds. 
(c)  Performance Bond Guarantee: Prior to the issuance of a building permit the applicant shall submit a performance bond secured by a deposit or negotiable securities. 
(1)  City Council Special Permits: The applicant shall submit a bond that, in the opinion of the City Council, is equal to 120% of the cost of constructing the approved development. After the development has been built to the satisfaction of the City Council, in accordance with the a approved special permit, the applicant may request discharge of the bond. 
(2)  Planning Board Special Permits and Approvals: For all developments the applicant shall follow the procedure for securities under Section 3.8 of Gloucester's Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land. 
(d)  Timing of Construction: As a condition of the issuance of approval under this inclusionary housing requirements ordinance, the City Council and Planning Board shall set time schedules for the construction of both affordable and market-rate units. 
5.11.10 Severability 
In case any paragraph or part of this Section should be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Adopted April 23, 1991; Amended May 27, 2008) 
5.12 - BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT 
All principal uses permitted in the BP Business Park District shall conform to the design standards described in the subsections below. 
5.12.1 Open Space 
To maintain the function, safety and aesthetics of parking areas and building development within the district, a minimum of ten (10) percent of each lot shall be maintained as open space. Such open space areas may include suitability landscaped areas, areas left in their natural state, planting areas within or adjacent to parking and loading areas, pedestrian walkways and exterior recreation areas. 
5.12.2 Landscaping Around Buildings 
For all buildings constructed after April 1, 1993, a five (5) foot wide landscaped foundation planting shall be provided at the base of not less than fifty (50) percent of the length of the building wall facing the way upon which it has its frontage. 
5.12.3 Buffer Zone 
A seventy-five (75) foot buffer zone shall be provided from the lot line of any lot that abuts or is partially within the residential district. No structures, parking, or paved areas shall be allowed within the buffer zone. 
5.13 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[1] 
5.13.1 Purposes 
5.13.1.1  To appropriately promote Wireless Communications Facilities in accordance with federal law, including the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, while also regulating Wireless Communications Facilities in a manner that protects the character of the City and its scenic, historic, and natural resources. 
5.13.1.2  To establish requirements for approval of Wireless Communications Facilities and standards for their design, placement, safety, monitoring, modification and removal. 
5.13.2 Applicability 
This section applies to all new Wireless Communications Facilities and modifications to existing or previously-approved Wireless Communications Facilities - except noncommercial amateur radio antennas. 
5.13.3 Definitions 
Antenna 
A transmitter device designed to transmit and/or receive radio frequency signals. 
Base Station 
A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a Tower as defined herein or any equipment associated with a Tower. Base Station includes, without limitation: 
i.  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
ii.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including DAS and small-cell networks). 
iii.  Any structure other than a Tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed under this section, supports or houses equipment described in paragraphs (i)-(ii) of this definition that has previously been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support. 
The term Base Station does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed under this section, does not support or house equipment described in (i) - (ii) of this definition. 
Collocation 
The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an Eligible Support Structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes. 
Distributed Antenna System (DAS) 
A multiple antenna system including antennas and control boxes typically installed on utility poles interconnected via cable or fibers belonging to the access point/base station dispersed across a coverage area. 
FCC 
The Federal Communications Commission. 
Host Structure 
Any building or structure other than a Tower, but including utility poles and signs, on or within which a new Wireless Communications Facility or modification thereof is proposed, including, without limitation, any newly constructed building or structure or any addition to any existing building or structure on or within which installation of a Wireless Communications Facility is simultaneously proposed. 
Monopole 
A single self-supporting Tower, tubular in design, enclosing cables within the tubular structure and designed so it does not require braces or guy wires for support and stability. 
Significant Gap 
A Coverage Gap in a carrier's wireless service network within a specific geographic area shall be considered to be a "Significant Gap" if such specific identified geographic area is so large in physical size and/or affects or is predicted to affect such a large number of remote users of Compatible User Service Devices as to fairly and reasonably be considered "significant" as opposed to merely being a small "dead spot". In determining whether or not a particular Carrier's Coverage Gap is significant, a relatively small or modest geographic area may be considered a "Significant Gap" if such geographic area is densely populated or is frequently used by a large number of persons for active recreational or similar purposes who are, or are predicted to be, remote users of Compatible User Service Devices, and/or such geographic area straddles one or more public highways or commuter rail lines regularly traveled, or predicted to be traveled, by remote users of Compatible User Service Devices, while a larger geographic area may be considered not to be a "Significant Gap" if such geographic area does not straddle any public highways or rail lines and/or is sparsely populated. Whether or not a Significant Gap exists is to be determined separately for each Carrier's Personal Wireless Services network. 
Site 
For Towers other than Towers in the public rights-of-way, the boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the Tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other Eligible Support Structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other Transmission Equipment already deployed on the ground. 
Transmission Equipment 
Equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. 
Wireless Communications Facility (or Facility) 
A facility for the transmission of any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication signals (but not including noncommercial amateur radio facilities). A Wireless Communication Facility shall include the Transmission Equipment and associated equipment, any Tower or other structure designed or used primarily to support or elevate such equipment, and any accessory structure, building or fenced compound used to shelter the equipment. In context, Facility may refer individually to one provider's installation or collectively to the aggregate of all installations of all providers providing wireless communications services at a common Site. 
Wireless Communication Tower (or Tower) 
Any structure greater than 15 feet in height mounted on the ground or on another structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized Transmission Equipment. 
5.13.4 Required Review and Approvals 
5.13.4.1  Facilities Allowed by Right: Wireless Communications Facilities meeting the following criteria shall be allowed by right, subject to issuance of a Building Permit and the applicant's filing with the building permit application a certification by a qualified engineer or professional that the Facility will comply with all applicable requirements and standards of the FCC and Massachusetts Department of Public Health ("DPH") related to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields and will not exceed the maximum permissible exposure ("MPE") levels deemed safe by the FCC: 
(a)  Concealed Facilities in All Zoning Districts: A "Concealed Facility" is a Wireless Communications Facility that is entirely contained within architectural features of a building or structure that is occupied or used primarily for other purposes, such that no part of the Facility is visible from the exterior of the structure. New architectural features, such as a cupola or other appurtenance, may be added to a building or structure to conceal a Wireless Communications Facility so long as such new architectural feature would otherwise be allowed under this Ordinance. Antennas and other components of a Facility situated on or within a Tower shall not be deemed concealed. 
(b)  Camouflaged Facilities in the General Industrial, Marine Industrial and Business Park Zoning Districts: A Camouflaged Facility is a Wireless Communications Facility that is disguised, shielded, hidden, or made to appear as an architectural component of an existing or proposed building or structure the use of which is otherwise permitted under this Ordinance. A Wireless Communications Facility attached to an existing building or structure shall not be deemed camouflaged if (a) it extends vertically more than 10 feet above the height of the building or structure or horizontally more than 6 feet beyond the face of any exterior side wall or the exterior of any surface of a structure with no side walls, or (2) any visible Antennas exceed 3' in diameter or 12' in height. Antennas and other components of a Facility situated on or within a Tower shall not be deemed camouflaged. 
(c)  Facilities mounted on existing buildings (including roof- and side-mounted) or on other existing Host Structures in the General Industrial and Business Park Zoning Districts - provided the Facility does not project vertically more than 15 feet above the height of the existing Building or Host Structure or project horizontally more than 6 feet beyond the face of any exterior side or the exterior surface of a structure with no side walls and any visible Antennas do not exceed 3' in diameter or 15' in height. 
(d)  Eligible Facilities Requests: Modifications to existing Towers or Base Stations that qualify as "Eligible Facilities Requests," as determined in writing by the Inspector of Buildings pursuant to Section 5.13.8, below. 
(e)  Home television or internet access antenna. 
(f)  Medical Facilities for transmittal of clinical medical information. 
(g)  Public Safety Facilities - Being Towers, Antennas and related equipment installed and used by a federal, state or City agency or entity for emergency preparedness and public safety purposes, such as police, fire and ambulance services. 
5.13.4.2  Facilities and Modifications Allowed by Planning Board Special Permit 
The following Facilities shall be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board: 
(a)  Facilities Mounted on Buildings or other Host Structures - Except that such Facilities allowed by right under Section 5.13.4.1 shall not require a special permit hereunder. 
(b)  DAS or similar small-cell antenna systems. 
(c)  Collocations or modifications to Facilities or Base Stations other than Towers or Facilities mounted on Towers - Except that a collocation or modification shall not require a special permit hereunder if (1) it is already expressly authorized by a previously-issued special permit for the existing Facility or Base Station, or (2) it qualifies as an "Eligible Facilities Request," as determined in writing by the Inspector of Buildings pursuant to Section 5.13.8, below. 
5.13.4.3  Facilities or Modifications Allowed by City Council Special Permit (CCS) 
The following Facilities shall be allowed only by Special Permit from the City Council: 
(a)  Wireless Communications Facilities mounted on a New Tower. 
(b)  Collocations or modifications to Facilities on existing Towers or Towers previously approved by a City Council special permit - Except that a collocation or modification shall not require a special permit hereunder if (1) it is already expressly authorized by a previously-issued special permit for the existing Tower, or (2) it qualifies as an "Eligible Facilities Request," as determined in writing by the Inspector of Buildings pursuant to Section 5.13.8, below. 
(c)  Any other Wireless Communications Facility for which a different review process is not specified within this Section 5.13. 
5.13.4.4  Eligible Facilities Requests Allowed by Administrative Review 
An "Eligible Facilities Request" for collocation or other modification of an existing Tower or Base Station shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to the review procedures set forth in Section 5.13.8, below. 
5.13.5 Planning Board Special Permit Review 
5.13.5.1  Application Requirements 
5.13.5.1.1.  In General: All applications to the Planning Board for a special permit for a Wireless Communications Facility shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Section 1.5, as applicable to a PB special permit, and the requirements of this Section 5.13.5. 
5.13.5.1.2.  Application Materials: Each application shall include the following information: 
(a)  Application Form. 
(b)  Application Fee. An application fee as set by the City Council and amended from time to time, as set forth in Appendix B, Schedule of Fees under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Narrative: A narrative description of the proposed Facility or modification, along with photographs, brochures or other graphic illustrations reasonably depicting the physical appearance of the proposed components. 
(d)  Plans: Plans as required for a Planning Board special permit under Section 1.5 and including the following additional details: 
•  ;hg;the location and dimensions of all components of the proposed Facility; 
•  ;hg;color of those portions of the Facility that will be visible to the public; and 
•  ;hg;all buildings and structures on adjacent lots. 
(e)  Visual Aids. Visual aids to facilitate the Board's and public's understanding of the visual impact of the proposed Facility or modification, including, to the extent relevant to the proposed Facility or modification, photographs of existing conditions and visual depictions or simulations of the proposed Facility. 
(f)  RF Report: A report describing in geographical and radio frequency terms the coverage need to be addressed by the proposed Facility and how the proposed Facility addresses that need. 
(g)  MPE Certification: Certification by a qualified engineer or professional that the Facility will comply with all applicable requirements and standards of the FCC and Massachusetts Department of Public Health related to environmental radiofrequency electromagnetic fields and will not exceed the MPE levels deemed safe by the FCC. 
(h)  Other Relevant Materials: Plans and other information pertaining to the installation or construction of the Facility adequate to show compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to support the Mandatory Findings identified below. 
(i)  Section 6409(a) Analysis: Analyses and documentation of potential future maximum height, width and other additions of any potential new Facility that may qualify for approval under Section 5.13.8 Eligible Facilities. 
(j)  Additional Requested Information: Such additional information as the Planning Board may require. 
5.13.5.1.3.  Waivers: The Planning Board may waive any of the above application requirements if it determines the information is not relevant or important to its review of the particular proposal. 
5.13.5.2  Independent Peer Review 
The Planning Board may at any time assess fees against the applicant for the purpose of employing an independent consultant to evaluate any aspect of the proposed facility, including current service coverage. 
5.13.5.3  Design Guidelines 
5.13.5.3.1.  Wireless Communications Facilities mounted on buildings or other Host Structures shall be designed in a manner that is sensitive to abutting properties and the surrounding area. 
5.13.5.3.2.  Antennas mounted on the façade of a building shall not extend above the façade of any wall or exterior surface of the building. 
5.13.5.3.3.  Antennas mounted on the roof of a building or on another Host Structure should not project vertically more than 15 feet above the height of the building or project horizontally more than 6 feet beyond the face of any exterior side or the exterior surface of a structure with no side walls, and any visible Antennas should not exceed 3' in diameter or 15' in height - unless the Planning Board determines that deviation from these guidelines is in the public interest and will not result in a substantially greater impact to abutters. 
5.13.5.3.4.  Antennas installed on utility poles as part of a DAS should not exceed ten feet in height beyond the highest point of such utility pole or sign - unless the Planning Board determines that deviation from this guideline is in the public interest and will not result in a substantially greater impact to abutters. 
5.13.5.3.5.  Any Facility located on or within an historic building or structure shall not alter the character-defining features, distinctive construction methods, or original historic materials of the building or structure. 
5.13.5.3.6.  All Facilities and their equipment shelters shall comply with the principal building setback provisions of the zoning district in which the Facility is located, unless the Planning Board determines that a lesser setback is in the public interest and will not result in a substantially greater impact to abutters. 
5.13.5.3.7.  A Facility shall not generate noise in excess of 50 decibels at the Site boundary as measured at ground level. 
5.13.5.4  Mandatory Findings 
The Planning Board shall not issue a special permit under this section unless it finds that the proposed Facility: 
(a)  meets the special permit granting standard of Section 1.8.3, "that the proposed use will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and that it will not adversely affect the neighborhood, the zoning district or the city to such an extent as to outweigh the beneficial effects of said use"; 
(b)  is designed in the most community-compatible method practicable and is either necessary to provide service to a Significant Gap or otherwise desirable and in the public interest to provide improved wireless communications services in the City; 
(c)  is sited and designed to be suitably screened; 
(d)  is colored so that it will, as much as possible, blend with or be compatible with its surroundings; and 
(e)  complies with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance. 
5.13.5.5  Special Permit Conditions 
The Planning Board may impose such conditions in any special permit issued hereunder that it determines to be appropriate or necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the City and to mitigate the visual impact of any proposed Facility. Such conditions may relate to, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Appearance, including color, style and materials, 
(b)  The type and dimensions of any fencing surrounding all or part of the Facility; 
(c)  Landscaping or other screening requirements at and around the Facility; 
(d)  Contents and dimensions of any permitted signs; 
(e)  Noise controls or limitations to ensure compliance with noise standards and to otherwise prevent unreasonably noise disturbance to residents surrounding the Facility; 
(f)  Limits as to the permissible height of any component of the Facility; 
(g)  Provisions to assure adequate lighting and lighting that is not intrusive to neighbors; 
(h)  Safety provisions to guard against damage to persons or property in the event of a collapse or structure failure of any component of the Facility; 
(i)  Provisions for the removal of the Facility upon abandonment or expiration of the special permit, including without limitation a bond or other surety. Such bond or other surety shall be maintained throughout the period of construction, location, operation and use of the subject Facility; the Building inspector shall receive 30 days prior written notice of any cancellation, non-renewal or material amendment of such bond or other surety; and 
(j)  Whether any colocations or potential future modifications are being pre-approved, and if so, the terms and conditions of any such co-location pre-approval. 
5.13.6 City Council Special Permit Review 
5.13.6.1  Application Requirements 
5.13.6.1.1.  In General: All applications to the City Council for a special permit for a Wireless Communications Facility or modification to a Wireless Communications Facility shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Section 1.5, as applicable to CCS special permits, and the requirements of this Section 5.13.6. 
5.13.6.1.2.  Application Materials: Each application shall include the following information: 
(a)  Application Form. 
(b)  Application Fee. An application fee as set by the City Council and amended from time to time, as set forth in Appendix B, Schedule of Fees under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Plans: Plans as required for a City Council special permit under Section 1.5 and including the following additional details: 
•  the location and dimensions of all components of the proposed Facility; 
•  color of those portions of the Facility that will be visible to the public; 
•  all buildings and structures on adjacent lots; and 
•  for proposed new Towers, (1) the fall-zone boundaries for 100% and 150% of the proposed Tower height, and (2) all buildings and structures within 300 feet of the proposed Tower. 
(d)  Narrative, Visual Aids, RF Report and MPE Certification - as specified in connection with Planning Board Special Permit proceedings in Section 5.13.5.1.2(c), (e), (f) and (g), above. 
(e)  Existing Facilities Map: For any proposed collocation or new Facility, a map showing all other existing and proposed Wireless Service Facilities in the City and outside the City within one mile of its corporate limits. 
(f)  NEPA/NHPA Documents: A statement as to whether an Environmental Assessment (EA), a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) is or will be required under the National Environmental Protection Act or the National Historic Preservation Act, and if so, a copy of any such EA, DEIS, or EIS (if available). 
(g)  Alternatives Analysis: For any proposed new Tower, a statement describing all alternatives considered by the applicant to address the Significant Gap, including use of existing Facilities or structures and any alternative technologies (for example, DAS or other small cell technologies), and the reason(s) such alternatives are not being proposed. 
(h)  Other Relevant Materials: Plans and other information pertaining to the installation or construction of the Facility adequate to show compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and to support the Mandatory Findings identified below. 
(i)  Section 6409(a) Analysis: Analyses and documentation of potential future maximum height, width and other additions of any potential new Facility that may qualify for approval under Section 5.13.8. 
(j)  Additional Requested Information: Such additional information as the City Council may require. 
5.13.6.1.3.  Waivers: The City Council may waive any of the above application requirements if it determines the information is not relevant or important to its review of the particular proposal. 
5.13.6.2  Independent Peer Review 
The City Council may at any time assess fees against the applicant for the purpose of employing an independent consultant to evaluate any aspect of the proposed Facility, including current service coverage. 
5.13.6.3  Balloon or Crane Tests 
If requested by the City Council, the applicant shall conduct a balloon or crane test, or such other reasonable equivalent, of the height of the proposed free standing facility. The applicant shall provide at least 48 hours written notice of said test to the City Council and to all abutters and persons required by state law to be notified of a public hearing. The applicant shall also submit to the City Council a photographic representation from a suitable number of locations, as directed by the City Council, so as to depict the visual impact of the proposed facility on the surrounding area. 
5.13.6.4  City Council's Waiver Authority to Avoid Violation of Federal Law 
The City Council, under its special permit granting authority and pursuant to federal law, may waive one or more requirements of this Section 5.13 and its subsections, including dimensional requirements, where the City Council finds that the relief is necessary to avoid a violation of federal law (for example, to avoid an unlawful prohibition of Wireless Communications Facilities in the City or to avoid unreasonable discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent services). 
5.13.6.5  Location and Design Standards 
5.13.6.5.1.  New lattice style Towers and similar tower structures requiring more than one leg or guy wires for support are prohibited. 
5.13.6.5.2.  Any Facility located on or within an historic building or structure shall not alter the character-defining features, distinctive construction methods, or original historic materials of the building or structure. 
5.13.6.5.3.  Setback Requirements: 
(a)  All Facilities and their equipment shelters shall comply with the principal building setback provisions of the zoning district in which the facility is located, unless the City Council finds that allowing a lesser setback would be in the public interest. 
(b)  All Towers shall be set back at least 50' from the boundary lines of the Site and at least 150% of the Tower height from any existing daycare centers and any dwelling units, except dwelling units located on the subject Site. 
5.13.6.5.4.  A Tower shall not exceed 175 feet in height above ground level or a height that requires illumination at night under Federal Aviation Administration or Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission regulations, whichever is less. 
5.13.6.5.5.  A Facility shall not generate noise in excess of 50 decibels at the Site boundary as measured at ground level. 
5.13.6.6  Mandatory Findings 
The City Council shall not issue a special permit under this section unless it makes the "Mandatory Findings" as specified for Planning Board Special Permits under Section 5.13.5.4 and additionally, for any Facilities proposed to be located on a new Tower, that the proposed Facility: 
(a)  cannot for technical or physical reasons be located on an existing Tower, building or Host Structure that would be expected to provide comparable service coverage; such alternative existing location or locations need not provide full service to the entire Significant Gap if, in the determination of the City Council, the remaining Gap to have been served by the proposed Facility is not Significant and/or if remaining portions of the Significant Gap can be served by new Facilities preferred by the City Council; and 
(b)  cannot be located at any other practicably available site that is less objectionable to the general public due to technical requirements, topography, or other unique circumstances; the applicant shall have the burden of showing what alternative sites and technologies it considered and why such sites and technologies are not practicably available. 
5.13.6.7  Special Permit Conditions 
5.13.6.7.1.  The City Council may impose such conditions in any special permit issued hereunder that it determines to be appropriate or necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the City and to mitigate the visual impact of any proposed Facility. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Conditions as authorized for Planning Board Special Permits under Section 5.13.5.5, above; 
(b)  Conditions related to potential future co-location of additional Facilities, including a condition requiring a new Tower to be constructed such that it can be extended in the future to accommodate additional Facilities. 
5.13.7 General Requirements Applicable to All Facilities 
5.13.7.1  Removal After Cessation: All structures, equipment, utilities and other improvements associated with a Wireless Communications Facilities shall be removed within one year after cessation of use. 
5.13.7.2  Term of Special Permit: Unless the Special Permit provides a different term, a Special Permit issued by the Planning Board or City Council under this Section 5.13 shall be valid for 25 years. 
5.13.7.3  Insurance and Indemnity: The owner and/or operator of a Wireless Communications Facility shall insure the Facility at all times against damage to persons and property of others, and shall defend and indemnify the City against any and all damages and claims incurred by or asserted against the City relating in any way to the Wireless Communications Facility. 
5.13.7.4  Compliance with Laws: All Wireless Communications Facilities shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
5.13.8 Eligible Facilities Request - Administrative Review and Determination 
5.13.8.1  Purpose: This section implements Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act (codified at 47 U.S.C. 1455) and the related rules of the FCC. Pursuant to Section 6409(a), the City "may not deny, and shall approve, any eligible facilities request for a modification of an existing wireless tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station." 
5.13.8.2  Definitions: 
Eligible Facilities Request 
Any request for modification of an "Eligible Support Structure" that does not result in a "Substantial Change" to the physical dimensions of such Eligible Support Structure, involving: 
i.  Collocation of new Transmission Equipment; 
ii.  Removal of Transmission Equipment; or 
iii.  Replacement of Transmission equipment. 
Eligible Support Structure (or "Existing Tower or Base Station") 
Any Tower or Base Station that, at the time an application is filed under this section, has been reviewed and approved by the City under the applicable zoning process or constitutes a lawfully pre-existing nonconforming structure under Section 2.4. 
Substantial Change 
A modification substantially changes the physical dimensions of an Eligible Support Structure if it meets any of the following criteria: 
i.  For Towers other than Towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the Tower by more than 10% or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; 
ii.  For other Eligible Support Structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than 10% or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater; 
iii.  For Towers other than Towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the Tower that would protrude from the edge of the Tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the Tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; 
iv.  For other Eligible Support Structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than 6 feet; 
v.  For any Eligible Support Structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; 
vi.  For Towers in the public rights-of-way and Eligible Support Structures, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
vii.  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
viii.  It would defeat the concealment elements of the Eligible Support Structure; or 
ix.  It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the Eligible Support Structure or base station equipment, provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs (i) - (vi) of this subsection. 
Cumulative Changes Considered: All changes noted above shall be measured from the height of the original Tower or Eligible Support Structure, inclusive of approved appurtenances and any modifications approved prior to passage of the Spectrum Act on February 22, 2012. 
5.13.8.3  Application Contents 
5.13.8.3.1.  Required Materials: All Eligible Facilities Request applications must include the following items: 
(a)  Application Form. 
(b)  Application Fee. An application fee as set by the City Council and amended from time to time, as set forth in Appendix B, Schedule of Fees under the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Plans. Plans as required for a City Council special permit under Section 5.13 and including, among other details, the location, details and relevant dimensions of the existing Facility and proposed modified Facility. 
(d)  Visual Aids. Visual aids that include, to the extent relevant to the proposed modification, photographs of the existing Facility, visual simulations showing before-and-after construction conditions, including any proposed screening, and other visual aids representing proposed visual changes to the existing conditions. 
(e)  Narrative Statement. A written statement (i) describing the proposed modification and related construction work, (ii) identifying any previous modifications to the Facility implemented pursuant to this section or Section 6409(a), and (3) explaining how the Tower or Base Station qualifies as an Eligible Support Structure and how the proposed modification otherwise qualifies as an Eligible Facilities Request. 
(f)  Prior Permits/Approvals. Copies of all previously-issued local permits and approvals for the existing Facility. 
(g)  MPE Compliance Certification: Certification by a qualified engineer or professional that the Facility will comply with all applicable requirements and standards of the FCC and Massachusetts Department of Public Health related to environmental radiofrequency electromagnetic fields and will not exceed the MPE levels deemed safe by the FCC. 
(h)  Noise Study: If the collocation or modification involves any new noise-generating components within 50' of any occupied buildings, except those on the subject Site, a noise study, prepared, signed, and sealed by a qualified engineer, confirming that the proposed modification(s) will not result in violations of the applicable noise standards. 
(i)  Other Information. Such other information as the Inspector of Buildings may require. 
5.13.8.3.2.  Waivers: The Inspector of Buildings may waive one or more of the above filing requirements if he determines the information is not necessary or relevant to his review and determination under this section. 
5.13.8.4  Review Process - Inspector of Buildings 
5.13.8.4.1.  An application for review of an Eligible Facilities Request shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Inspector of Buildings, who shall make the final determination under this section after consultation with the City's Planning Director. 
5.13.8.4.2.  An approval under this section must be obtained prior to filing of a building permit application for the proposed modification. 
5.13.8.4.3.  At the time of application hereunder, the applicant shall also submit copies of the application to (1) the City's Planning Director, (2) the City's Department of Public Works, and (3) any board, council or commission that issued any prior permit or approval for the Tower or Base Station that is the subject of the application. 
5.13.8.5  Timeframe for Review 
5.13.8.5.1.  60-Day Review Period: The application under this section shall be approved or disapproved by the Inspector of Buildings within 60 days of its filing. 
5.13.8.5.2.  Tolling of Review Period: The 60-day review period begins to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by mutual agreement by the Inspector of Buildings and the applicant or in cases where the Inspector of Buildings determines that the application is incomplete. 
(a)  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the Inspector of Buildings must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or information required in the application. 
(b)  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the Inspector of Buildings' notice of incompleteness. 
(c)  Following a supplemental submission, the Inspector of Buildings will notify the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is further tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the above procedures. 
5.13.8.6  Final Decision 
5.13.8.6.1.  Approvals: The Inspector of Buildings must approve an application if he/she determines that the application qualifies as an Eligible Facilities Request - that is, that the proposal involves the proposed collocation, removal or replacement of Transmission Equipment on an Eligible Support Structure and that the proposed modification will not result in a "Substantial Change" to the physical dimensions of the Eligible Support Structure (as those terms are defined above). 
5.13.8.6.2.  Conditions of Approval: In addition to any other conditions of approval that the Inspector of Buildings may determine to be necessary or appropriate and consistent with federal and state law and this Ordinance, all approvals issued under this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No Automatic Renewal. The grant or approval of a wireless facility minor modification permit shall not renew or extend the underlying permit term. 
b.  Compliance with Previous Approvals. The applicant shall be subject to the conditions of all previously-issued permits and approvals for the subject Tower or Base Station, except as may be preempted by Section 6409, subdivision (a). 
c.  As-Built Plans. The applicant shall submit to the Inspector of Buildings an as-built set of plans and photographs depicting the entire Facility, as modified, including all Transmission Equipment and all utilities, within ninety (90) days after the completion of construction. 
d.  Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the applicant and any successors and assigns, shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless city, its employees, agents and officials, from and against any liability, claims, suits, actions, regulatory proceedings, losses, expenses or costs of any kind, including, but not limited to, actual attorney fees and litigation expenses, incurred in relation to or arising out of, in whole or in part, the Facility, as modified. 
e.  Compliance with Applicable Laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, any permit or approval issued under this Ordinance, and all other applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
f.  Compliance with Approved Plans. The approved Facility shall be built in compliance with the approved plans. 
5.13.8.6.3.  Disapprovals: If the Inspector of Buildings disapproves the application, the Inspector of Buildings shall state the reasons for the disapproval. 
(Ord. of 6-28-2016(1)) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 6-28-2016(1), repealed 5.13, §§ 5.13.1-5.13.13, in its entirety and enacted a new 5.13, to read as set out herein. Former 5.13 pertained to "Personal Wireless Service Facility," and was derived from Ord. of 1-6-1998. 

5.14 - ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCES 
5.14.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to provide for the availability of Assisted Living Residences and services in the City of Gloucester. Assisted Living is a special combination of housing, ancillary support services and personalized care that is designed to respond in a homelike setting to the individual needs of adults requiring help with Activities of Daily Living, but who do not require the skilled medical care provided in a nursing facility. 
5.14.2 Administration 
(a)  The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) shall be the City Council which shall follow the procedural requirements for special permits as set forth in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9 and pursuant to Section 1.5 of the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Applicability : Assisted Living Residences (ALR) are allowed in the zoning districts specified in Section 2.3.1, Residential Use Numbers 18 and 19. An Assisted Living Residence of up to ten (10) dwelling units may be authorized by the granting of a special permit pursuant to Section 1.8 and Section 5.14.4. An Assisted Living Residence of eleven (11) or more dwelling units may be authorized by the granting of a special permit pursuant to Section 1.8, Section 5.7 Major Projects, and Section 5.14.4. 
(c)  Dimensional Requirements : See Section 3.2.5 Dimensional Requirements for Assisted Living Residences. 
(d)  Application Submittal : The applicant shall submit to the City Clerk twelve (12) copies of a City Council Special Permit Application which shall include a site plan in accordance with Section 5.14.4 and, when necessary for 11 or more units, Section 5.7.5. 
(e)  Independent Review : At the City Council's discretion an independent review may be requested at the applicant's expense. 
5.14.3 Definitions 
Assisted Living as defined by MGL Chapter 19D, 651 CMR 12.00 and 651 CMR 13.00. 
Assisted Living Residence as defined by 651 CMR 12.02, an Assisted Living Residence is any entity, however organized, whether conducted for profit or not for profit, which meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  Provides room and board; and 
(b)  Provides, directly by employees of the entity or through arrangements with another organization which the entity may or may not control or own, Personal Care Services for three or more adults who are not related by consanguinity or affinity to their care provider; and 
(c)  Collects payments or third party reimbursements from or on behalf of Residents to pay for the provision of assistance with the Activities of Daily Living or arranges for the same. 
Dwelling Unit for Assisted Living Residences - A portion of an Assisted Living Residence designed for and occupied by one or two individuals as the private living quarters of such individuals. 
5.14.4 Performance Standards 
In addition to the requirements of Section 1.4.2.2 for Assisted Living Residences of ten (10) or less dwelling units and Sections 1.4.2.2 and 5.7 for Assisted Living Residences of eleven (11) or more dwelling units, the following requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Assisted Living Residences shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape, and shall be designed to protect abutting properties and community amenities, and shall be consistent with the neighborhood character. 
(b)  Assisted Living Residences shall provide one off-street parking space for every two dwelling units, and one visitor parking space for every ten units. 
(c)  Other than for access to the upper floors, the street level floor of Assisted Living Residences in Central Business (CB) and Village Business (VB) districts shall be occupied by retail businesses, open to the public. 
(d)  An Assisted Living Residence where each unit is owned separately or converted to separate ownership shall establish an Owners Association which shall provide for the maintenance of the common facilities. An agreement regarding the same shall be submitted to and subject to the approval of the City Council and City Legal Department. 
(e)  Assisted Living Residences with 5-10 dwelling units shall provide one affordable unit and comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The agent of the facility shall annually certify to the Gloucester Community Development Director that the low to moderate income of the residents meets the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) qualifications. 
2.  Preference shall be given to Gloucester residences for occupancy of the affordable units provided they meet the eligibility requirements of federal, state and local regulations. 
(f)  Assisted Living Residences with eleven (11) or more dwelling units shall comply with the following affordability requirements: 
1.  Twenty (20)% of the dwelling units shall be designated for low to moderate income persons as defined by the most recent income guidelines established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
2.  The agent of the facility shall annually certify to the Gloucester Community Development Director that the low to moderate income of the residents meets the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) qualifications. 
3.  Preference shall be given to Gloucester residences for occupancy of the affordable units provided they meet the eligibility requirements of federal, state and local regulations. 
(g)  In addition to any applicable conditions specified in this ordinance, the City Council may impose such other conditions as it finds reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood, the residents, guests or employees of the facility, or otherwise serve the purposes of this ordinance. 
(Adopted June 20, 2000; Amended November 15, 2005) 
5.15 - OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
5.15.1 Purpose and Intent 
5.15.1.1  Primary purposes for Open Space Residential Development, hereafter OSRD, are: 
(a)  To advance and be consistent with the goals, objectives and strategies of The Community Development Plan for the City of Gloucester, 2001: A Comprehensive Plan , August 2001. 
(b)  To encourage permanent preservation of open space, agricultural land, forest, forestry land, wildlife habitat, other natural resources including aquifers and watershed, water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archeological resources. 
(c)  To encourage a more efficient form of development that is less sprawling, consumes less open land, and conforms to existing topography and natural features better than a grid subdivision. 
(d)  To minimize the total amount of disturbance on a site and to preserve the natural topography of a site. 
(e)  To allow greater flexibility and creativity in design of residential developments. 
(f)  To facilitate the construction and maintenance of housing, ways, utilities and services in a more economical and efficient manner. 
5.15.2 Applicability 
5.15.2.1  OSRD is permitted in the following zoning districts: R-80, R-40, RC-40, R-30, R-20, R-10 (See Section 2.3.1 Residential Use No. 20), and is subject to Section 5.11 and Sections 5.15.4 and 5.15.5. 
5.15.3 Design Overview 
5.15.3.1  The Four Step Design Process: 
(a)  Identify and delineate the following: 
1.  Primary Conservation Areas which include wetlands, riverfront areas, and floodplains; and Secondary Conservation Areas which are unregulated features of the natural landscape, such as: steep slopes, mature woodlands, prime farmland, meadows, additional wildlife habitats and cultural features such as historic and archeological sites, and scenic views; and 
2.  Potentially Developable Areas which is all other land outside identified Primary and Secondary Conservation Areas. 
(b)  Locate house sites, providing the approximate sites of individual houses within the Potentially Developable Area along with delineation of private yards and shared amenities, so as to reflect an integrated community, with emphasis on consistency with the city's historical development patterns. The number of homes enjoying the amenities of the development should be maximized. 
(c)  Align Streets and Trails. Align streets in order to access the house lots. Trails should be laid out to create internal and external connections to existing and/or potential future streets, sidewalks and trails. 
(d)  Draw in the lot lines. 
5.15.3.2  Generic Design Standards: 
(a)  OSRD shall promote permanent preservation of open space, agricultural land, forestry and, natural resources, historical and archeological resources better than a grid subdivision. 
(b)  OSRD shall consume less open land than a grid subdivision. 
(c)  OSRD shall conform to existing topography and natural features of the land. 
(d)  OSRD shall have less total amount of disturbance on the site than a grid subdivision. 
(e)  OSRD shall facilitate the layout, construction and maintenance of ways, utilities, and public services in a more economical, safe and efficient manner than a grid subdivision. 
(f)  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state. Tree and soil removal shall be minimized. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. Individual building sites shall be oriented to maintain natural topography, soils and vegetation. 
(g)  Ways shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the subject parcel. 
(h)  Proposed buildings and associated development shall be compatible with surroundings, terrain, other existing uses, scale, and architecture of nearby buildings and possess a functional and visual relationship to the nearby environment. 
(i)  All open space that is not set aside for wildlife habitat and resource protection shall be designed to add to the visual amenities of the area by maximizing its visibility for persons passing the site or overlooking it from nearby properties. 
(j)  The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures, or architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable. 
(k)  The proposal should protect the adjoining premises and general neighborhood from any detrimental impact resulting from the use of the subject property, including but not limited to the production of a nuisance by virtue of noise, odor, unsightliness, or vibration. 
5.15.3.3  Detailed Design Standards are further defined in the OSRD Rules and Regulations . 
5.15.3.4  In approving an OSRD Site Plan, Planning Board, hereinafter referred to as the Board, may impose conditions to ensure that a site plan complies with OSRD detailed design standards. 
5.15.4 Open Space Requirements 
5.15.4.1  Open Space. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the site shall be open space with no more than twenty-five percent (25%) defined as Resource Area and at least fifteen percent (15%) of the remaining open space shall not consist of 'Buffer Zone' as defined by the City of Gloucester General Wetlands Ordinance (Article 12, Gloucester Code of Ordinances) or slope of more than twenty percent (20%). 
(a)  Open space shall not include driveways, roads or ways necessary for access and egress to the site. 
(b)  One third (1/3) of the twenty (20) foot site perimeter setback, as required in 5.15.5.1(c), may be used towards the required open space. 
(c)  One hundred percent (100%) of the open space, shall either be: 
1.  Conveyed to the City of Gloucester and accepted by it for open space use with an assignment for the perpetual care and custody of the site under the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission; or 
2.  Conveyed to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as part of a state forest, park, or wildlife management area; or 
3.  Conveyed to a nonprofit corporation, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space, and made subject to a conservation restriction prepared in accordance with provisions of Section 31 and 33, inclusive, of MGL Chapter 184; or 
4.  Made subject to a conservation restriction prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 31 and 33, inclusive, of MGL Chapter 184 running in favor of either the City or, upon the approval of the Board, a nonprofit corporation, the principal purpose of which is the conservation open space. The conservation restriction shall provide that such land shall be kept, in perpetuity, in an open or natural state, in accordance with the above noted sections of MGL Chapter 184. 
(d)  Open space shall be a large contiguous parcel. 
(e)  Open space shall be used for conservation purposes, including wildlife habitat, watershed protection, historic preservation, education, outdoor education, passive recreation, park purposes, agriculture and horticulture/ forestry. 
(f)  Provided that the Board finds that such uses will not be detrimental to the character, quality or use of the open space, wastewater and stormwater management systems, and underground utilities serving the site may be located within open space. Surface systems, such as retention and detention ponds, shall not qualify towards the minimum required open space. 
5.15.5 Dimensional Requirements 
5.15.5.1  Applicants for OSRD development are encouraged to modify lot size, shape and other dimensional requirements for lots within an OSRD development. Section 3.2 of the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance setting forth the minimum lot requirements shall not apply to lots within OSRD. The minimum requirements for such lots are: 
(a)  Minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum frontage shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  A site perimeter setback of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided at the perimeter of the overall site subject to OSRD except that driveways necessary for access and egress to the site may be allowed within the site perimeter setback for the overall site subject to OSRD. No vegetation in this buffer shall be disturbed, destroyed or removed, except for normal maintenance. (See Open Space Requirements, Section 5.15.4). 
(d)  New lots shall not have frontage on a way other than one created within an OSRD. 
(e)  The minimum frontage for the overall site subject to OSRD shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(f)  Maximum building height shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(g)  The maximum lot coverage for an individual lot shall not exceed fifty (50) percent. 
5.15.6 Pre-application 
5.15.6.1  Prior to submitting an OSRD site plan, the applicant shall make a written request for an informal pre-application review by the Board at a regular meeting. 
5.15.6.2  Submittals under this category of review shall be labeled 'PRE-APPLICATION'. 
5.15.6.3  Pre-application Site Visit. The Board shall hold a site visit as soon as possible with the applicant and/or agents in attendance. 
5.15.7 Site Plan 
5.15.7.1  For the purposes of this ordinance the Planning Board is the Site Plan review authority. 
5.15.7.2  The Site Plan shall consist of a Yield Plan and a Sketch Plan: 
5.15.7.3  The Yield Plan shows the maximum number of lots that can be placed on a site under a grid subdivision plan. 
(a)  Sites with access to municipal sewer. The Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Lots is calculated by the following equation below where the total area is the area of the proposed development, and the resource area is as defined and approved by the Gloucester Conservation Commission. 
Formula #1: Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Lots 
[(Total Area - Resource Area) × (.90)] / District Minimum Lot Area 
(b)  Sites served by individual or shared on-site wastewater systems governed under 310 CMR 15.00 The State Environmental Code, Title 5 and The City of Gloucester On-site Wastewater Regulations. The Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Lots shall be derived by submittal of a yield calculation using Formula #1 accompanied by a plan that provides evidence, acceptable to the Board, confirming the number of dwelling units that could be served by on-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems and which probably could be permitted to serve a set number of dwelling units based on site soil evaluations and consideration of relevant state and local laws. The applicant shall have a burden of proof to supply soils analysis and engineering information on the plan that defines, with reasonable certainty, the number of allowable dwelling units that can be safely sited on a lot. At a minimum, standard soil and percolation testing specified in state and local regulations shall be completed for each proposed area which might be suitable for an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system with such testing witnessed by the agents of the Board of Health. A site plan showing calculations and possible locations of suitable areas for on-site systems shall be compiled. The City of Gloucester On-site Wastewater Regulations should be reviewed and the Board of Health consulted for additional information. Within twenty one (21) days of receiving written request from Planning Board, the Board of Health shall provide written input to the Planning Board regarding this determination. 
(c)  Sites served by on-site shared wastewater systems governed under 314 CMR 3 (Surface Water Discharge Permit) or 314 CMR 5 (Groundwater Discharge Permit) shall take into consideration the carrying capacity of the land and receiving water(s). In no instance shall yield calculation be greater than that which could be calculated under 5.15.7.3(a) and (b). Within twenty one (21) days of receiving written request from the Planning Board, the Board of Health shall provide written input to the Planning Board regarding this determination. 
5.15.7.4  The Sketch Plan shall: 
(a)  Be prepared and signed by a certified Landscape Architect, or by a multidisciplinary team of which one member must be a certified Landscape Architect; and 
(b)  Provide specific reference to the Yield Plan; and 
(c)  Address the general features of the land, give approximate configurations of the open space, roads, lots, and include the information, as appropriate, as listed in OSRD Rules and Regulations; and 
(d)  Include detailed narrative regarding the layout of open space, stormwater management, wastewater management, utilities, landscaping, and other aspects of infrastructure and building design; and 
(e)  Reflect the four step design process as set forth in Section 5.15.3.1; and 
(f)  Comply with the design standards set forth according to sections 5.15.3.2. and 5.15.3.3. 
5.15.7.5  A Site Plan may be a fully engineered plan, conforming with the provisions of this ordinance. The Site Plan shall incorporate the features of the sketch plan and include stormwater management, wastewater management, utilities, and all other information as required within this ordinance and referenced regulations. 
5.15.7.6  OSRD definitive subdivision approval shall be conditional upon approval of the Site Plan. 
5.15.8 Procedure for Submittal and Approval of Site Plan 
5.15.8.1  A complete application shall be filed with the City Clerk and the Planning Board. Fifteen (15) copies shall be filed with Planning. 
5.15.8.2  Review by municipal entities. The Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Building Inspector, Fire Department, Police Department, and Engineering/DPW shall consider, review and report to the Board in writing on the application. Reports from other boards and officials shall be submitted to the Board within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the City Clerk of a complete application. Failure of these reviewing parties to make recommendations after receiving the applicable materials shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto. In the event that a public hearing by the Board is held prior to the expiration of the thirty-five (35) day period, the Board shall continue the public hearing to permit the formal submission of reports and recommendations. 
5.15.8.3  Public hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of a complete application. 
5.15.8.4  Board decision. The Board shall issue a written site plan decision within sixty five (65) days of the submittal of a complete site plan. In reviewing a site plan, the Board may impose conditions to ensure that the site plan complies with generic and detailed design standards, requirements of OSRD Rules and Regulations. The decision shall contain written explanation for any significant departures from the recommendations of any reviewing party. The decision shall be upon a majority of the Board and a written decision shall be endorsed by the Board Chair. The appeal of any decision of the Board shall be made in accordance with the provisions of MGL Ch. 41, Section 81BB. A copy of the decision shall be filed with City Clerk and shall be forwarded to the applicant by registered mail. 
5.15.8.5  Site plan approval shall lapse one (1) year from the date that the Board votes to endorse a site plan unless the applicant has submitted an OSRD definitive plan application, or within three (3) years unless building permits have been issued, whichever is less. Prior to the lapse of this period an applicant may make a written application requesting a time extension for the site plan, by providing a rationale for said request for a time extension. For good cause such approval may be granted by the Board by issuing a written extension following a public hearing. 
5.15.9 Relationship Between OSRD Site Plan and OSRD Definitive Subdivision Plan 
5.15.9.1  The issuance of OSRD Site Plan Approval allows the applicant to submit an OSRD Definitive Subdivision Plan to the Board for consideration under the Subdivision Control Law. 
5.15.9.2  The OSRD definitive subdivision plan shall substantially comply with the OSRD Site Plan. Substantial compliance is deemed to exist providing that there is no: 
(a)  Increase in the number of building lots or units; 
(b)  Significant decrease in open space area; 
(c)  Significant change in site layout; 
(d)  Significant change in the general development pattern which adversely affects natural landscape features and open space preservation; and 
(e)  Significant change to stormwater and wastewater management. 
5.15.9.3  If the Board determines that the OSRD Definitive Subdivision Plan does not substantially comply with the OSRD Site Plan, the Board may disapprove the definitive subdivision plan. 
5.15.9.4  The Board may conditionally approve an OSRD Definitive Subdivision Plan that does not substantially comply with the Site Plan. The Board shall issue a written decision identifying where the plan does not substantially comply with the Site Plan and shall require that the Site Plan be amended to be in compliance. The Board shall also require that the applicant file an application to amend the Site Plan within a specified time period. The public hearing on the application to amend the Site Plan shall be limited to the significant changes identified by the Board in their conditional approval of the OSRD Definitive Subdivision Plan. These are the only considerations that the Board may take into account in deciding whether to amend the Site Plan. 
5.15.9.5  Submittals and permits provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other requirements of the Subdivision Control Law, Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, or any provisions of the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
5.15.10 Rules and Regulations 
See "Rules and Regulations Pertaining to the City of Gloucester Open Space Residential Development (OSRD)", Section 6.1, of the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land, Gloucester. 
(Adopted August 20, 2002) 
5.16 - VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT 
5.16.1 Statement of Legislative Intent 
Consistent with the Community Development Plan For the City of Gloucester, 2001 (August 2001) and the West Gloucester Land Use and Wastewater Plan (Ward 5-2 Section) - Final Report (July locations where there is adequate existing or planned infrastructure, such as sewers, water facilities and roads. The VDOD special permit mechanism is intended to provide an incentive mechanism whereby areas of high environmental sensitivity are permanently preserved as open space in exchange for a density bonus - meaning that a "Village Development Project" (VDP) proponent may increase density of housing by a set proportion in exchange for the permanent protection of open space, and by providing a mix of housing, including permanently affordable units. The overlay mechanism also provides incentive by allowing Planning Board (special permit granting authority) to approve a more flexible layout than other available options such as a conventional subdivision or a city council multifamily special permit. Provisions of this overlay district zoning ordinance are discretionary - the existing underlying zoning remains in effect, and a developer may continue to build under that criteria. Standards applicable to this section apply only to areas within the municipality specifically defined in applicable zoning maps. This ordinance promotes the protection and environmental quality of key natural resources, and promotes managed development of sewer facilities and other infrastructure in targeted areas. This ordinance shall not be construed to authorize or mandate construction of aforementioned public facilities. This ordinance is adopted in conjunction with City Ordinance Ch. 23 Utilities, Art. II Sewers, Division 2: Use regulations, Sec. 23-42 Sewer Extensions in Ward Five (5) Precinct Two (2) adopted December 17, 2002. 
5.16.2 Purpose 
The purposes of the Village Development Overlay District are to: 
(a)  Encourage the preservation of open land for its scenic beauty and to enhance agricultural, open space, forestry, and recreational use; 
(b)  Protect the natural environment; 
(c)  Promote appropriate compact development in areas served by public water and sewer lines; 
(d)  Promote creative developments that provide a range of housing styles and prices that suit the needs of Gloucester's residents. 
5.16.3 Definitions 
5.16.3.1  As defined by the Planning Board, "Affordable to persons or families qualifying as low income" shall mean affordable to persons or families earning less than fifty percent (50%) of the median income for Gloucester using the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Income Guidelines that are issued on an annual basis for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA). 
5.16.3.2  As defined by the Planning Board, "Affordable to persons or families qualifying as moderate income" shall mean affordable to persons or families earning more than fifty percent (50%) but less than eighty percent (80%) of the median income for Gloucester using the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Income Guidelines that are issued on an annual basis for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA). 
5.16.3.3  "Basic maximum number of allowed units" shall mean the number of dwelling units which could reasonably be expected to be developed upon the site under a conventional plan in full conformance with all zoning, subdivision regulations, health regulations, wetlands regulations and other applicable requirements. 
5.16.3.4  "Basic maximum number of allowed bedrooms" shall mean the basic number of allowed units multiplied by three (3). 
5.16.3.5  "Designated Open Space" shall mean those areas of land designated as desirable for open space purposes as set forth in Section 5.16.16, including Type I and Type II. 
5.16.3.6  "Targeted Village Development Areas" shall mean the area labeled 'areas recommended for incentive zoning' on VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT MAP: Applicable to Portions of Ward Five Precinct Two Pursuant to Zoning Ordinance 5.16, on file with City Clerk and the Community Development Department. That map is derived from the Land Use Recommendations map, labeled Figure 10, as presented in West Gloucester Land Use and Wastewater Plan: Ward 5-2 Section - Final Report . Targeted village development areas are designated for creative and compatible higher density development. 
5.16.3.7  "Areas Targeted for Lower Density Development" shall mean all areas located outside of the Targeted Village Development Areas on the VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT MAP: Applicable to Portions of Ward Five Precinct Two pursuant to Zoning Ordinance 5.16, on file with City Clerk and the Community Development Department.Areas Targeted for Lower Density Development are designated for conservation and lower density development. 
5.16.3.8  "Village Development Project (VDP)" shall mean a development authorized by special permit in Targeted Village Development Areas pursuant to regulations and guidelines herein. 
5.16.4 Overlay District 
The Village Development Overlay District is hereby established and shall be construed as an overlay district. Within the Village Development Overlay District all ordinances and regulations of the underlying district(s) shall continue to be in full force and effect, except where the Village Development Overlay District ordinances and regulations supersede such underlying requirements or provide an alternative to such requirements. The Village Development Overlay District shall consist of Targeted Village Development Areas and Areas Targeted for Lower Density Development, as defined above and as shown on the map entitled VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT MAP: Applicable to Portions of Ward Five Precinct Two pursuant to Zoning Ordinance 5.16, hereby incorporated by reference into the zoning ordinance - the map is made part of the official zoning map and a copy of such map is on file at the Office of City Clerk and the Community Development Department. 
5.16.5 Development Allowed by Special Permit 
Within the Village Development Overlay District, a VDP may be constructed exclusively in Targeted Village Development Areas upon the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board, subject to the requirements set forth herein. Only those uses and structures specifically authorized herein shall be permitted in conjunction with a VDP. 
5.16.6 Pre-application Process 
Applicants for Village Development Projects are strongly encouraged to request pre-application review at a regular business meeting of the Planning Board. The purpose of pre-application review is to minimize the applicant's costs of engineering and other technical experts, and to commence negotiations with the Planning Board at the earliest possible stage of design. At the pre-application session, the applicant may outline the proposed VDP, seek preliminary feedback from Planning Board and/or its technical experts, and set a timetable for submittal of a formal application. At the request of the applicant, and at the expense of the applicant, Planning Board may engage technical experts to review the informal plans of the applicant and to facilitate submittal of a formal application for a special permit. Pre-application process is non-binding on all parties and it is not to be construed as site plan review. 
5.16.7 Procedures 
Following the pre-application review, applicants for a VDP shall file with the Planning Board an application in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board. Planning Board shall follow the procedural requirements for special permits as per Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40A and Sections 1.5 and 1.8 of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. Planning Board by written procedural rules may augment these procedures, such as to further define the form and content of an application. 
5.16.8 Modification of Lot Requirements and Other Standards 
Modification of Lot Requirements and Other Standards. Lots within a VDP are not subject to any of the Intensity of Use Schedule requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance or any Off-street Parking requirements set forth in the Off-Street Parking subsection of the General Regulations of the Zoning Ordinance except for the following: 
(a)  No building shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height unless a separate additional special permit is granted by the City Council. 
5.16.9 Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Dwelling Units 
In a VDP the proponent shall have the burden of proof to show the Basic Number of Allowed Dwelling Units that a site could yield with regard to the design and engineering specifications for a conventional plan, such as a subdivision. The Planning Board shall consult the Board of Health and Conservation Commission (and their staff) regarding the methods used and their interpretation of the findings of such analysis. 
5.16.10 Density Bonus Calculation 
Planning Board may award a density bonus in a VDP to increase the number of dwelling units or bedrooms beyond the Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Dwelling Units or Bedrooms. The density bonus for the VDP shall not, in aggregate, exceed an additional one hundred percent (100%) of the Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Dwelling Units or Bedrooms. Density bonus computations shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number. The applicant may choose to calculate the density bonus by using one of the following methods: 
(a)  Dwelling Unit Method: The Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Dwelling Units within a VDP may be increased as a result of the density bonus. At least fifty percent (50%) of all dwelling units awarded as a density bonus shall be two bedroom units and/or permanently restricted to occupancy by persons over the age of fifty-five. 
(b)  Bedroom Method: The Basic Maximum Number of Bedrooms within a VDP may be increased as a result of the density bonus. A density bonus for bedrooms for the VDP shall be calculated by determining the density bonus for dwelling units and then multiplying said density bonus by three 
(3)  The bedrooms may be provided in dwelling units of various sizes, including one (1) bedroom, two (2) bedroom, and three (3) bedroom units. 
5.16.11 Reasons for Density Bonus 
A density bonus may be awarded under the following circumstances; an applicant shall have the burden of proof to show that proposed designated open space could yield the basic maximum number of dwelling units that the applicant claims: 
(a)  For Designated Open Space Type I permanently restricted as specified in Section 5.16.16, the density bonus for dwelling units shall be the number of dwelling units that could be constructed on the Designated Open Space times one and one-half (1.5). This means that the density bonus is the base number of units that could be constructed on 'proposed open space' plus an additional fifty percent of units - the resulting total number of bonus units is sent from the proposed open space into the proposed VDP as an additional bonus increment (see also 5.16.10). The density bonus for bedrooms shall be the number of dwelling units that could have been constructed on the Designated Open Space times four and one-half (4.5). 
(b)  For Designated Open Space Type II permanently restricted as specified in Section 5.16.16, the density bonus for dwelling units shall be the number of dwelling units that could be constructed on the Designated Open Space. The density bonus for bedrooms shall be the number of dwelling units that could have been constructed on the Designated Open Space times three (3). 
(c)  In lieu of permanently restricted open space of either type, the Planning Board may award an appropriate density bonus where the applicant agrees to deposit in the City's Ward 5-2 Open Space Trust Fund an equivalent amount of funds to be used for the purchase of open space (Note: At the point of adoption of this ordinance this fund was not yet established, and it will take a separate City Council action to do so). The Planning Board may engage technical experts to assist in determining the appropriate in lieu payment. 
5.16.12 Affordable Component 
As a condition of the grant of any special permit for a VDP, a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total number of dwelling units shall be restricted for 45 years in the following manner: 
(a)  Ten percent (10%) of the units shall be affordable to persons or families qualifying as low income; and 
(b)  Ten percent (10%) of the units shall be affordable to persons or families qualifying as moderate income. 
The method employed for defining affordability to persons of low and moderate income shall be defined by the Planning Board, which may enlist the assistance of the City Community Development Department. The forty-five (45) year restriction shall be approved as to form by legal counsel to the Planning Board, and a right of first refusal upon the transfer of such restricted units shall be granted to the City for a period not less than one hundred twenty (120) days after notice thereof by registered mail. The City may transfer that right of first refusal to another entity. 
5.16.13 Payment in Lieu 
Alternatively, in lieu of actually building the affordable unit(s), the applicant may contribute an appropriate amount per required affordable units to the City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund (Note: At the point of adoption of this ordinance this fund was not yet established, and it will take a separate City Council action to do so). In the case of fractional units, the contribution shall be prorated for the fractional portion of any unit. The Planning Board may engage technical experts to assist in determining the appropriate in lieu payment. 
5.16.14 Types of Buildings 
The VDP may consist of any combination of single family, two family and multifamily residential structures. A multifamily structure shall not contain more than four (4) dwelling units, unless an additional special permit is granted by the City Council. The architecture of all multifamily buildings shall be residential in character, with an articulated footprint, and varied facades. Residential structures should be oriented toward the street serving the premises and not toward the off street parking area, if any. 
5.16.15 Standards 
The development of a VDP shall conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Roads. The principal roadway(s) serving the site shall be designed to conform with the standards of the Planning Board, with the Subdivision Rules and Regulations serving as a guide, where the roadway is or may be ultimately intended for dedication and acceptance by the City. Private ways shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular traffic and shall be maintained by an association of unit owners or by the Applicant. 
1.  To the extent possible, roadways shall form an interconnected pattern of rectilinear or curvilinear streets. If one or more properties adjacent to a site being consider for development are undeveloped, a plan should provide at least one right of way, as may be required by Planning Board under its subdivision review regulations, suitable to provide future access connections to the adjacent areas. Cul de sacs are discouraged. 
2.  Parking may be provided on a street with the consent of the Planning Board, however, the minimum pavement width on streets where on-street parking is allowed shall not be less than twenty four (24) feet. 
(b)  Parking. Parking may be provided on-street or off street. 
1.  Parking provided shall be at a standard of at least one and a half (1.5) parking spaces provided per dwelling unit (see also 'roads' above). It may be preferred to have two (2) spaces per unit for those units with two or more bedrooms. 
2.  Parking areas with greater than eight spaces should be screened from public view, preferably by landscaping treatment that utilizes vegetation for screening. 
(c)  Drainage. Stormwater management shall be consistent with the requirements for subdivisions set forth in the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations. 
(d)  Perimeter Buffer. A perimeter buffer of not less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be provided, except where access roads enter or exit the premises. The Planning Board may waive this requirement where suitable screening is provided by fencing, plantings, or other methods. No structures or parking areas shall be located in the perimeter buffer. 
5.16.16 Designated Open Space 
Designated Open Space includes land within Areas Targeted for Lower Density Development that as been identified by the Conservation Commission or Planning Board as suitable for conservation, recreation, and open space purposes. 
(a)  Type I Designated Open Space. Type I Designated Open Space shall include any land within Areas Targeted for Lower Density Development that has one or more of the following characteristics: 
1.  The land is adjacent to existing protected open space or provides access to protected open space. 
2.  The land contains or is adjacent to a stream or creek that drains to Essex Bay, Little River, Jones River, Annisquam River, Ipswich Bay, or any beach. 
3.  The land provides access to a beach, dune, or tidal flat. 
4.  The land contributes to the area's scenic character by virtue of abutting a street. 
5.  The land has been recommended for acquisition by either the Conservation Commission or Planning Board. 
(b)  Type II Designated Open Space. Type II Designated Open Space shall include any other land within the Area Targeted for Lower Density Development that is deemed appropriate by the Planning Board for the purposes set forth below, including lands containing marsh and wetland. 
(c)  Purposes. Designated Open Space shall be restricted for conservation, historic preservation, outdoor education, recreation, public parks, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a combination of these uses, as determined by the Planning Board, and shall be served by suitable access for such purposes. 
(d)  Improvements. The Designated Open Space shall remain unbuilt upon, provided that Planning Board may permit up to ten percent (10%) of such open space to be altered for structures accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such open space or for pedestrian walks, bike paths, and the like. 
(e)  Ownership. Any Designated Open Space provided through this Section 5.16 shall, at the Planning Board's discretion, be conveyed to or restricted in favor of the following: 
1.  City of Gloucester acting through its City Council; or 
2.  A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space and any of the purposes for such open space set forth above. 
5.16.17 Decision 
The Planning Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a VDP after determining whether the VDP better promotes the purposes of Section 5.16.2 than would a conventional development on the same site. 
5.16.18 Relation to Other Requirements 
The submittals and permits of this section shall be in addition to any other requirements of the Subdivision Control Law or any other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance not superseded by the provisions of Section 5.7 or any other applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
5.16.19 Reports on the Use and Impacts of the Village Development Overlay District 
No more than five years from the date of adoption of this ordinance, the Community Development Department shall formulate a comprehensive written review of permit activity that has occurred under this ordinance and the resulting impacts within the community. Such report shall be transmitted to the Mayor who shall provide a copy to Planning Board and City Council. 
(Adopted January 29, 2003) 
5.17 - DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES 
5.17.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this section is to protect the health, safety, welfare and convenience of residents, minimize traffic congestion, and maintain the architectural integrity of the surrounding area by requiring performance standards for the construction and operation of drive-through facilities. 
5.17.2 Administration 
(a)  Drive-through facilities are allowed by special permit in only the following districts: Central Business (CB), Neighborhood Business (NB), Extensive Business (EB), Village Business (VB), Marine Industrial (MI), General Industrial (GI), and Business Park (BP). 
(b)  Dimensional Requirements: 
CB NB EB VB MI GI BP * Min. Lot Area (sf) 15,000 20,000 15,000 20,000 15,000 15,000 40,000 Min. Frontage (ft) 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 Min. Front Yard (ft) 30 30 30 30 30 30 40 Min. Side Yard (ft) 20 20 20 20 20 20 25 Min. Rear Yard (ft) 30 30 30 30 30 30 40  
* At least 15,000 sf must be designated for drive-through facility. 
5.17.3 Special Permit Application Procedures 
(a)  The Special Permit Granting Authority : The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for drive-through facilities shall be the City Council. The City Council shall follow the procedural requirements for special permits as set forth in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, and Sections 1.5 and 1.8 of the City of Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Application Submittal : The applicant shall submit to the City Clerk twelve (12) copies of an application for a special permit which shall include a site plan in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Section 5.17.5(b). 
(c)  Drive-Through Application Review : Review of a drive-through facility application shall be referred to the Planning Board for their review within 45 days of receipt of the application from the City Council. The Planning Director will submit the application to key municipal departments, including Planning, Building, DPW/Engineering, Public Health Department, Police, Fire, and Traffic Commission for their review and comment. 
(d)  Independent Review : At the City Council's discretion, an independent review may be requested at the applicant's expense. 
5.17.4 Definitions 
Access Connection : A means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian entrance or exit to a property from the public/private roadway, such as, but not limited to a driveway, curb cut, turnout. 
Driveway/Curb Cut Spacing : The distance between access points of the driveway, measured from the closest edge of pavement of the driveway or curb cut to the next closest edge of the pavement along the public/private roadway. 
Stacking Lane : An area of driving lane and waiting spaces provided for vehicles waiting for drive-through service, that is physically separated from other traffic and pedestrian circulation on the site. 
Stacking Space : An area within a stacking lane for vehicles waiting to order and/or finish a drive-through transaction. 
5.17.5 Performance Standards 
Drive-through service facilities shall comply with the performance standards set forth in this section. Except for dimensional requirements, the City Council may impose additional conditions or alter performance standards if it finds that a substantially better design will result from such additional or alternate standards. In so doing, the City Council shall consider how such additions or alterations will impact public safety, character of the neighborhood, and the environment. 
(a)  Traffic Impact Study (TIS). The City Council shall require that a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) be prepared by a registered professional engineer who is a member of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). The purpose of a TIS is to document existing traffic conditions in the vicinity of the proposed drive-through facility, to describe the volume and effect of projected traffic generated by the proposed project, and to identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on traffic, as stated in the following: 
(1)  Existing Traffic Conditions: Average daily and peak hour volumes, average and peak speeds, sight distances, appropriate and pertinent accident data, levels of service of intersections and streets likely to be affected by proposed project. Generally, such data shall be presented for all streets and intersections adjacent to or within 500 feet of the project's boundaries. The data will be no more than twenty-four (24) months old, upon submittal unless other data is specifically approved by the City Council. 
(2)  Projected Impact of Proposed Project: Projected peak hour and daily traffic generated by the drive-through on roads and ways in the vicinity; sight lines at the intersections of the proposed driveways and streets; existing and proposed traffic controls in the vicinity; projected post development traffic volumes and levels of service of intersections and streets likely to be affected by proposed project. 
(b)  Site Plan. The site plan, prepared by a registered Professional Civil Engineer and Registered Land Surveyor, shall accompany the special permit application and shall include the following items and information: 
(1)  Site plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40'), or such scale as may be approved by the City Council. 
(2)  Name and address of project; name and address of owner; name and address of Engineer and Surveyor; assessors map and lot numbers; zoning district; locus (1" = 1,000'); North arrow; boundaries; topography; date; scale of plan. 
(3)  The proposed site plan, incorporating recommendations of the Traffic Impact Study shall minimize points of traffic conflict, both pedestrian and vehicular. The following guidelines shall be used to evaluate compliance with this standard: 
a.  Entrance and exit driveways shall be located and designed to create maximum practicable distance from existing and proposed access connections from adjacent properties. 
b.  Where possible, driveways shall be located opposite similar driveways. 
c.  Left-hand turning movement shall be minimized. 
d.  No parking shall be allowed on street within 8' of curb cuts. 
e.  No vehicular waiting shall be allowed on the street. Vehicle stacking spaces to accommodate waiting traffic shall be provided in the drive-through lane. 
f.  Pedestrian and bicycle circulation shall be separated from motor vehicle circulation as far as practicable by an ADA compliant walkway from sidewalk to facility. 
g.  Off-street loading shall comply with Zoning Ordinance Section 4.2. 
(4)  The location and use of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, including their dimensions, height, and exterior entrances and exits. Location of all service equipment. Location of all present and proposed public and private ways, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, ramps, curbs, fences, walls, buffers for screening purposes, paths, landscaping, planting areas, signs, refuse and other waste disposal containers. Detailed location of accessing entrance and exit, and sight distance for any access connection applicable to site. 
(5)  Location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities. 
(6)  Lighting shall be shown on the site plan. 
(c)  Site Access 
(1)  Width of the access connections at the property line shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet, unless the TIS identifies and the City Council agrees to the need for turning lanes from the development onto the adjacent public road. 
(2)  All streets and intersections impacted by the project as identified in TIS shall have a comparable level of service to pre-development conditions. 
(d)  Stacking Lanes 
(1)  Entrances to stacking lane(s) shall be clearly marked and a minimum of forty (40) feet from the intersection with the public street. The distance shall be measured from the property line along the street to the beginning of the entrance. 
(2)  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length and ten (10) feet in width along all portions of the lane(s). 
(3)  Fast food restaurants shall have a minimum of 5 spaces for queuing cars accessing the ordering window or speaker. If pickup/payment windows are provided separately, the queuing distance between windows and/or speaker(s) shall be a minimum of 2 stacking spaces. Banks, service and retail establishments shall have a minimum of 3 stacking spaces for queuing cars accessing a drive-through window or speaker. 
(4)  Stacking lanes shall be delineated from traffic aisles, other stacking lanes and parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping and the use of alternative paving materials or raised medians. 
(5)  Stacking lanes shall be designed to prevent congestion, both on site and on adjacent streets. 
(6)  Stacking lane layout: 
a.  Shall be integrated with the on-site circulation pattern; 
b.  Shall minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic by providing physical and visual separation between the two; 
c.  Shall provide an emergency by-pass or exit, if said stacking lane is curbed; 
d.  Shall not impede or impair access into or out of parking spaces; 
e.  Shall not impede or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic movement; 
f.  Shall not interfere with required loading and trash storage areas; 
g.  Shall not enter or exit directly into a public right-of-way. 
h.  Shall not be located in the setbacks in NB and VB districts exclusively. 
(e)  Layout of Outdoor Service Equipment 
(1)  Menu Signs/Speaker Boards: 
a.  Signs shall be a maximum of thirty (30) square feet, with a maximum height of six (6) feet, and shall not require a separate permit under the sign ordinance, but shall follow requirements of Zoning Ordinance Section 4.3. 
b.  Menu Signs and speaker boards shall be physically shielded from any public street and residential properties by landscaping or other means. 
c.  Outdoor speakers shall comply with the noise ordinance of Chapter 13 of the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances, and should be directed away from abutting properties. 
(2)  Dumpsters: 
a.  Based on the Board of Health "Dumpster Regulations", no dumpster shall be placed within fifteen (15) feet of a building unless approved by the Fire Chief, and shall not block a public way or sidewalk. 
b.  No dumpster shall be placed within ten (10) feet of a property line. 
(f)  Lighting 
(1)  Flood and area lighting is unacceptable. 
(2)  All luminaries/lighting fixtures shall have a total cutoff of all light at less than ninety (90) degrees from vertical. The lighting from the fixture shall only be visible from below. 
(3)  Shielding shall provide cutoff of all light at the property lines of the subject site. 
(4)  The luminaries/lighting fixtures in the parking lot, sidewalks, paths and adjacent to the vehicular circulation system shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. 
(5)  Where wall-pack type luminaries/lighting fixtures are utilized for outdoor lighting, these shall be equipped with lenses to reduce glare. Wall-pack lighting shall direct lighting towards the ground. 
(6)  All luminaries/lighting fixtures shall be restricted to a maximum horizontal foot-candle level of 8.0 (initial), as measured directly below the fixture at grade. 
(g)  Landscaping 
(1)  A landscape plan, prepared by a Landscape Architect , shall show all existing natural land features and all proposed changes to these features. 
(2)  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state as much as possible by minimizing tree and soil removal and by avoiding abrupt grade changes. There should be an attempt to blend into existing topography. 
(3)  There shall be a five (5) foot minimum landscaped buffer zone between the exterior lot lines of the proposed development and abutters in NB and VB Districts. Open space should landscaped with a variety of plant material and maintained accordingly. 
(h)  Operation and Security 
(1)  The applicant shall submit information on the hours of operation, security on the site, employee parking, and plans for cleanup and maintenance. 
(Adopted July 13, 2004) 
5.18 - MARINE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
For all uses requiring a special permit in the Marine Industrial (MI) district, and located within (200) feet of the water's edge, in addition to the requirements for the issuance of special permits contained in Sections 1.5.3, 1.5.4, and 5.7 herein, the Special Permit Granting Authority "in approving the project must find that: 
1.  The proposed use will not displace an existing water-dependent use with a non water-dependent use; 
2.  The proposed use will not, by virtue of its location, scale, duration, operation, or other aspects, pre-empt or interfere with existing or future development of water-dependent uses of the project site or surrounding property; 
3.  The proposed use is compatible with the working waterfront character of the zone; 
4.  The proposed project will not displace existing commercial fishing vessel berthing in Gloucester Harbor, without providing equivalent space and draft at a suitable alternative site not already used by commercial fishing vessels; 
5.  The proposed use will not adversely affect the preservation of water-dependent uses on surrounding properties. 
In exercising its power under this section, the Special Permit Granting Authority may impose reasonable modifications, conditions, or limitations as are necessary or appropriate to ensure that the presence of the proposed development does not result in any of the above adverse impacts or otherwise adversely affect the primary character of the area as a working waterfront. 
(Ord. of 3-30-2010(6)) 
5.19 - LOCATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICES 
Facilities for motor vehicle service, rental, or repair shall not be granted a Special Permit except in conformity with the following: 
5.19.1  No vehicular entrance or exit shall be located within 25 feet of a residential district or the sideline of an intersecting street. 
5.19.2  No vehicular entrance or exit shall be located within 400 feet of the nearest property line of any school, library, hospital, playground or religious institution, unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that special circumstances of the site or use effectively mitigate concern over the hazard. 
5.19.3  There shall be adequate space off-street for not fewer than two cars to await service per filling position. 
5.19.4  Automatic car washes shall provide space for not less than 10 cars per washing lane to queue off-street and, where waste water does not discharge directly into a public sewer, shall provide positive means of preventing water pollution. Water recycling requirements of the Gloucester Department of Public Works shall be complied with. 
5.20 - PORK CHOP LOTS 
5.20.1 Conditions for Issuance 
The Gloucester Planning Board may authorize Pork Chop Lots by Special Permit (SP) in cluster developments and in residential districts on streets in existence at the date of adoption of this Section, provided that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  That the site is an appropriate location for the proposed use and that the character of adjoining uses will not be adversely affected. 
(b)  That the minimum lot area of the Pork Chop Lot is at least two times the minimum lot area required in the zoning district in which the Pork Chop Lot is located, except that the portion of the lot to the way shall not be included in the lot area calculation. (Amended 12/8/98) 
(c)  That safe and adequate vehicular access can be provided on said lot, without easements, from the street frontage to the principal building on the lot. 
(d)  That the width of the Pork Chop Lot measured at the shortest distance between side lot lines is no less than forty feet (40') at any point between the street and the existing or proposed building on the lot. 
(e)  That the depth of that portion of the lot which fails to satisfy the lot frontage requirements set forth in Section 3.2 shall not exceed a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from the street, measured along the proposed driveway. 
(f)  All front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be the same as the yard setbacks of the zone in which the lot is located. 
(g)  That no more than one principal building shall be located on a lot. 
(h)  That there is not more than one (1) other Pork Chop Lot with frontage contiguous to 
5.20.2 Procedure for Special Permits 
The Planning Board shall follow the procedural requirements for Special Permits as per Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A and Section 1.5 of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(Adopted December 22, 1987) 
5.21 - COMMON DRIVEWAYS 
5.21.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to enhance the safety and welfare of residents of common driveways and to clarify the rights and responsibilities of builders and residents of common driveways, and of the City of Gloucester, in order to improve the public safety along streets by reducing the number of curb cuts, to reduce the negative visual impact of multiple driveways exiting upon a street and to minimize negative impacts on natural resources. 
5.21.2 Definition 
Vehicular access, extending from a street, serving as a common vehicular access to more than one (1) but not more than four (4) residential lots is a common driveway, built in accordance with standards established in "Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, Massachusetts" where allowed by Special Permit. The driveway will lie entirely within the lots being served. 
5.21.3 Prohibition 
A common driveway which would serve more than four (4) residential lots is prohibited. 
5.21.4 Scope 
Common driveways may be allowed by Special Permit and plan approved by the Planning Board for single and two-family residential use only. Where the proposed development constitutes a subdivision under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL, Chapter 41, sec. 81-K et seq., this ordinance shall not apply. All lots associated with the use of a common driveway must provide off-street parking as indicated in Section 4.1 "Off Street Parking." A common driveway shall not become a public or private way. The City of Gloucester shall not be required to provide construction, reconstruction, maintenance, snowplowing, school bus pickup or police patrols along a common driveway, unless by contract duly entered into by the City and all landowners served by the common driveway. 
3.5.5 [5.21.5] Conditions for Issuance 
The Planning Board may authorize the use of common driveways to provide access to no more than four (4) individual lots of land through issuance of a Special Permit (SP) provided the following conditions are met. 
(a)  Common driveways may not be used to satisfy zoning frontage requirements as defined in Section VI. Each lot served shall have lot frontage on a street which serves to satisfy lot frontage requirements as defined in Section VI. 
1.  No common driveway shall be extended or connected to any way other than at one point of intersection with a street providing frontage to the development. 
(b)  All lots to be served by common driveway must meet the requirements of a lot as defined in Section VI. All dimensional requirements, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance, for lots served by a common driveway, including but not limited to, setback and dimension of front, side and rear yards, as measured in relation to the street serving as the legal frontage for the lots, shall be the same as would be required for those lots had they not shared a common driveway. 
(c)  That common driveways are required to access over approved lot frontage as defined in Section VI. 
(d)  That each lot having access from an approved common driveway may be improved with no more than two (2) dwelling units and related accessory building and uses. 
(e)  That if the common driveway provides access to two (2) OR MORE (no more than four) lots, the landowners of all residences served by a common driveway shall be granted a right-of-way. Such right-of-way shall be recorded at the Essex County Registry of Deeds within thirty (30) days of approval by the Planning Board, together with a statement of covenants as follows: 
1.  The common driveway shall at no time be used to satisfy frontage requirements under the Zoning Ordinance; and 
2.  the common driveway shall at no time become the responsibility or liability of the City of Gloucester; and, 
3.  each landowner served by the common driveway shall be liable and responsible in whole for the repair and maintenance of any portion of the common driveway to which they have the exclusive Right of Way, such as a spur serving solely one parcel; and, 
4.  each landowner served by the common driveway shall be jointly and severally responsible and liable for the repair and maintenance of all portions of the common driveway to which more than one landowner hold a Right of Way. 
(f)  A covenant shall be entered into between the owner or developer and the City in a form acceptable to the Planning Board prohibiting the sale of lots and erection of building except for lots approved and/or prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, until such time as the common driveway has been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(g)  Common driveways shall provide access to the lots from the street on which the lots served have their frontage and must observe a twenty-five (25) foot setback from the sideline which the lot of origin shares with a lot not served by the common driveway. The Planning Board may waive this requirement if necessary. 
(h)  That common driveways be constructed in accordance with the standards established in "Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, Massachusetts." 
3.5.6 [5.21.6] Procedure for Special Permits 
The Planning Board shall follow the procedural requirements for Special Permits as per Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A and Section 1.5 of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(Adopted December 9, 1997) 
5.22 - COMMERCIAL LAND-BASED WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITIES 
5.22.1 PURPOSE and INTENT 
The purpose of this section is to accommodate land-based commercial wind energy conversion facilities (not residentially scaled facilities) in appropriate locations, while minimizing adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts of the facilities. The ordinance enables the review of commercial wind energy conversion facilities by the City Council in keeping with the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances and Zoning Ordinance. This ordinance is intended to be used in conjunction with other regulations adopted by the City, including historic district regulations, general wetlands ordinance, and other local regulations designed to encourage appropriate land use, environmental protection, and provision of adequate infrastructure development in the City of Gloucester. 
5.22.2 DEFINITIONS 
Commercial Wind Energy Conversion Facilities: Commercial wind energy conversion facilities include all equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, service and access roads, and one or more wind turbines. 
Distributed Generation Wind Facility: A wind energy conversion facility, which is primarily designed to provide its electrical output, or value thereof, for the use or benefit, accessory to a structure(s) on the same lot, or contiguous commonly owned lots. 
Height: The height of a wind turbine measured from existing average grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height. 
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production equipment, which is typically specified by the manufacturer with a "nameplate" on the equipment. 
Special Permit Granting Authority: The Special Permit Granting Authority for a commercial wind energy conversion facility shall be the Gloucester City Council. The special permit is subject to the following requirements as stated below in Section 5.22.6 as well as those set forth in Sections 1.5 and 1.8. 
Wind Monitoring or Meteorological Tower: A temporary tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction, and used to determine how much wind power a site can be expected to generate. 
Wind Turbine: A device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more blades. 
5.22.3 APPLICABILITY 
(a)  The construction of a commercial wind energy conversion facility shall be permitted in the R-80, R-40, and R-30 zoning districts and on municipally owned property, subject to the issuance of a Special Permit by the City Council and provided that the use complies with all requirements set forth in this section of the zoning ordinance (see Section II, 2.3.6, Other Principal Uses Numbers 8 & 9). 
The construction of an accessory commercial wind energy conversion facility shall be permitted in the MI, GI and BP zoning districts and on municipally owned property, subject to the issuance of a Special Permit by the City Council and provided that the use complies with all requirements set forth in this section of the zoning ordinance (see Section II, 2.3.7, Accessory Use Number 15) 
(b)  Wind monitoring or meteorological towers shall be allowed by-right on a temporary basis, in the MI, GI, BP, R-80, R-40, and R-30 districts and on municipally owned land subject to the issuance of a building permit (see Section II, 2.3.6, Other Principal Uses Number 10; Section II, 2.3.7 Accessory Use Number 17). 
(c)  All such wind energy conversion facilities shall be constructed and operated in locations that minimize adverse visual, safety, and environmental impacts. No special permit shall be granted unless the special permit granting authority finds in writing that 
1.  The proposed location is an appropriate location on the site; 
2.  The use will not pose a significant adverse impact to the health or public safety of the neighborhood; 
3.  There will be no serious hazard to pedestrians or vehicles from the use; and 
4.  Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the use. 
These criteria are to be used in lieu of the special permit criteria outlined in Section 1.8. 
(d)  Commercial wind energy conversion facility and temporary meteorological towers will not require a Height Exception under Section 3.2 of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(e)  Such permits may also impose reasonable conditions, safeguards and limitations on time and use and may require the applicant to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the wind energy conversion facility, should they occur. 
5.22.4 SITE CONTROL 
The applicant shall submit documentation of the legal right to install and use the proposed facility at the time of application for a Special Permit. Documentation should also include proof of control over the land in setback or clear areas, if required under Section 5.22.5. Control shall mean legal authority to prevent the use of any structure within the setback or clear area for human habitation or other uses. 
5.22.5 PROOF of LIABILITY INSURANCE 
The applicant shall be required to provide evidence of the availability of liability insurance in an amount sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures occasioned by the failure or use of the facility. 
5.22.6 SPECIAL PERMIT REGULATIONS 
Proposed wind energy conversion facilities shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable electrical, construction, noise, safety, environmental and communications requirements. 
(a)  Height 
Commercial wind energy conversion facilities shall be no higher than 500 feet above the existing average grade. The height of all wind energy conversion facilities shall be measured from the existing average grade to the highest point reached by the rotor blades. The City Council may allow this height to exceed 500 feet as part of the special permit process if the project proponent can demonstrate: 
1.  That the additional height is needed and would result in significant additional benefits in terms of energy production and efficiency, and 
2.  By submission of substantial evidence that such height reflects industry standards for a similarly rated wind energy conversion facility, and 
3.  That the proposed wind energy conversion facility satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a special permit under this section of the zoning ordinance. 
4.  The allowance to exceed the height of 500 feet shall not constitute a variance from the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Setbacks 
1.  Each wind energy conversion facility and its associated equipment shall comply with the building setback provisions of the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
2.  In addition, the following setbacks shall be observed: 
i)  In order to ensure public safety and to protect the interests of neighboring property owners, the minimum distance from the base of any wind turbine tower to the nearest building on the lot, or on contiguous commonly owned lots, shall be 50 feet; the minimum distance from a public or private way shall be 100 feet; and the minimum distance from property lines shared with abutting properties shall be 150 feet; and in no case shall be less than the length of an individual rotor blade measured from the hub of the wind turbine, whichever is greater. 
ii)  Wetland resources and their buffer zones may be used for the purposes of providing setbacks. 
iii)  In the R-80, R40, and R-30 residential districts, with the exception of city-owned land, the minimum lots size for a wind energy conversion facility shall be 12.5 acres and the minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet. The minimum distance of a proposed turbine to any existing residential dwelling shall be equal to the height of the wind turbine to the tip of its rotor blade at its highest point. 
iv)  The setbacks should be kept free of all habitable structures so long as the facility is in place; however, these areas need not be cleared of trees or other vegetation. Setbacks shall be measured from the outside surface at the base of the turbine tower. The City Council may reduce the setbacks as appropriate, based on site specific considerations, and only after review of substantial evidence, including but not limited to detailed engineering reports or product engineering certification, which demonstrate that safety concerns have been minimized and that setbacks have been complied with to the maximum extent practicable. 
v)  Such reduction of required setbacks, if granted, shall not constitute a variance from the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Visual Impact 
The proponent shall demonstrate through project siting and proposed mitigation that the wind energy conversion facility minimizes impact on the visual character of surrounding neighborhoods and the community. This may include, but not be limited to, information regarding site selection, turbine design, buffering, lighting, cable layout, and demonstration of compliance with all special permit regulations. 
(d)  Color 
Wind energy conversion facilities shall be painted a non-reflective color that blends with the sky and clouds. 
(e)  Equipment Shelters 
All equipment necessary for monitoring and operation of the wind energy conversion facilities should preferably be contained within the turbine tower. If this is not feasible, ancillary equipment may be located outside the tower. Whenever reasonable, structures should be joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts, contained either within an underground vault, enclosed within a separate structure, or shielded from view either by year-round landscaping or vegetated buffers. Equipment shelters shall only be used for housing of equipment for this particular site. 
(f)  Lighting and Signage 
1.  Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The proponent shall provide a copy of the FAA's determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for the structure. 
2.  Lighting of equipment structures and any other facilities on site (except lighting required by the FAA) shall be shielded from abutting properties. 
3.  Signs on the facility shall be limited to: 
i)  Those needed to identify the property and the owner/operator, and to warn of any danger; and 
ii)  Educational signs providing information on the technology and renewable energy usage. 
4.  All signs shall comply with the plans approved and incorporated by reference in a special permit granted under this section. 
(g)  Utility Connections 
All utility connections from the commercial wind energy conversion facility site shall be underground to the nearest utility pole or transformer, unless the applicant demonstrates by substantial evidence that the construction of such underground facilities would be unreasonable owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape, or topography of such a site or if the utility provider requires the connections to be above ground. The electrical transformer for the utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider. 
(h)  Support Towers 
Monopole towers are the preferred type of support for commercial wind facilities. 
5.22.7 ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS 
(a)  Wetlands 
Commercial wind energy conversion facilities shall be located in a manner consistent with all applicable local and state wetlands regulations. 
(b)  Land Clearing/Open Space 
Wind energy conversion facilities shall be designed to minimize land clearing and fragmentation of open space areas, and shall avoid permanently protected open space when feasible. Wind turbines should be sited to make use of previously developed areas wherever possible. 
(c)  Stormwater 
Stormwater run-off and erosion control shall be managed in a manner consistent with all applicable state and local regulations. 
(d)  Noise 
The commercial wind energy conversion facility and associated equipment shall conform to Massachusetts noise regulations (310 CMR 7.10) and the provisions of the Gloucester Code of Ordinances Chapter 13: Noise. An analysis, prepared by a qualified acoustical engineer, shall be present to demonstrate compliance with these noise standards and be consistent with Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection guidance for noise measurement. 
(e)  Shadowing/Flicker 
Wind energy conversion facilities shall be sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadowing or flicker impacts. The proponent has the burden of proving that this effect does not have significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either through siting or mitigation. 
(f)  Safety Standards 
No hazardous materials or waste shall be discharged on the site of any commercial wind energy facility. If any hazardous materials or wastes are to be used on site, unless contained within the wind turbine itself, there shall be provisions for full containment of such materials or waste. An enclosed containment area, designed to contain at least 110 percent of the volume of the hazardous materials or waste stored or used on the site may be required to meet this requirement. The wind turbine shall also be designed to prevent unauthorized access. 
5.22.8 PRE-APPLICATION 
(a)  Conference: Prior to the submission of an application for a Special Permit under this regulation, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the City Council at a public meeting to discuss the proposed wind energy conversion facility in general terms and to clarify the filing requirements. The City Council shall meet with the applicant under this regulation within 35 days following a written request submitted to the City Council and the City Clerk. If the City Council fails to meet with an applicant who has requested such a meeting within 35 days of said request and said meeting has not been postponed due to mutual agreement, the applicant may proceed with a Special Permit application under this ordinance without need for a pre-application conference. 
(b)  Filing Requirements: The purpose of the conference is to inform the City Council as to the preliminary nature of the proposed wind energy conversion facility. As such, no formal filings are required for the pre-application conference. However, the applicant is encouraged to prepare sufficient preliminary architectural and engineering drawings to inform the City Council of the location of the proposed facility, as well as its scale and overall design. 
5.22.9 SPECIAL PERMIT APPLICATION FILING REQUIREMENTS 
The following shall be included with an application for a Special Permit for each commercial wind energy conversion facility: 
(a)  General Filing Requirements: 
1.  Name, address, telephone number and original signature (photo-reproductions of signatures will not be accepted) of applicant and any co-applicants. Co-applicants may include the landowner of the subject property or the operator of the wind energy conversion facility. If telecommunications antennae are proposed, a telecommunications carrier should be a co-applicant. 
2.  If the applicant or co-applicant will be represented by an agent, the name, address and telephone number shall be provided and original signature authorizing the agent to represent the applicant and/or co-applicant shall also be provided. Photo-reproductions of signatures will not be accepted. 
3.  Documentation of the legal right to install and use the proposed facility and proof of control over the setback or clear areas, proof of financial surety that satisfies Section 5.22.5, proof of liability insurance that satisfies Section 5.22.5, certification of lighting requirements from the FAA, statement that satisfies noise requirements as per Section 5.22.7 (d), and certification of attainment for Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR Part 15) relating to interference with radio or television reception. 
(b)  Location Map Filing Requirements 
Copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle Map, at a scale of 1:25,000, showing the proposed facility site, including turbine sites, and the area within at least two miles from the facility. Zoning district designation for the subject parcel should be included; however copy of zoning map with the parcel identified is suitable . 
(c)  Site Plan Requirements 
Twelve (12) copies of a one-inch-equals-40 feet vicinity plan, signed and sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer or Licensed Surveyor showing the following: 
1.  Property lines for the subject property and all properties adjacent to the subject property within 300 feet. 
2.  Outline of all existing buildings, including purpose (e.g., residential buildings, garages, accessory structures, etc.) on subject property and all adjacent properties within 300 feet. Distances, at grade, from the proposed wind energy conversion facility to each building on the vicinity plan shall be shown. 
3.  Proposed location of wind energy conversion facility, including all turbines, fencing, associated ground equipment, transmission infrastructure and access roads. Including: 
i)  Location of all roads, public and private, on the subject property and on all adjacent properties within 300 feet including driveways proposed to serve the wind energy conversion facility, 
ii)  All proposed changes to the existing property, including grading, vegetation removal and temporary or permanent roads and driveways, 
iii)  Representations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed facility, including cable locations, parking areas and any other construction or development attendant to the wind energy conversion facility. 
4.  Tree cover and average height of trees on the subject property and adjacent properties within 300 feet. 
5.  Contours at each two feet Above Mean Sea Level (AMSL) within 50 feet of proprosed wind energy conversion facility and at a five foot interval for the remainder of the subject property and adjacent properties within 300 feet. 
6.  Representation of location of viewpoint for the sight-line diagram referenced below. 
(d)  Visualizations 
The special permit granting authority shall select four (4) or more sight-lines, including from the nearest building with a view of the wind energy conversion facility, for pre- and post-construction view representations. Sites for the view representations shall be selected from populated areas or public ways within a 2-mile radius for the wind energy conversion facility. View representations shall include the following characteristics 
1.  View representations shall be in color and shall include actual pre-construction photographs and accurate post-construction simulations of the height and breadth of the wind energy conversion facility (e.g. superimpositions of the facility onto photographs of existing views). 
2.  All view representations shall include existing or proposed buildings and tree cover. 
3.  Applicant must include a description of the technical procedures and equiptment utilized and followed in producing the visualizations. 
(e)  Elevations 
Siting elevations, or views at-grade from the north, south, east and west for a 50-foot radius around the proposed wind energy conversion facility. Elevations shall be at one-quarter inch equals one foot horizontal scale and one-eighth inch equals one foot vertical scale and show the following: 
1.  Wind energy conversion facility, and if applicable, the security barrier and associated equipment, with total elevation dimensions of all parts of the facility. 
2.  Security barrier. If the security barrier will block views of the wind energy conversion facility, the barrier drawing shall be cut away to show the view behind the barrier. 
3.  Any and all structures on the subject property. 
4.  Existing trees at current height and proposed trees at proposed height at time of installation, with approximate elevations dimensioned. 
5.  Grade changes, or cuts and fills, to be shown as original grade and new grade line, with two-foot contours above mean sea level. 
(f)  Materials and Colors 
Materials provided for the proposed wind energy conversion facility and all other proposed equipment/facilities shall be specified by type and specific treatment. Colors of the proposed wind energy conversion facility, antennas, mounts, cables, cable runs, equipment shelters and security barriers if any, shall be represented by a color board showing actual colors proposed. 
(g)  Balloon or Crane Test: 
Within 30 days of the submission of an application for a Special Permit, the applicant shall arrange for a balloon or crane test at the proposed site, or alternate means approved by the SPGA, to illustrate the height of the proposed facility. The date, time (and alternate if needed due to weather) and location of such test shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 14 days, but not more than 21 days prior to the test. Such advertisement shall be made at the expense of the applicant. In addition, notice shall be provided to the city, abutters, and abutters to abutters within 300 feet as certified by the Assessor's Department, with proof of notification. 
(h)  Operation & Maintenance Plan 
The applicant shall submit a plan for maintenance of access roads and stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the wind energy conversion facility. 
(i)  Landscape Plan 
A plan indicating all proposed changes to the landscape of the site, including temporary or permanent roads or driveways, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, other than FAA lights, screening vegetation or structures. Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting properties and be directed downward with full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution. 
(j)  Noise and Environmental Requirements 
The applicant shall provide a statement listing the existing noise levels and the maximum future projected noise levels from the proposed wind energy conversion facility, measured in decibels for the following: 
1)  Existing, or ambient: the measurement of existing noise at the property boundaries, buildings of abutters and nearest inhabited residence. 
2)  Existing plus proposed wind energy conversion facility: maximum estimate of noise from the proposed wind energy conversion facility plus the existing noise environment. Such statement shall be certified and signed by a qualified engineer, stating that noise projections are accurate and meet the noise standards of this ordinance and applicable state requirements. 
3)  As proposed, all requirements are specified to ensure a legally defensible position by the City. 
These criteria shall be measured at both the property line and at the nearest inhabited residence. The applicant shall also submit information illustrating how the project is consistent with the environmental standards of this ordinance. 
(k)  Emergency Services 
The applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary and site plan to the local police and fire departments. The applicant shall cooperate with local police and fire departments in developing an emergency response plan. 
5.22.10 INDEPENDENT CONSULTANTS 
Upon submission of an application for a special permit, the special permit granting authority is authorized to hire outside consultants for a peer review of an application, pursuant to MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, Appendix A Rule 25: Rules of Procedure of the Zoning Ordinance and MGL Chapter 44, Section 53G, whose services shall be paid for by the applicant. 
5.22.11 USE by TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS 
Wind energy conversion facilities may be used to locate telecommunications antennas; such use shall be subject to applicable regulations governing such uses, and subject to the provisions of Section 5.13 Personal Wireless Service Facilities of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
(a)  All ground-mounted telecommunications equipment shall be located in either a shelter, within the wind turbine tower or otherwise screened from view year-round, either through effective landscaping or existing natural vegetated buffers; and 
(b)  Antennas shall be mounted to be in keeping with the design of the wind turbine tower; and 
(c)  All cabling associated with the personal wireless facility shall be contained within the tower structure or enclosed within a conduit painted to match the turbine mount. 
5.22.12 TERM OF SPECIAL PERMIT 
A Special Permit issued for any wind energy conversion facility shall be valid for 25 years, unless extended or renewed. With a written request from the owner, the time period may be extended or the Special Permit may be renewed upon satisfactory operation of the facility. At the end of that time period, the wind energy conversion facility shall be removed as required by this section. 
Any special permit granted under this subsection shall lapse if construction of the commercial wind energy conversion facility does not commence within two years of the date of its issuance, unless good cause for failure to begin construction can be shown. Good cause may include delay in shipment of wind energy conversion facility components, but financial ability shall not be cause for delay. 
The applicant or facility owner shall maintain a phone number and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project. 
5.22.13 MODIFICATIONS 
The City Council shall be notified of all modifications to a commercial wind energy conversion facility made after issuance of the Special Permit, and such modification shall require approval by the City Council in accordance with the city's existing process for modifications to Special Permit approvals. After issuance of a special permit, a change in model or manufacturer of wind turbine to be installed, which complies within 15 feet of the height granted and all other special permit regulations and conditions, shall not require amendment of the special permit. 
5.22.14 MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE 
As proposed, all requirements are specified to ensure a legally defensible position by the City. 
(a)  The applicant shall maintain the wind energy conversion facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the foundation and support structure and security barrier (if applicable), and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping if present. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Fire Chief. The project owner shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the wind energy conversion facility and access road, unless accepted as a public way, and the cost of repairing any damage occurring as a result of operation and construction. 
(b)  The applicant shall notify the City Council of the wind energy conversion facility becoming operational; thereafter the applicant shall submit to the City at annual intervals, a report detailing operating data for the facility, including but not limited to days of operation, energy production, and certification of compliance with noise standards; such measurements shall be signed by an acoustical engineer stating that the noise measurements are accurate and meeting the Noise Standards sub-section of this ordinance. 
(c)  Notice shall be provided to the city of any change in ownership of the facility or discontinued operation for more than a two week period. 
5.22.15 ABANDONMENT or DISCONTINUATION of USE 
(a)  At such time that a wind energy conversion facility is scheduled to be abandoned or discontinued, the applicant shall notify the city by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the facility shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the facility is inoperable for 180 days or if designated a safety hazard by the Building Inspector. In the case of a multi-turbine facility, the City Council shall determine in its decision what proportion of the facility would be inoperable for the facility to be considered abandoned. 
(b)  Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner may be required to physically remove the wind energy conversion facility within 180 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be extended at the request of the operator and at the discretion of the City Council. Physically remove shall include but not be limited to: 
1.  Removal of the wind turbine and tower, all machinery, equipment, equipment shelters, security barriers and all appurtenant structures from the subject property; 
2.  Proper disposal of all solid or hazardous materials and wastes from the site in accordance with local and state solid waste disposal regulations; 
3.  Restoration of the location of the wind energy conversion facility to its natural pre-existing condition, except that any landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may remain in the after- condition. Restoration shall be verified by the Gloucester Building Inspector and Gloucester Health Department. 
(c)  If an applicant fails to remove a wind energy conversion facility in accordance with this section of this ordinance, the city shall have the authority to enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. The City Council may require the applicant, and/or subsequent owners of the property or wind energy conversion facility, to provide a form of surety (i.e. post a bond, letter of credit or establish an escrow account or other) at the City Council's election at the time of construction to cover costs of the removal in the event the city must remove the facility. The amount of such surety shall be equal to 150 percent of the cost of compliance with this section. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for a Cost of Living Adjustment after 10 and 15 years. 
5.22.16 SEVERABILITY: The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Adopted 5-15-2007; Ord. of 4-27-2010(1)) 
5.23 - RESIDENTIAL LAND-BASED WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITIES 
5.23.1 PURPOSE and INTENT 
The purpose of this section is to accommodate land-based residential wind energy conversion facilities in appropriate locations, while minimizing adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts of the facilities. The ordinance enables the review of residential wind energy conversion facilities by the Zoning Board of Appeals in keeping with the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances and Zoning Ordinance. This ordinance is intended to be used in conjunction with other regulations adopted by the City, including historic district regulations, general wetlands ordinance, and other local regulations designed to encourage appropriate land use, environmental protection, and provision of adequate infrastructure development in the City of Gloucester. 
5.23.2 DEFINITIONS 
Residential Wind Energy Conversion Facility (RWECF): A wind energy conversion facility with a blade-tip height up to 150 feet as measured from existing average grade. 
Height: The height of a wind turbine measured from existing average grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point, or blade-tip height. 
Special Permit Granting Authority: The Special Permit Granting Authority for a residential wind energy conversion facility shall be the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Wind Turbine: A device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. A wind turbine typically consists of a tower, nacelle body, and a rotor with two or more blades. 
5.23.3 SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
A special permit may be issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the erection of a RWECF, as an accessory use in any designated residential district or in connection with any residential use in a designated commercial district, subject to the following conditions as well as those set forth in section 1.4.1.2. 
(a)  Location and Lot Size: Tower-mounted RWECFs are allowed in all residential zoning districts and VB. Tower-mounted residential wind energy facilities shall not be placed on lots of less than 40,000 square feet (see Section II, 2.3.7 Accessory Use Number 18). 
(b)  Height: The height of a wind turbine shall be no higher than 150 feet measured from existing average grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest point or blade-tip height. The Zoning Board of Appeals may allow this height to be exceeded as a part of the special permit process if the project proponent can demonstrate 
1.  That the additional height is needed and would result in significant additional benefits in terms of energy production and efficiency, and 
2.  By submission of substantial evidence that such height reflects industry standards for a similarly rated wind energy conversion facility, and 
3.  That the proposed wind energy conversion facility satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a special permit under this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 
4.  The allowance to exceed the height of 150 feet shall not constitute a variance from the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Set-backs: No part of the residential wind energy conversion facility support structure, including guy wire anchors, may extend closer to the property boundaries than the standard structure setbacks for the zoning district where the land is located. 
1.  The base of the residential wind turbine tower must be set back at least 10 feet from any habitable structure on the lot on which it is located. 
2.  In order to ensure public safety and to protect the interests of neighboring property owners, the minimum distance from the base of the wind turbine tower to the nearest dwelling, business or institutional use on abutting properties shall be 1.0 times the overall blade tip height, and 100 feet from property lines, and public or private ways. A setback from a lot line shall not be required when the abutting owner(s) grants an easement to the owner of the RWECF. Such easements shall be provided at the time of application. In a case where the applicant is also the owner of the abutting property, the setback shall be measured from the furthest lot line of the abutting property. 
3.  Setbacks distances may be reduced by Zoning Board of Appeals based on site specific criteria and if the project is consistent with special permit granting criteria and only after review of substantial evidence, including but not limited to detailed engineering reports or product engineering certification, which demonstrate that safety concerns have been minimized and that setbacks have been complied with to the maximum extent practicable. 
(d)  Noise: The RWECF shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the following maximum noise levels at ground level, as measured by the "A" scale of a Type 1 Sound Level Meter, at a point one hundred feet from the tower base, with the wind averaging thirty miles-per-hour or less: 
Ambient Reading 
(without RWECF operating) Maximum Reading 
(with RWECF operating) 45 dB or less 48 dB 45 dB 50 dB 50 dB 55 dB 55 dB 60 dB 60 dB 65 dB  
In no instance may the noise level at the lot line exceed 10 dB(A) over the ambient sound level. In a case where the applicant is also the owner of the abutting property, the distance shall be measured from the furthest lot line of the abutting property. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require an analysis, prepared by a qualified engineer to demonstrate compliance with these noise standards. 
(e)  Prevention of Tower Access: Climbing access to the tower shall be limited by one of the following methods: by placing climbing apparatus no lower than ten feet from the ground, or by placing shielding over climbing apparatus or access, or by installation of a fence that touches the ground with a minimum height of 6 feet. 
(f)  Compliance with FCC Regulations: The RWECF shall be certified by the manufacturer to be in conformance with the Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR Part 15) relating to possible interference with radio or television reception. 
(g)  Compliance with State Building Code: Building permit applications for residential wind energy conversion facilities shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the state building code and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted. This analysis is frequently supplied by the manufacturer. 
(h)  Compliance with FAA Regulations: Wind energy conversion facilities must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports. 
(i)  Compliance with National Electric Code: Building permit applications for wind energy conversion facilities shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code. This information is frequently supplied by the manufacturer. 
(j)  Utility Notification: No wind energy conversion facility shall be installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(l) [(k)]  Special Permit Approval Criteria: Any special permit for a RWECF granted shall meet the following conditions: 
1.  The specific site is an appropriate location for such use; and 
2.  The use will not pose a significant adverse impact to the health and safety of the neighborhood; and 
3.  There will be no serious hazard to pedestrians or vehicles from the use; and 
4.  Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the use. 
Such permits may also impose reasonable conditions, safeguards and limitations on time and use and may require the applicant to implement all reasonable measures to mitigate unforeseen adverse impacts of the wind energy conversion facility, should they occur. 
Residential wind energy conversion facilities will not require a Height Exception under Section 3.1.6 of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. 
5.23.4 ABANDONMENT 
A residential wind energy conversion facility will be considered to be abandoned if it is not operated continuously for a period of one year, or if it is designated a safety hazard by the building inspector. Once an RWECF is designated as abandoned or a safety hazard, the owner shall be required to immediately physically remove the installation, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Removal of RWECF, any equipment shelters and security barriers from the subject property; and 
(b)  Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid waste disposal regulations; and 
(c)  Restoring the location of the RWECF to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after-condition. 
The city retains the right to enter and remove an abandoned or hazardous RWECF that is not removed by the property owner within six (6) months from the date of abandonment. All RWECF removal and associated costs will be charged to the property owner as a tax lien on the property. 
5.23.5 LAPSE of SPECIAL PERMIT 
Any special permit granted under this subsection shall lapse if construction of the RWECF is not commenced within two years following the date of its issuance, unless good cause for failure to begin construction can be shown by the applicant to the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the expiration of the Special Permit. Financial ability shall not be considered cause for delay. 
5.23.5 [5.23.6] SEVERABILITY 
The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Adopted May 15, 2007; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2)) 
5.24 - ACCESSORY IN-LAW APARTMENTS 
5.24.1 Purpose and Intent 
The purpose of Accessory In-law Apartments is to facilitate a family's need for housing family members, young and old, and preserve the character of neighborhoods in the City of Gloucester. The intent of this ordinance is to permit the use of Accessory In-law Apartments within existing and new owner-occupied single-family dwellings. This ordinance shall be enforced through an Amnesty Program which shall be adopted as a zoning amendment no later than December 31, 2007. 
5.24.2 Definitions 
Accessory In-law Apartment. A dwelling unit located within an owner-occupied single-family dwelling with one or more rooms with kitchen and bathroom facilities that are separate from those of the principal dwelling. The unit shall be designed for the occupancy of a family member(s), and shall remain under the same ownership of the principal dwelling. An Accessory In-law Apartment shall not constitute a two-family dwelling as defined in Section VI . No more than one Accessory In-law Apartment shall be located on a single lot. An Accessory In-law Apartment shall require a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit; provided that a group of six (6) or more persons who are not within the second degree kinship to each other, as defined by civil law, shall not be deemed to constitute a family. 
5.24.3 Administration 
(a)  Applicability: Accessory In-law Apartments are allowed by special permit in all residential districts . (See Section II, 2.3.7, Accessory Use Number 20.) 
(b)  The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) shall be the Zoning Board of Appeals, which may grant a special permit for the alteration of an owner-occupied single-family dwelling to include an Accessory In-law Apartment subject to the following requirements as stated below in Section 5.24.4, as well as those set forth in Sections 1.5 and 1.8 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Prior to applying for an Accessory In-law Apartment Special Permit the owner may submit plans of the proposed work for completion to the Building Inspector for review. 
5.24.4 Special Permit Requirements 
(a)  The lot on which such Accessory In-law Apartment is located shall contain at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area. 
(b)  The size of the Accessory In-law Apartment shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet or 35% of the total gross floor area of the principal dwelling, whichever is greater, including a bathroom and kitchen. 
(c)  The record owner of the property shall live on the premises. The special permit shall be issued to the record owner of the property. 
(d)  An affidavit by the record owner, sworn under penalties of perjury, with proper documentation is required to certify that the Accessory In-law Apartment living area is for a family member(s). Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, the owner(s) must notify the Building Inspector in writing that the owner will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises as the owner's primary residence . 
(e)  The requirement for off-street parking as specified in Section 4.1 shall apply to the addition of one Accessory In-law Apartment in a single-family dwelling. 
(f)  Any exterior changes shall be limited to construction that allows for the accommodation of an Accessory In-law Apartment, and shall be consistent with the appearance of the structure as a single-family dwelling and with the character of the neighborhood. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require that there be no change or minimal change to any face of a building oriented toward a street. 
(g)  Existing utilities serving the principal dwelling such as water, sewer, electric, and gas may be utilized for the Accessory In-law Apartment. 
(h)  If the single-family dwelling is not served by city sewer, the sanitary disposal system shall comply with Massachusetts State Environmental Code, Title 5, and the Gloucester On-Site Wastewater Regulations. 
(i)  Compensatory Sewer Fee and Sewer Betterment Assessment: 
1.  If a sewer betterment has previously been assessed to an existing single-family dwelling, the permitting of the Accessory In-law Apartment shall not result in a compensatory sewer privilege fee under Code of Ordinances Section 23-23. 
2.  If the Accessory In-law Apartment to be permitted is in a single-family dwelling to be assessed a sewer betterment under Code of Ordinances Sections 23-15 and 23-24, the dwelling shall be counted as one unit and not as two. 
(j)  In granting a special permit the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and limitations as it may deem appropriate to avoid detriment to the neighborhood or to nearby property. 
(k)  The special permit shall be recorded at the South Essex District Registry of Deeds or Land Court against the title of the record owner of the lot. Prior to the issuance of a building permit the applicant must submit proof of the recording of the special permit to the Building Inspector. 
5.24.5 Monitoring and Enforcement 
(a)  Following the granting of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals hereunder, the Occupancy Permit for an Accessory In-law Apartment shall be renewed annually on or before January 31 st . The record owner shall submit a written letter to the Building Inspector verifying the continued use. For such purpose of renewal, the Building Inspector shall have the right at a reasonable time to inspect the premises to determine compliance per requirements of this ordinance and the special permit . 
(b)  The special permit shall terminate upon any one of the following, and the Accessory In-law Apartment shall be vacated and use discontinued: 
1.  When the house is sold or the ownership transferred; or 
2.  If the principal dwelling or the Accessory In-law Apartment ceases to be occupied by the owner or a family member ; or 
3.  Discontinued use of the Accessory In-law Apartment by the owner or a family Member for more than one year. 
(c)  When a single-family dwelling with an Accessory In-law Apartment is sold or transferred, and the new owner(s) wishes to continue use of said Accessory In-law Apartment, they must apply for a new special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals within six (6) months of the sale or transfer. 
(d)  The Accessory In-law Apartment shall not be held in, or transferred into separate ownership from the principal dwelling under a condominium form of ownership, or otherwise. 
(Adopted May 15, 2007) 
5.25 - HOTEL OVERLAY DISTRICT 
5.25.1 Purpose 
It is the purpose of the Hotel Overlay District (HOD) to encourage the use of property within its boundaries for a Hotel, as defined in Section 5.25.3, which has long been lacking in the downtown area. The HOD is designed to strengthen the area's existing uses and infrastructure by permitting the development of a Hotel, consistent with the goals of the City's planning, including but not limited to the City's Harbor Plan (December 2009) and the Gloucester Harbor Economic Development Plan (May 2011). Among the objectives of the HOD are: 
(a)  To facilitate development in the HOD of a Hotel together with uses accessory thereto; 
(b)  To stimulate the general economy of the City by creating jobs and generating real estate and other tax revenue; 
(c)  To encourage the appropriate use of land; 
(d)  To provide public access to open space. 
5.25.2 Overlay District 
5.25.2.1 Definitions 
For the purposes of the HOD only, "Hotel" shall be defined as follows: 
A structure or structures providing not less than 80 sleeping rooms for residents of transient guests, which also provides one or more of the following: parking facilities and/or parking structure, restaurant (with or without outdoor seating), meeting/conference/event facilities, fitness center, pool or other recreational facilities (indoor or outdoor), spa, retail sales, retail services and such other amenities and uses as may commonly be found in hotels. 
For the purposes of the HOD only, "Guest Unit" shall be defined as follows: 
A bedroom or suite of rooms, including a bedroom, in a Hotel, as defined in this Section 5.25, to be rented as a separate unit to transient guests. 
5.25.2.2 Map 
The HOD is an overlay district which encompasses land shown on Gloucester Assessors' Map 1, Lot 33. The land in the HOD is shown on the map entitled "Exhibit to Accompany an Amendment to the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance - Hotel Overlay District" dated May 2, 2012, incorporated herein by reference and hereby made a part of the City's official zoning map. A copy of said map is on file with the City Clerk's Office and the Community Development Department. 
5.25.2.3 Establishment 
The HOD is an overlay district superimposed on the underlying zoning district and the land affected thereby. The underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect. To the extent that any provision in this Section 5.25 is in contradiction or conflicts with any other provision of this ordinance, the provisions of this Section 5.25 shall control. 
5.25.2.4 Applicability 
The City Council shall be the special permit granting authority for special permits granted pursuant to this Section 5.25, and such special permits shall satisfy the criteria set forth in this Section 5.25. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Section 5.18 of this ordinance. Footnote 1 in Section 2.3.1, Footnote 1 in Section 2.3.4 and, Footnote 1 in Section 2.3.7 shall not be applicable to any Hotel use or uses accessory thereto, proposed to be made pursuant to this Section 5.25. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this ordinance, in any instance where the City Council has jurisdiction to issue a special permit for a Hotel pursuant to this Section 5.25, it shall also be the sole special permit granting authority for all other special permits required by this ordinance for such use and/or development. The Planning Board shall continue to be the issuer of any decisions relating to site plan approval under Section 5.8 of this ordinance. 
5.25.2.5 Standard to be Applied 
Special Permits under this Section 5.25 shall be granted under the standards of Section 1.8.3 (Special Permits), Section 5.7.5 (Major Projects), Section 5.5.4 (Lowlands), Section 3.1.6 (Height), Section 4.1 (Off-Street Parking) and Section 4.3 (Signs). 
5.25.3 Uses 
5.25.3.1 Uses Allowed by Right 
Uses allowed by right in the underlying zoning district shall be allowed by right in the HOD. 
5.25.3.2 Uses Authorized by Special Permit 
In addition to the uses permitted as of right or by special permit in the underlying zoning district(s), the following uses shall be permitted subject to the issuance of a special permit issued by the City Council: 
(a)  Hotel, as defined in 5.25.2.1; and 
(b)  The accessory uses authorized by the definition of "accessory use" in Section VI and by Section 2.3 of this ordinance, and other uses customarily accessory to a Hotel, whether or not specifically mentioned in Section 2.3. 
5.25.3.3 Prohibited Uses 
Any use not specifically allowed by right or by special permit within the HOD as provided in Section 5.25.3.1 and 5.25.3.2 or in the underlying zoning district[s] is prohibited, and any such prohibited use can only be authorized by a use variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
No Hotel, or portion thereof, shall be used as a condominium, cooperative, time share, and no guest shall be permitted to occupy a room for a period of time in excess of 90 consecutive days. No casino is allowed in the HOD. 
5.25.4 Dimensional Requirements 
5.25.4.1 Dimensional Table 
All buildings and structures permitted pursuant to the HOD shall conform to the following dimensional requirements, which requirements shall be deemed to be a part of Section 3.2.6 under an HOD designation: 
Minimum lot area (sf) 60,000 (f) Minimum lot area per two guest units(sf) 1,250 (f) Minimum open space per two guest units (sf) 0 (f) Minimum lot width (ft) 0 Minimum frontage (ft) 125 Minimum front yard (ft) 10 (g) Minimum side yards (ft. each) 0 Minimum rear yard (ft) 0 Maximum building height 40 (h) Distance between principal buildings 0  
(f)  In the HOD District, Lot Area shall be defined as the horizontal area of a lot, exclusive of any street or way open to public vehicular use. In calculating lot area in the HOD District, land below elevation 7.0 (NAVD 1988) shall be excluded from Lot Area. 
(g)  In the HOD District, a yard of ten feet from a lot line shall be provided when a building on an adjacent lot and existing at the time of the adoption of this Section 5.25, is located within ten feet of that lot line. 
(h)  In the HOD District, Building Height for a Hotel shall not include (a) mechanicals, (b) other non-habitable rooftop structures or (c) non-habitable towers or other architectural features which do not have a footprint greater than 400 s.f. and do not exceed the ridge height of a Hotel by more than 20 feet. Building Heights greater than 40 feet for a Hotel or tower heights greater than 20 feet above ridge height of a Hotel may be authorized by Special Permit issued by the City Council, using the standards as provided in Section 3.1.6 of the Ordinance. 
5.25.5 Off-Street parking and Loading Requirements 
5.25.5.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements 
The parking requirement for a Hotel within the HOD shall require a minimum of one space per guest unit plus one space for each three employees working during the largest shift, with no additional parking required for any use determined by the City Council to be accessory to a Hotel. If a proposed Hotel within the HOD does not conform with any parking provision in this ordinance, the special permit granting authority may authorize such nonconformance by the grant of a special permit under the standard set forth in Section 4.2.1. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the special permit granting authority may grant a special permit to authorize shared, valet and/or tandem parking, on and off-site, regardless of the distance of the off-site parcel from the principal use and to modify the design and layout standards of Section 4.1.4. 
In connection with any special permit application hereunder, the special permit granting authority may allow by special permit the use of a lot off-site to provide parking accessory to a Hotel located within the HOD, provided that such off-site lot is not located within a residential district, and a Hotel use on such off-site lot is allowed as of right or by special permit. Such off-site lot(s) may be a shared lot, served by a valet and/or may have tandem parking if so authorized by the special permit granting authority. 
5.25.5.2 Off-Street Loading Requirements 
The loading requirements for a Hotel within the HOD shall require a minimum of one loading bay. 
5.25.6 Signs 
Section 4.3 of this ordinance shall govern signage in the HOD. 
5.25.7 Submissions 
5.25.7.1 Contents 
Any application for a special permit under the HOD shall include a plan or plans with the information required by Section 1.5.3(c) and 1.5.3(d)of this ordinance, being the submittal requirements for "CCS" special permits and for a Major Project (See Section 5.7.1). In addition, any other special permits required pursuant to this ordinance, for which the City Council is designated under this Section 5.25 as the special permit granting authority, shall include the information required in this ordinance. Review of an application for a special permit shall comply with the procedural requirements of Section 1.5 of this ordinance as applicable to City Council special permits, including the requirements of notice and a public hearing and deadline for the same and for the issuance of a decision thereon. 
5.25.7.2 Lowland Requirements Applicability 
Any application hereunder shall conform to the requirements of Section 5.5.4 of this ordinance, as applicable. 
5.25.7 [5.25.8] Relief by Special Permit 
Except as provided in Section 5.25.3.3, in any instance where a Hotel, including any uses determined by the City Council to be accessory uses to a Hotel, does not comply with any provisions of this Section 5.25 or with respect to any provision of this ordinance other than those contained in Section II, regulating use, the City Council is authorized to issue zoning relief for such non-compliance by the issuance of a special permit. In granting a request for a special permit, the City Council may condition its grant on the provision of certain open space, or traffic or pedestrian improvements or other amenities. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2012(1)) 
5.26 - 107 & 125 ATLANTIC ROAD HOTEL OVERLAY DISTRICT 
5.26.1 Purpose 
It is the purpose of the 107 & 125 Atlantic Road Hotel Overlay District ("ARHOD") to encourage the continued use of properties within its bounds for a hotel, motel, or motor inn (hereinafter singularly or collectively referred to as a "Hotel"). The ARHOD is designed to encourage expansion of the area's existing uses and economic vitality by permitting the alteration, expansion, or replacement of existing Hotels and supporting uses, consistent with the goals of the City. Among the objectives of the ARHOD are: 
(a)  To facilitate the alteration, expansion, replacement of existing or new Hotels in the ARHOD together with uses accessory thereto; 
(b)  To stimulate the general economy of the City by creating jobs and generating real estate and other tax revenue; and 
(c)  To encourage the appropriate use of land. 
5.26.2 Overlay District 
5.26.2.1. Map 
The ARHOD is an overlay district that encompasses land shown on Gloucester Assessors' Map 72, Lots 1 and 3. Such land is also shown on the map entitled "Structure Location Plan at 107 & 125 Atlantic Road, Located in Gloucester, MA," dated September 21, 2012, incorporated herein by reference and hereby made a part of the City's official zoning map. 
5.26.2.2 Establishment 
The ARHOD is an overlay district superimposed on the underlying zoning district(s). The underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect. To the extent that any provision in this Section 5.26 is in contradiction or conflicts with any other provision of this ordinance, the provisions of this Section 5.26 shall control. 
5.26.2.3 Applicability 
The City Council shall be the special permit granting authority for any required special permits granted pursuant to this Section 5.26, and the issuance of such special permits shall satisfy the procedural criteria set forth in this Section 5.26 and other relevant sections of this Ordinance. 
5.26.2.4 Standard to be Applied 
Special Permits required under this Section 5.26 shall be granted under the standards of Section 1.8 (Special Permits) and Section 5.7 (Major Projects). 
5.26.3 Uses 
5.26.3.1 Uses Allowed by Right 
(a)  Uses allowed by right in the underlying zoning district(s) shall continue to be allowed by right in the ARHOD. 
(b)  Existing principal Hotel uses and existing uses accessory or incidental to a Hotel use shall also be allowed by right. 
5.26.3.2 Uses Authorized by Special Permit 
In addition to the uses permitted by right or by special permit in the underlying zoning district(s), the following uses shall be permitted subject to the issuance of a Special Permit issued by the City Council: 
(a)  Alterations, expansions, or replacement of an existing Hotel; and 
(b)  New independent accessory uses and other new uses customarily accessory to or incidental to a Hotel use. 
5.26.3.3 Prohibited Uses 
Any use not specifically allowed by right or by Special Permit within the ARHOD or in the underlying zoning district(s) is prohibited. 
5.26.4 Dimensional Requirements 
5.26.4.1 Dimensional Table 
All buildings and structures permitted pursuant to the ARHOD shall conform to the following dimensional requirements, which shall be incorporated into a separate table under ARHOD: 
Minimum lot area (sf) 40,000 Minimum lot area per guest unit (sf) 750 Minimum open space per guest unit (sf) 200 (i) Minimum lot width (ft) 100 Minimum frontage (ft) 80 Minimum front yard (ft) 30 (ii) Minimum side yards (ft) (each) 20 (ii, iii) Minimum rear yard (ft) 30 (ii) Maximum building height (ft) 30 (iv) Distance between principal buildings (ft) 10 (v) Maximum lot coverage 35%  
(i)  Or, at the option of the land owner, a contiguous area of "open space," as currently defined in this Ordinance of not less than 10,000 square feet all located in the front yard of the premises. 
(ii)  Or the setback existing on site on the date of the adoption of this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, whichever is less. For new construction outside the footprint of the buildings that exist as of the date of the adoption of this Section 5.26, the setbacks listed above shall apply. 
(iii)  For the purpose of alterations, expansions, or replacement of an existing Hotel pursuant to Section 5.26.3.2(a) only: if a side yard abuts a lot containing a one- or two-family residential dwelling, the setback for an addition to a Hotel higher than the existing height of the Hotel building as of the date of the adoption of this Section 5.26, but not for any addition to or alteration or replacement of the Hotel at or below the existing height, from only the side yard property line that abuts the lot containing the one- or two-family dwelling, shall be 75 feet. 
Additionally, any such upper portion set back from a side yard property line pursuant to this footnote shall not contain any windows facing that side yard unless installed for ventilation purposes only. 
(iv)  In the ARHOD, features such as chimneys, skylights, television antennae, and building mechanicals shall not be included in the determination of building height. The City Council may authorize an increase in building height above the maximum by special permit pursuant to Section 3.1.6. 
(v)  For principal buildings existing on site on the date of the adoption of this Section 5.26:10 feet or whatever currently exists on site on the date of the adoption, whichever is less. For new construction, no principal building shall be closer to another principle building on the same site than the sum of their respective heights; provided however, that the City Council may by special permit authorize a reduction in said distance upon a finding that such reduction does not pose an impediment to service access or access for public safety. 
5.26.5 Off-Street Parking Requirements 
5.26.5.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements 
The minimum parking requirements for an existing Hotel within the ARHOD shall be the number of parking spaces on site on the date of the adoption of this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, which shall be verified by the Building Inspector. With respect to any alteration, expansion, or replacement of an existing Hotel, the minimum number of required parking spaces shall be the sum of the actual number of spaces required under Section 4.1.2(b) of this Ordinance for the existing Hotel and any additional required spaces due to the alteration, expansion, or replacement, but in no circumstances less than the minimum number of spaces existing upon the date of the adoption of this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. 
If a proposed alteration, expansion, or replacement of an existing Hotel does not conform with any parking provision in this ordinance, the special permit granting authority may authorize such nonconformance by the grant of a special permit. 
5.26.6 Submissions 
5.26.6.1 Contents 
Any application for a special permit required under the ARHOD shall include a plan with the information required by Section 1.5.3(c) of this ordinance, being the submittal requirements for "CCS" special permits, unless the proposed use is a Major Project (see Section 5.7.1), in which case, the application shall comply with the requirements of Section 1.5.3(d) of this ordinance. In addition, any other special permits required pursuant to this ordinance, for which the City Council is designated as the special permit granting authority, shall include the information required in this ordinance. 
Review of an application for a special permit shall comply with the procedural requirement of Section 1.5 of this ordinance as applicable to City Council special permits, including the requirements of notice and a public hearing and deadline for the same and for the issuance of a decision thereon. 
5.26.7 Relief by Special Permit 
In any instance where a Hotel development does not comply with any provision of this Section 5.26 or any other provision of this ordinance, the City Council is authorized to issue zoning relief for such noncompliance by special permit(s) and not variance(s). 
(Ord. of 10-23-2012(1)) 
5.27 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTERS AND MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITIES[2] 
5.27.1 Definitions. 
A "Medical Marijuana Treatment Center" is defined in Section VI of this ordinance. 
A "Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility" is defined in Section VI or this ordinance. 
5.27.2 Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish specific standards and procedures for local permitting of medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana infused products, manufacturers and medical marijuana cultivation operations. 
The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a limitation on the content of any communicative matter or materials. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers or to other related matter or materials that are protected by the Constitution of the United States of America or of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny rights that distributors of such materials may have to sell or distribute such materials. Neither is it the purpose or intent of this Ordinance to legalize the sale, rental, or distribution of illicit or other illegal matter or materials. 
5.27.3 General. 
Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers and Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities may be authorized by Special City Council Permit as set forth in Table 2.3.2 (Community Service Use). An application for a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall follow the procedural requirements and standards of Section 5.7 Major Project and such application shall be required to obtain a Site Plan Approval from the Gloucester Planning Board pursuant to Section 5.8 of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance. The following regulations shall also apply to Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers as defined in this Ordinance 
5.27.4 Prohibition. 
No permit for a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be issued to any person convicted of violating the provision of G.L. c. 119, s. 73, or G.L. c. 94C or similar laws in other jurisdictions. Any applicant for permit, or operators at a facility approved under this Ordinance must allow for a criminal background check, which includes jurisdictions beyond the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
5.27.5 Separation. 
No Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be located within fifteen hundred (1,500) linear feet of; 
1.  Any school or child care establishment; or 
2.  Any area where large numbers of minors regularly congregate; or 
3.  Any other Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility; or 
4.  Any church or other structure used in whole or in part all the time or part of the time for religious or spiritual services; or 
5.  Any establishment licensed under the provisions of GL.c. 138, s.12. No Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be located within five hundred (500) linear feet from the property line of any residentially zoned property. 
Distances shall be calculated by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for purposes described above to the nearest portion of the building in which the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility is located, using a route of direct pedestrian access. 
5.27.6 Conflict of Laws. 
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable state or local law, the stricter provision, as deemed by the City Solicitor, shall control. 
5.27.7 Signage. 
Any permitted Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall comply with the requirements of the city sign ordinances at all times. In addition, no permitted medical marijuana distribution site shall use any advertising material that is misleading, deceptive, or false or that is designed to appeal to minors upon penalty of permit revocation. 
5.27.8 Manufacturing. 
A local permit for medical marijuana infused product manufacturing may be issued in any location where commercial manufacturing of products is permitted by the zoning ordinance. Any such facility must be directly attached to the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility with which it is associated. 
5.27.9 Issuance/Transfer/Discontinuance of Use. 
1.  A special permit shall be valid only for the registered entity to which the approval was issued and only for the site on which the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility has been authorized. 
2.  A special permit shall be non-transferable and shall have a term limited to the applicant's ownership or control of the premises as a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility. 
3.  Permitted Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facilities shall file an annual report to the City Council no later than January 31st, providing a copy of all current applicable state licenses for the facility and/or its owners and demonstrating continued compliance with the conditions of the special permit. 
4.  A special permit shall lapse if the applicant ceases operation of the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and/or if the applicants' registration by the Department of Public Health (DPH) has been revoked, expires, is terminated, is transferred to another controlling entity or is relocated to a new site. 
5.  The applicant shall notify the Inspector of Buildings and City Council in writing within 48 hours of such lapse, cessation, discontinuance, expiration, revocation or transfer. 
6.  A Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility shall be required to remove all material, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia in compliance with 105 CMR 725.105, prior to expiration of its DPH registration or immediately following revocation or voiding of its DPH registration, or upon ceasing its operation. 
5.27.10 Notification. 
Any new application sought under this Ordinance must be publically advertised for a period of no less than fourteen (14) days. Abutters within four hundred (400) feet must be notified in writing of said application, and include any and all dates for public hearings on said application. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2016(1)) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 5-10-2016(1), repealed 5.27, §§ 5.27.1, 5.27.2, in its entirety and enacted a new 5.27, to read as set out herein. Former 5.27 pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Ord. of 11-12-2013(1). 

5.28 - ATLANTIC ROAD OVERLAY DISTRICT 
5.28.1 Purpose. 
The purpose of the Atlantic Road Overlay District is to protect the coastal shoreline known as Gloucester's Back Shore, in order to minimize potential loss of life, destruction of property and environmental damage inevitably resulting from storm, erosion, and current and future flooding. 
5.28.2 Map. 
The Atlantic Road Overlay District is an overlay district that encompasses land on the water side of Atlantic Road from the intersection of Grapevine Road (including Assessor's Map 76, Lot 57) to the intersection of Bass Rocks Road (including Assessor's Map 69, Lot 1). Such land is also shown on the map entitled, "Atlantic Road Overlay District, Located in Gloucester, MA," dated November 3, 2015, incorporated herein by reference and hereby made part of the city's official zoning map. 
5.28.3 Uses. 
No building permit shall be issued for construction in the AROD except on the approval of a Special Permit issued by the City Council. Special Permits granted under this section shall be subject to the procedural requirements and standards in Section 1.8 and to any other sections of the Zoning Ordinance which the Council may determine applies. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2015(1)) 
5.29 - MIXED USE OVERLAY DISTRICT 
5.29.1 Purpose. 
It is the purpose of the Mixed Use Overlay District (MUOD) to encourage the use of property within its boundaries for mixed use development, including profit and non-profit uses. More specifically, the MUOD is designed to promote retail, commercial, business, residential, recreational and/or community service uses benefiting the residents of the City of Gloucester ("MUOD Purposes"). Among the objectives of the MUOD are: 
(a)  To facilitate development in the MUOD that will create a cohesive sense of place consistent with the MUOD Purposes, create connections among uses, and that accommodates pedestrian traffic yet remains sensitive to vehicular traffic needs by providing efficient parking, including shared parking, on and off site, when appropriate and for the purpose of reducing impervious surfaces; 
(b)  To encourage the appropriate use of land by balancing a variety of uses that are compatible with the predominate surrounding uses and areas in terms of scale, activities, appearance and site design, with sensitivity to other uses in the area; 
(c)  To create a compact and efficient design where working, shopping, living, and recreating can co-exist to ensure long term self-sufficiency and financial return to the City; 
(d)  Shared parking is encouraged; and 
(e)  To stimulate the general economy of the City by creating jobs and generating real estate and other tax revenue. 
5.29.2 Overlay District. 
5.29.2.1  Definitions 
For the purposes of the MUOD the definitions set forth in this ordinance shall apply except as follows: 
Lot Area: The horizontal area of a lot, exclusive of any area in a street or way open to public use. In calculating lot area for multi-family residential dwellings, not more than ten percent (10%) of the area required by Section 3.2 shall be a brook, stream, river, pond, water-filled quarry, lake, estuary, bank, fresh water wetland, coastal wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, wet meadow or swamp, or any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage, flooding or inundation, as defined at Section 12-11 of the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances. In calculating lot area for all other residential and non-residential buildings, and only in the case of the laying out of new lots, not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area required by Section 3.2 shall be a brook, stream, river, pond, water-filled quarry, lake, estuary, bank, fresh water wetland, coastal wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, wet meadow or swamp, or any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage, flooding or inundation, as defined at Section 12-11 of the City of Gloucester Code of Ordinances. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any area denoted as FEMA "Special Flood Hazard Zone" or "Flood Zone X" shall be included in the lot area calculation without limitation. 
5.29.2.2  Map 
The MUOD is an overlay district which encompasses land shown on Gloucester Assessors' Map 262, Lot 14; Map 262, Lot 37; Map 43, Lot 4; and Map 43, Lot 5. The land in the MUOD is shown on the map entitled "Exhibit to Accompany an Amendment to the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance Mixed Use Overlay District" dated December 28, 2016 incorporated herein by reference and hereby made a part of the City's official zoning map. A copy of said map is on file with the City Clerk's Office and the Community Development Department. 
5.29.2.3  Establishment 
The MUOD is an overlay district superimposed on the underlying zoning district and the land affected thereby. The underlying zoning and all permitted uses existing on this date, whether by permit or as of right, shall remain in full force and effect, except as otherwise stated herein. To the extent that any provision in this Section 5.29 is in contradiction or conflicts with any other provision of this ordinance, the provisions of this Section 5.29 shall control. Nothing in the MUOD shall restrict the rights of any owner who elects to utilize the existing underlying zoning district regulations to develop and redevelop land. 
5.29.2.4  Applicability 
The City Council shall be the special permit granting authority for special permits granted pursuant to this Section 5.29, and such special permits shall satisfy the criteria set forth in this Section 5.29. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this ordinance, in any instance where the City Council has jurisdiction to issue a special permit pursuant to this Section 5.29, it shall also be the sole special permit granting authority for all other special permits required by this ordinance for such use and/or development, except that the Planning Board shall remain the permit granting authority for site plan approval under Section 5.8 of this ordinance. Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of an application for a special permit under this MUOD, the City Council shall refer the application to the Planning Board for review and recommendation, which recommendation shall be made no later than ninety (90) days after the City Council's referral without mutual agreement of the extension of such time. 
5.29.2.5  Standard to be Applied 
Except as otherwise set forth herein, Special Permits under this Section 5.29 shall be granted under the standards of Section 1.8.3 (Special Permits); Section 3.1.6 (Height); Section 4.1 (Off-Street Parking); Section 4.3 (Signs); Section 5.7.5 (Major Projects); and Section 5.17 (Drive-through facilities). 
5.29.2.6  Design Standards 
In its grant of a Special Permit under this Section 5.29, the City Council shall consider the following in its decision making: 
1.  Overall layout and design that creates a cohesive sense of place consistent with the MUOD Purposes, connections among site uses, and that accommodates pedestrian traffic in a manner that is consistent with the proposed project. 
2.  Provision of efficient parking, reasonably adequate for the contemplated uses, including shared parking, on and off-site, when appropriate and to reduce the number of impervious surfaces. When appropriate the City Council may require that the applicant provide documentation reasonably satisfactory to it evidencing a shared parking or off-site parking arrangement. 
3.  Compact and efficient site design with clearly articulated and marked building entrances, as well as public spaces within the site that promote the connection of uses within the site. 
4.  Design of landscaping elements that present a pleasant, well-designed appearance during all seasons, such as plantings of different types and sizes to create an attractive landscaping consistent with native New England character. 
5.  Use of landscape design to minimize the appearance of electrical transformers, site mechanical equipment and loading/service areas. 
6.  Utility feeds shall be underground, unless precluded by the utility supplier, or if conditions are encountered that could not have been reasonably expected by the developer, or when the cost of underground utility feeds outweigh the benefit. Notwithstanding this provision, up to three overhead utility poles may be installed along the westerly boundary of the MUOD that abuts the Route 128 layout. 
7.  Employment of high quality and durable building materials consistent with comparable buildings of the similar type and use. 
5.29.3 Uses. 
5.29.3.1  Uses Allowed by Right 
Uses allowed by right in the underlying zoning districts shall be allowed by right in any portion of the MUOD except for the following uses that shall be prohibited: 
New or conversion to one-family or two-family dwelling with or without changes to the exterior dimensions of the building. 
Open Space Residential Development (See Section 5.15) 
Golf Course, standard or par-three 
5.29.3.2  Uses Allowed by Special Permit in Underlying Zoning District 
All uses allowed by special permit in the underlying zoning districts shall be permitted in the MUOD subject to the issuance of a special permit issued by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Section 5.29 or by utilizing the existing underlying zoning districts' regulations to develop and redevelop land, except that the following uses are prohibited: 
Conversion to or new multi-family or apartment dwelling with less than twenty-five dwelling units 
Conversion to or new mixed-use building with less than twenty-five dwelling units 
Cluster Development 
Boarding house, rooming house, lodging house or hostel, licensed by the Licensing Board 
Mobile home park 
Campground 
Village Development Project (See Section 5.16) 
Cemetery 
Riding school, stable 
Land based wind energy conversion facilities and temporary monitoring facilities related thereto 
Airport, Heliport 
Outdoor Golf Driving Range, Drive-in Theater, Amusement Park, race track or other similar commercial outdoor recreation 
Junk Yard 
5.29.3.3  Additional Uses 
In addition to the uses permitted under Section 5.29.3.1 and 5.29.3.2, the following uses shall be permitted in the MUOD subject to the issuance of a special permit issued by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this Section 5.29: 
Golf driving range - indoor only 
New or conversion to office building 
Bank, automatic teller machines 
Restaurant w/ or w/o outdoor seating and w/or w/o takeout 
Feed or building materials establishment 
Laundry, laundromat or dry cleaning establishment 
Shopping Center 
Automatic amusement devices 
Drive-through facility 
Philanthropic institution or other non-profit organization. 
Retail, consumer service or other non-industrial business use, other than those listed in Section 2.3.4, Use Nos. 1-24 
Wireless Communication Facility 
5.29.3.4  Prohibited Uses 
Any use not specifically allowed by right or by special permit within the MUOD as provided in Section 5.29.3.1, 5.29.3.2, 5.29.3.3 or in the underlying zoning districts is prohibited, and any such prohibited use can only be authorized by a use variance issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
5.29.4 Dimensional Requirements. 
5.29.4.1  Dimensional Table 
All buildings and structures permitted pursuant to the MUOD shall conform to the following dimensional requirements, which requirements shall be deemed to be a part of Section 3.2.6 under an MUOD designation: 
ALL USES ALLOWED IN MUOD DISTRICT (i) Minimum lot area (sf) 60,000 SF (j) Minimum Lot width (ft.) 100 Feet Minimum frontage (ft.) 100 Feet (k) Minimum front yard (ft.) 20 Feet Minimum side yards (ft. each) 10 Feet Minimum rear yard (ft.) 10 Feet Maximum building height 30 Feet (l) Distance between principal buildings 15 Feet MULTI-FAMILY Minimum lot area per dwelling unit (sf) 1,000 SF Minimum open space per dwelling unit (sf) 200 SF Maximum building height 55 Feet (l) SHOPPING CENTERS Minimum open space per 1,000 sf of gross floor area (sf) 100 SF PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION OR OTHER NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION, CONSUMER SERVICE OR PUBLIC, RELIGIOUS, OR OTHER NON-PROFIT SCHOOL, BUILDING OR USE Maximum building height 45 Feet (l) Minimum open space per 1,000 sf of gross floor area (sf) 100 SF DRIVE-THROUGH Min. Lot Area (sf) 15,000 SF Min. Frontage (ft.) 100 Feet Min. Front Yard (ft.) 30 Feet Min. Side Yard (ft.) 20 Feet Min. Rear Yard (ft.) 30 Feet  
(i)  In the MUOD District, notwithstanding any other provision of the Ordinance, more than one principal building may be constructed on one lot as of right. All other dimensional requirements of the MUOD shall be complied with. 
(j)  In the MUOD District, Lot Area shall be defined as the horizontal area of a lot, exclusive of any public way, but inclusive of parking and other travel lanes. 
(k)  In the MUOD District, Lot Frontage shall be defined to include the width of any parking or other travel lanes that divides the Lot. 
(l)  In the MUOD District, Building Height shall be defined as follows: The vertical height from the finished grade at the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; to the deck line for mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for gables, hip, and gambrel roofs. Not included in the determination of height (a) mechanicals and antennae, (b) other non-habitable rooftop structures or (c) non-habitable towers or other architectural features which do not have a footprint greater than 400 SF and do not exceed the ridge height of a building or structure by more than 12 feet. 
5.29.5 Height Requirements. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.1.6 (Height) of this ordinance, building heights in excess of the limits set forth in Section 5.29.4 of the MUOD may be authorized pursuant to the following special permit procedure; provided, however, that in no case shall such increase in allowable height be greater than allowed by the State Building Code and other state and municipal regulations. 
    Building heights in excess of the requirements set forth in Section 5.29.4 of the MUOD may be authorized by special permit issued by the City Council. Said permit shall contain such conditions as the City Council deems necessary, and shall only issue upon a written determination by the City Council that such increase in allowable height is consistent with neighborhood character and will not be substantially detrimental to the neighborhood because of obstruction of views, overshadowing of other properties, impairment of utilities or other adverse impacts. 
5.29.6 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. 
5.29.6.1  Off-Street Parking Requirements 
The parking requirements within the MUOD shall be as set forth in section 4.1 of this ordinance except as follows: 
(a)  Residential: minimum of 1.50 spaces for each dwelling unit; 
(b)  All other uses allowed as of right or by special permit in the MUOD under this section 5.29: Minimum of 1.00 space for each 260 SF of floor area exclusive of basement. 
The parking requirements in the MUOD may be met through shared parking on or off-site. No additional parking shall be required for any use determined by the City Council to be accessory to a use allowed in the MUOD. 
If a proposed use within the MUOD does not conform with any parking provision in this ordinance, the City Council may authorize such nonconformance by the grant of a special permit under the standard set forth in Section 4.1.2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the City Council may grant a special permit to authorize valet and/or tandem parking, on and off-site, regardless of the distance of the off-site parcel from the principal use and to modify the design and layout standards of Section 4.1.4. 
5.29.6.2  Off-Street Loading Requirements 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.2 of the Ordinance, in the MUOD for any retail or commercial building with gross floor area of more than 5,000 SF but not more than 40,000 SF one (1) loading bay will be required and may be used to service all uses within that building regardless of the number of uses and/or tenants. The loading bay may be located within the building or outside and adjoining any opening in the building, except for the primary front elevation. This provision does not preclude the designation of a loading area at the front entrance, but such designation shall not satisfy the requirements of this section. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4.2 of the Ordinance, in the MUOD no loading bay shall be required for any building utilized for any other use, including Philanthropic Institution or Other Non-Profit Organization, Consumer Service or Public, Religious, or Other Non-Profit School, Building or Use. 
5.29.7 Signs. 
Section 4.3 of this ordinance shall govern signage in the MUOD. 
5.29.8 Drive-through Facilities. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.17 of this ordinance, the dimensional requirements for a drive-through in the MUOD shall be as set forth in the Dimensional Table above in Section 5.29.4.1. All other provisions of Section 5.17 of this ordinance shall apply. 
5.29.9 Submissions. 
5.29.9.1  Contents 
Any application for a special permit under the MUOD shall include a plan or plans with the information required by Section 1.5.3(c) and 1.5.3(d) of this ordinance, being the submittal requirements for "CCS" special permits and for a Major Project (See Section 5.7.1). Even if a project is comprised of several parcels and uses, the applicant may file a single application for the project. In addition, any other special permits required pursuant to this ordinance, for which the City Council is designated under this Section 5.29 as the special permit granting authority, shall include the information required in this ordinance, unless otherwise exempted under this Section 5.29. Review of an application for a special permit shall comply with the procedural requirements of Section 1.5 of this ordinance as applicable to City Council special permits, including the requirements of notice and a public hearing and deadline for the same and for the issuance of decision thereon. 
5.29.10 Relief by Special Permit. 
Except as provided in Section 5.29.3.4, in any instance where a use, allowed by right or by special permit within the MUOD, including any uses determined by the City Council to be customary accessory uses, does not comply with any provisions of this Section 5.29, including the dimensional provisions of Section 5.29.4, or with respect to any provision of this ordinance other than those contained in Section II of the Ordinance, regulating use, the City Council is authorized to issue zoning relief for such non-conformity by the issuance of a special permit. In granting a request for a special permit, the City Council must make a written determination that the nonconformity is consistent with the MUOD character and will not be substantially detrimental to the MUOD because it is found to meet the following six factors: 
(a)  The social, economic and community needs that will be served by the proposed use; 
(b)  Traffic flow and safety; 
(c)  Adequacy of utilities and other public services; 
(d)  Neighborhood character and social structure; 
(e)  Qualities of the natural environment; 
(f)  Potential fiscal impact. 
Furthermore, the City Council may condition its grant on the provision of certain open space, or traffic or pedestrian improvements or other amenities. 
(Ord. of 4-25-2017(1)) 
5.30 - PERMITTING OF CERTAIN PRE-EXISTING MULTI-FAMILY USES 
5.30.1 Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to provide the owners of long-standing but improperly permitted or unpermitted multi-family properties an expeditious path to bringing such properties into compliance with the Zoning Ordinance. This section shall apply only to high density (R-5) and medium-high density (R-10) residential districts. This ordinance shall be in effect on an interim basis. The effective period of this interim shall be three (3) years from the date of its adoption. Such effective period may only be extended by amendment of the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.11 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
It is also the purpose of this section to encourage the owners of said properties to obtain the required Health Department and Building Department inspectional certificates for multi-family use. 
It is also the purpose of this section to encourage the owners of said properties to contribute rental units to Gloucester's inventory of affordably priced rental units, as defined at Section 5.11.2. and to assist the City in increasing the number of safe affordable units available in the community. 
Recognizing that most if not all of said properties were in existence at the time of adoption of the original Zoning Ordinance or of subsequent amendments thereto relating to dimensional requirements, it is also the purpose of this section to exempt from the dimensional requirements of Section 3.2 such properties as have been granted a special permit pursuant to this section. 
5.30.2 Definitions. 
Qualifying Property: A property located in the R-5 or R-10 district on which three to six dwelling units, located in one or multiple structures on the property, have existed without interruption(s) or discontinuation(s) lasting for one year or more at a time, or more than two years total, from no later than January 1, 2007 to the present. 
Evidence of Continuous Use: A special permit applicant pursuant to this section must provide at least two of the following items as proof of continuous use of a property for the number of units sought to be permitted: 
Assessors' records showing continuous occupancy for each unit; 
Utility bills for each unit (at least one bill per unit per year), showing differentiated addresses (e.g. apartment or unit numbers) or differentiated billing names for the billing period; 
Voter registration data for each year, identifying the voters at each of the designated units; 
Leases or other rental agreements for each year; 
Vehicle excise tax records. 
5.30.3 Procedures Relating to Special Permits Issued Pursuant to this Section. 
(a)  Upon adoption of this section, the City Council and the Zoning Board of Appeals shall enter into a Memorandum of Understanding providing for the appointment, pursuant to GL c. 40A, § 13, of a Zoning Administrator and other such matters pertaining to the expeditious review of permit applications pursuant to this section. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator shall review special permit applications submitted pursuant to this section, which applications shall include all of the documents and affidavits required by Section 5.30.4 
(c)  If the Zoning Administrator determines that an application and its supporting documents are complete and accurate, he/she shall so certify to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(d)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall promptly conduct a hearing on said application, following public notice as required by Section 1.5.10 
(e)  Certification by the Zoning Administrator shall be prima facie evidence as to the accuracy of the permit application and its supporting documentation. Provided, however, that in rendering its decision on said application the Zoning Board of Appeals may take into consideration such additional testimony as it deems relevant to the criteria set forth at Section 1.8.3. 
(f)  Issuance of a special permit pursuant to this section shall exempt the subject property from the dimensional requirements set forth at Section 3.2. Provided, however, that this Section 5.30.3(f) shall not apply to: 
(1)  the off-street parking requirements of Section 4.1; 
(2)  those exterior portions of the subject property that were constructed for the purpose of adding an unpermitted or improperly permitted apartment. 
5.30.4 Special Permit Application Requirements. 
In addition to the information required on the application form prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, an application for a special permit pursuant to this section shall include the following: 
(a)  Current Health Department inspection certificates for each rental unit sought to be permitted; 
(b)  Current Building Department inspection certificates for each rental unit sought to be permitted; 
(c)  An affidavit by the record owner, property manager, or tenant, sworn under the penalties of perjury, that the number of units sought to be permitted have existed on the property since at least January 1, 2007. If said owner has not been the record owner since January 1, 2007, the affidavit shall attest that the number of units sought to be permitted have existed on the property throughout his/her period of ownership; 
(d)  Certification by the Building Department that no complaints have been filed against the subject property within the five years prior to application; 
(e)  Evidence of continuous use, as defined at Section 5.30.2, for the number of units sought to be permitted; 
(f)  Fully executed Affordable Housing Rental Unit Restriction, in the form prescribed by the Community Development Department, along with certification by the department that the property owner has complied with all relevant provisions of Section 5.11. At least one rental unit shall be restricted in the case of three and four unit properties and at least two rental units shall be restricted in the case of five and six unit properties. Such Affordable Housing Restriction shall have a term of no less than 30 years. Failure to comply with the requirements of such restriction may be grounds for revocation of any issued multi-family special permit under Section 5.30. 
(g)  Compensatory sewer privilege fees shall be assessed for additional permitted units as determined by article II, division 1, section 23-23 of the Gloucester Code of Ordinances, as applicable. 
(Ord. of 8-22-2017(1), § V) 
5.31 - MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 
M.G.L. c. 94G, authorizes a system of state licensing for businesses engaging in the cultivation, testing, processing and manufacturing, and retail sales of marijuana, collectively referred to as "marijuana establishments." In addition M.G.L. c. 94G, §3, Local Control , allows cities and towns to adopt ordinances and by-laws that impose reasonable safeguards on the operation of marijuana establishments, provided they are not unreasonably impracticable and are not in conflict with the laws and regulations of M.G.L. c. 94G or 935 CMR 500. 
Marijuana retailers shall be subject to M.G.L. c. 94G, §12 and the following restrictions to ensure there are no undue impacts on the health, safety, and well-being of the public: 
As defined in M.G.L. c. 94G, and as established in Chapter 28 Marijuana Retail Establishments of the Code of Ordinances, the number of marijuana retailers shall be limited to no more than 20% of the number of licenses issued within the city for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not to be drunk on the premises where sold under M.G.L. c. 138, §15. Should 20% of the number of licenses issued be a whole number and .5 or greater, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number; should it be less than .5, the number shall be rounded down. 
5.31.1 Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to allow state-licensed marijuana establishments to exist in the city in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations and impose reasonable safeguards to govern the time, place and manner of marijuana establishment operations and any business dealing in marijuana accessories in such a way as to ensure public health, safety, well-being, and undue impacts on the natural environment as it relates to the retailing, cultivation, processing, manufacturing or testing subject to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, M.G.L. c. 40A, M.G.L. c. 94G, and 935 CMR 500. 
5.31.2 Applicability; Effective Date. 
This section applies to all marijuana establishments including, but not limited to, marijuana cultivators, testing facilities, product manufacturers, processors, medical marijuana treatment centers and/or retailers. 
Under the state law, M.G.L. c. 94G, experienced marijuana establishment operators including medical marijuana treatment centers as defined in Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 with a registration in good standing, or a reorganized marijuana business established by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the Board of Directors of any entity that submitted an application for a registration to operate a medical marijuana treatment center to the Department of Public Health before October 1, 2015, and was issued a provisional registration to operate a medical marijuana treatment center by the Department of Public Health are also subject to this Zoning Ordinance should said experienced marijuana establishment operator of a medical marijuana treatment center convert into a retail marijuana establishment. 
5.31.3 Definitions. 
The following definitions, consistent with M.G.L. c. 94G, shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
"Experienced marijuana establishment" or "Experienced marijuana operator" shall include: 
(a)  a medical marijuana treatment center as defined in chapter 369 of the acts of 2012 with a registration in good standing, or 
(b)  a reorganized marijuana business established by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the board of directors of an entity that submitted an application for a registration to operate a medical marijuana treatment center to the Department of Public Health before October 1, 2015 and was issued a provisional registration to operate a medical marijuana treatment center by the department of public health. 
"Marijuana" or "Marihuana" all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, not excepted below and whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin including tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in M.G.L. c. 94C, §1; provided that "Marijuana" shall not include: 
(a)  The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination; 
(b)  Hemp; or 
(c)  The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other products. 
"Marijuana accessories" equipment, products, devices or materials of any kind that are intended or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body. 
"Marijuana cultivator" or "Marijuana cultivation facility" an entity licensed to cultivate, process and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. 
"Marijuana establishment" a marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer, medical marijuana treatment center or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business. 
"Marijuana manufacturing" to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product. 
"Marijuana product manufacturer" or "Marijuana manufacturing facility" an entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers. 
"Marijuana processing" to harvest, dry, cure, trim and separate parts of the marijuana plant by manual or mechanical means. 
"Marijuana products" products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures. 
"Marijuana testing facility" an entity licensed to test marijuana and marijuana products, including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants. 
"Marijuana retailer" an entity licensed to purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to consumers. 
5.31.4 Use Allowance and Special Permit Procedures. 
Marijuana establishments including marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers, conversions of medical marijuana treatment centers shall be permitted in zoning districts as identified in Section 2.3 with Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 5.8 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
The City Council may grant a Special Permit and the Planning Board may grant a Site Plan Approval for a medical marijuana treatment center as defined in M.G.L. c. 94I or a retail marijuana establishment as defined in M.G.L. c. 94G in the zoning district(s) identified in Section 2.3 in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 1.5 and Section 5.8 of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to the standards set forth in this section and the general criteria for granting a special permit contained in section 1.8.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
The issuance of a site plan approval or special permit pursuant to this section or other applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance does not create an exception, defense, or immunity to any person or entity in regard to any potential criminal liability the person or entity may have for the production, distribution, or possession of marijuana. 
A site plan approval or special permit issued for a marijuana establishment is not transferable or assignable to a different location or a different type of marijuana establishment. 
In addition to the dimensional standards in Section 3 of the Zoning Ordinance, marijuana establishments shall not be located within 500 feet of a pre-existing public or private school providing education in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12. Distances shall be calculated by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land used for purposes described above to the nearest portion of the building in which the marijuana establishment is located using a route of direct pedestrian access. 
5.31.5 Additional Filing Requirements and Standards. 
The following apply to all marijuana establishments as defined above and in M.G.L. c. 94G including marijuana cultivation facilities, manufacturing facilities, testing facilities, medical marijuana treatment centers and retail establishments. 
1.  Any Site Plan Review or Special Permit application for a marijuana establishment shall include: 
a.  A copy of the application materials submitted to the Cannabis Control Commission as described in 935 CMR 500.101. 
b.  A Transportation Plan as described herein. A proposed marijuana establishment shall prepare and submit a Transportation Plan that will, among other things, provide a detailed analysis of how the use may impact traffic and parking in the area immediately surrounding the proposed site of a marijuana establishment and how best practices of the industry may be utilized to address traffic and parking. 
c.  A written description stating how the proposed marijuana establishment will meet the minimum requirements of 935 CMR 500.105 including, without limitation and subject to the discretion of the City Council, policies and procedures for energy efficiency and conservation. 
d.  A written description of how the proposed marijuana establishment will meet the requirements of 935 CMR 105 and requirements of section 4.3 of the Zoning Ordinance relating to marketing and signage. 
2.  No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested within any type of licensed marijuana establishment. 
3.  Hours of operation for marijuana retailers shall be consistent with those of package stores licensed under M.G.L. c. 138. 
4.  Deliveries of products to retail marijuana establishments shall comply with the Code of Ordinances. 
5.  Marijuana plants, products, and paraphernalia shall not be visible from outside the building of any marijuana establishment. 
6.  In addition to the parking layout and design standards of Section 4 of the Zoning Ordinance, a retail marijuana establish shall provide a minimum of 1 parking space per 100 square feet of retail space and 1 parking space per 200 square feet of bulk storage. 
7.  In addition to the use allowance of Section 2.3 and the dimensional requirements of Section 3 of the Zoning Ordinance, marijuana retail establishments shall only be permitted in allowable zoning district(s) on lots with a minimum of 20,000 square feet and frontage and access from an Arterial Street(s) including, but not limited to, Route 128, Bass Avenue, Eastern Avenue, Essex Avenue, Thatcher Road, and Gloucester Crossing Road. 
5.31.6 Reserved. 
5.31.7 Reserved. 
5.31.8 Special Permit Findings. 
In addition to the findings for a special permit in section 1.8.3 of the Zoning Ordinance, the City Council must also make the following findings: 
1.  The Applicant demonstrates that the marijuana establishment will meet all of the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth and will be in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to M.G.L. c. 94G, §12. 
2.  The Applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of this section and other applicable sections of the Zoning Ordinance and any applicable city ordinances. 
3.  The establishment provides adequate security measures to ensure that there are not direct threats to the health or safety of employees, staff, or members of the public and that storage and/location of cultivation is adequately secured. 
5.31.9 Host Community Agreements. 
All marijuana establishments under this section shall enter into Host Community Agreements (HCAs) with the city in compliance with the requirements of M.G.L. c. 94G and all regulations promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission that pertain to the execution of a host community agreement with the city. Specifically, under M.G.L. c. 94G, §3, a marijuana establishment seeking to operate or continue to operate in the city shall execute a host community agreement with the city setting forth conditions which shall include, but not be limited to, all stipulations of responsibilities between the host community and the marijuana establishment. An agreement between a marijuana establishment and the city may include a community impact fee for the city; provided, however, that the community impact fee shall be reasonably related to the costs imposed upon the city by the operation of the marijuana establishment and shall not amount to more than 3 per cent (3%) of the gross sales of the marijuana establishment or be effective for longer than 5 years. Any cost to the city imposed by the operation of a marijuana establishment shall be documented and considered a public record. All HCAs shall address any known and additional impact of marijuana related use on the municipal departments and services including but not limited to public safety, health services, schools and infrastructure, and any other stipulations deemed necessary by the Office of the Mayor, and such agreement shall accompany any required special permit application. 
5.31.10 Unlawful Acts. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any marijuana establishment in the city without a valid license issued by the state licensing authority under the M.G.L. c. 94G. 
2.  When a marijuana establishment has received a renewal license from the state, the marijuana establishment shall submit a copy to the Building Department within 30 days of receipt. 
3.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a marijuana establishment as outlined in this section including, but not limited to, retail marijuana, marijuana product manufacturing, marijuana cultivation, marijuana processing, or marijuana testing establishment without a Special Permit from the City Council or Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board. 
4.  In addition to the requirements of 935 C.M.R. 500, specifically 935 C.M.R. 500.105(4)(b), Prohibited Practices, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate an establishment so as to clearly display any marijuana advertising, products, paraphernalia or accessories so that it is visible to a person from the exterior of establishment. This includes any of the same that have multiple uses of which one is for marijuana. 
5.31.11 Violations and Penalties. 
All marijuana establishments shall be subject to M.G.L. Chapter 94G, § 13 and 935 C.M.R. 500. For any violation of the terms and conditions of a Special Permit issued pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance or any section of this Zoning Ordinance that, after proper notice and demand, is not abated, the Building Inspector shall institute appropriate action or proceedings on behalf of the city. A fine of $300.00 per violation per day for each day the violation continues shall be issued. 
5.31.12 Severability. 
If any provision of this section is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2018(1); Ord. of 11-13-2018(1)) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ords. of 9-11-2018(1) and 9-25-2018(1) repealed and reenacted 5.31. Former 5.31 pertained to temporary moratorium on recreational marijuana establishments, and was derived from Ord. of 9-26-2017(1). 

SECTION VI - DEFINITIONS 
In this Ordinance the following terms, unless a contrary meaning is required by the content or is specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future, and the plural includes the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is intended to be mandatory; "occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual. 
Accessory Building or Use : A building or use customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with the principal building or use, except that if more than 30% of the floor area or 50% of the lot area is occupied by such use, it shall no longer be considered accessory. 
Animal Feedlot : A plot of land on which 25 livestock or more per acre are kept for the purposes of feeding. 
Animal Kennel or Hospital : A structure used for the harboring and/or care of more than three dogs that are more than six months old, whether commercially operated or not. 
Arterial Street : All state-numbered highways (Routes 127, 127A, 128, 133), Atlantic Road north of Moorland Road, Bass Avenue west of Thatcher Road, East Main Street, Eastern Point Road, Rogers Street, and Sayward Street, plus any streets subsequently laid out with right-of-way width of eighty (80) feet or more. 
Aquifer : A confined geologic formation composed of rock or unconsolidated material, from which significant quantities of potable water may be obtained. 
Assisted Living : See Section 5.14 
Automatic Amusement Devices : Devices as defined at and in compliance with Code of Ordinances, Part II, Chapter 3, Article III, as said article may be amended from time to time. 
Bedroom : Any inhabitable room in a dwelling, other than a living room, dining room, kitchen, utility room, or bath if such room exceeds seventy (70) square feet. 
Billboard : A structure or part of a structure, of any size, either free-standing or affixed to a building, the surface of which is for hire for advertising purposes. 
Boarding, Lodging, or Rooming House : A building which contains rooms offered for lodging and in which meals also may be served to lodgers only, provided that the house is licensed by the Licensing Board and appropriate agencies, and the total number of lodgers in any boarding house may not exceed twenty (20) persons. 
Building : A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, built, erected and framed of a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. 
Building Height : See Section 3.1.8. 
Bulk Storage (Outdoor) : Exposed outdoor storage of sand, lumber, coal, or other bulk materials, bulk storage of liquids in tanks, excluding underground tanks that are accessory to a principal use. 
Camper : A portable dwelling, eligible to be registered and insured for highway use, designed to be used for travel, recreational and vacation uses, but not for permanent residence. Includes equipment commonly called travel trailers, pick-up coaches or campers, motorized campers, and tent trailers, but not mobile homes. 
Camp Ground : Premises used for travel trailers, campers, tenting, or for temporary overnight facilities of any kind where a fee is charged. 
Camping, Supervised : Facilities operated on a seasonal basis for a continuing supervised recreational, health, educational, religious, and/or athletic program, with persons enrolled for periods of not less than one week. 
Casino Ship : "Casino Ship" includes all boats landing or mooring in Gloucester where its customers do not lodge on board overnight, where it has only one port of docking and destination and where gaming is its main activity. 
Club or Lodge : Premises or buildings of a non-profit organization exclusively servicing members and their guests for recreational, athletic, or civic purposes, but not including any vending stands, merchandising, or commercial activities except as required generally for the membership and purposes of such club. Does not include golf clubs as elsewhere defined, or clubs or organizations whose chief activity is a service customarily carried out as a business. 
Collector Street : Any street, other than an arterial street, which serves non-residential property fronting thereon, or subsequently laid out having a right-of-way of at least sixty (60) feet wide, plus the following named streets: Atlantic Road, south of Moorland; Atlantic Street south of Massachusetts Avenue; Concord Street south of Bray Street; Farrington Avenue; Haskell Street; Hesperus Avenue east of Norman Avenue; Magnolia Avenue; Maplewood Avenue; Moorland Road; Mt. Pleasant Avenue; Norman Avenue; Pleasant Street; Poplar Street; Prospect Street; Railroad Avenue; Reynard Street; and Wheeler Street south of Shore Hills Rd. 
Condominiums : Land and building or buildings thereon, containing office or dwelling units and common areas and facilities which are regulated and managed by an organization of unit owners, under a master deed according to the provisions of Ch. 183A., M.G.L. 
Consumer Service Use : An establishment in which the principal activity is the performance of a service. Consumer service establishments include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: appliance repair, barber shop, beauty salon, catering, locksmith, photographer's studio, printing establishment, radio/TV repair, shoe repair, sign painting, tailor, watch and jewelry repair. 
Contractor's Yard : Premises used by a building contractor or subcontractor for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of sub-assemblies, and parking of wheeled equipment. 
Corner Lot : See Section 3.1.8. 
Cruise Ship : "Cruise ship" includes all boats landing or mooring in Gloucester Harbor whose main purpose is to travel to more than one port, where all its passengers lodge on board overnight and where gaming is incidental to the main purpose of visiting more than one port on each voyage. 
Discharge : The disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing of any hazardous material into or on any land or water so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
Drive-Through Facility : A commercial facility which provides a service directly to a motor vehicle or where the customer drives a motor vehicle onto the premise and to a window or mechanical device through or by which the customer is serviced without exiting the vehicle, although this shall not include the selling of fuel at a gasoline filling station or the accessory functions of a car wash facility such as a vacuum cleaning stations. See Section 5.17, Drive-Through Facilities, for permitting requirements. 
Dwelling : A building or part of a building used exclusively as the living quarters for one or more families. 
Dwelling Unit : Living quarters for a single family with cooking, living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities for each unit. 
Dwelling, Multi-Family or Apartment : A structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units, whether for rental, condominium ownership, or other form of tenancy, including row or town house structures; or a structure containing one or more permitted non-residential uses on the ground floor or on the ground and other floors, and also containing more than one dwelling unit above the ground floor. 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached : A building containing a single dwelling unit, and having no common or party walls. 
Dwelling, Two-Family : A building containing two (2) dwelling units that are in immediate proximity to each other and share either a common vertical exterior wall or a floor/ceiling separation. The length of any connecting corridor, hallway or passageway may not exceed three (3) times the width of corridor, hallway or passageway. 
Family : One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit; provided that a group of six (6) or more persons who are not within the second degree kinship to each other, as defined by civil law, shall not be deemed to constitute a family. 
Fast Food Restaurant : Any restaurant serving the majority of its food in disposable containers, packages, or other similar wrapping, for consumption on or off the premises. 
Fish : Means fin fish, mollusks, crustaceans, and all other forms of marine animals and plant life, except marine mammals and birds. 
Fishing Vessel : Means a vessel that commercially engages in the catching, taking or harvesting of fish or an activity that can be reasonably expected to result in the catching, taking or harvesting of fish (as defined in the Commercial Fishing Industry Vessel Act, P.L. 98-364, 46 U.S.C. Sec. 2101-2114 as amended). 
Floor Area : The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, including the area of basements not more than fifty (50) percent below grade, roofed porches and roofed terraces, excluding areas with less than six (6) feet floor to ceiling height. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls. 
Gross Floor Area : The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building, including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human occupancy, or any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this Ordinance. It shall include the horizontal area at each floor level devoted to stairwells and elevator shafts. 
Groundwater : Water located beneath the earth's surface in the zone of saturation of unconsolidated or consolidated aquifers. 
Guest Unit : A bedroom or suite of rooms, including a bedroom, in a hotel, motel, motor inn, lodging house, guest house, Bed and Breakfast Home or Establishment, to be rented as separate units to transient guests. 
Hazardous waste : A product or waste or combination of substances which because of quantity, concentration, or physical, or chemical, or infectious characteristics poses, in the Board of Health's judgment, a substantial present or potential hazard to the human health, safety, or welfare, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or disposed of, or otherwise managed. Any substance deemed a hazardous waste in G.L., Ch. 21C, shall also be deemed a hazardous material for the purpose of this ordinance. 
Hostel : An overnight lodging facility licensed by a recognized national or international hostelling organization, offering temporary lodging and services related to hostelling to members of such organizations and other travelers. Lodging shall not be provided to any individual for more than 14 days in any six month period, or for more than seven consecutive days. 
Hotel, Motel, Motor Inn : A structure or structures providing sleeping rooms for residence of transient guests, and where public eating facilities are provided; but not including buildings of charitable, educational or philanthropic institutions. 
Impervious Surface : Material on the ground that does not allow surface water to penetrate into the soil. 
Junk : Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out, cast off, or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion. Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new, shall not be considered junk. 
Junk Yard : A site or facility used for the collection, storage, salvage, disposal, dismantling, processing, recycling, sale, or resale of waste materials including paper, rags, cloth, metal, glass, batteries, rubber, parts from old or damaged motor vehicles and equipment, and other discarded goods and materials. These materials are generally but not necessarily, stored in the open air or under a roofed structure rather than within a fully enclosed building. 
Leachable Waste : Waste materials, including solid wastes, sewage, sludge, and agriculture wastes, that are capable of releasing water-borne contaminants to the surrounding environment. 
Lot : See Section 3.1.8. 
Lot Area : See Section 3.1.8. 
Lot Coverage : See Section 3.1.8. 
Lot Frontage : See Section 3.1.8. 
Lot Width : See Section 3.1.8. 
Marine-Related : An activity involving, pertaining to or requiring the loading, unloading, storage, processing or sale of fish or other water-borne goods or materials, or the embarking or disembarking of passengers, or the docking, construction, repair, servicing or maintenance of vessels. 
Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility : When separated from a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, a facility for the cultivation and harvesting of medical marijuana that meets the requirements set forth in 105 CMR 725.105(B)(1)(a-f) 
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center : Any medical marijuana treatment center, as defined under state law as a Massachusetts not for profit entity that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies; or educational materials to qualifying patients or their personal caregivers, which is properly licensed and registered by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health pursuant to all applicable state laws and regulations. 
Mining of Land : The removal or relocation of earth materials, including but not limited to, topsoil, sand and gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock. 
Mobile Home : A movable or portable dwelling unit built on a chassis, designed for connection to utilities when in use, and designed without necessity of a permanent foundation for year-round living. A manufactured home designed for installation on a permanent foundation and for permanent connection to utilities without any provision for attachment of wheels shall not be considered a mobile home, whether or not built on a chassis, provided such manufactured home has a brick, wood, or similar exterior, and a pitched roof; and meets U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development construction and safety standards. 
Mobile Home Park : Premises which have been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use. 
Mural : A decorative display applied directly to a wall surface without supplementary backing, framing or other means of support. 
Nonconforming Building or Lot : A building or lot that does not conform to a dimensional regulation prescribed by this Ordinance for the district in which it is located or to regulations for signs, off-street parking, off-street loading, or accessory buildings but which building or lot was in existence at the time the regulation became effective and was lawful at the time it was established. 
Nonconforming Use : A use of a building or lot that does not conform to a use regulation prescribed by this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, but which was in existence at the time the use regulation became effective and was lawful at the time it was established. 
Nursery School or Day Care Center : Any facility operated on a regular basis, whether known as a day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, child play school, progressive school, child development center, pre-school, or known under any other name which receives children, not of common parentage, under seven years of age, or under sixteen years of age if such children have special needs, for non-residential custody and care during part of all of the day separate from their school system; any part of a private organized educational system, unless the services of such a system are primarily limited to kindergarten, nursery or related pre-school services; a Sunday school conducted by a religious institution; a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are attending religious services; a family day care home; an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives; or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefor. 
Nursing, Convalescent or Rest Home, Hospital : An institution licensed by the Department of Public Health as a nursing, convalescent or rest home, charitable home for the aged, hospital or sanitarium pursuant to Sections 51 and 71 of Chapter III, General Laws. 
Open Space : Lot area not covered by any structure other than a swimming pool, and not used for driveways, parking or storage. However, balconies and any roof area developed for recreation shall be deemed to be open space. 
Parking Space : Space adequate to park an automobile, plus means of access. All parking spaces required by this Ordinance shall be built to the standards set forth in Section 4.1.4. Where spaces are not marked, each space shall be assumed to require 350 square feet. 
Personal Wireless Service Facility : See Section 5.13 
Philanthropic Institution : An endowed or charitably supported non-profit religious or non-sectarian activity maintained for a public or semi-public use. 
Principal Building or Use : Building or use other than an accessory one. 
Public Utility : Electrical, gas, steam, water, communication or public passenger transportation systems and their appurtenances. Excluded from this definition are all personal wireless service facilities. 
Radio Transmission : Premises used for the commercial transmission of radio or television, not including studios. 
Recharge Area : Area of permeable earth materials which is hydrologically connected to aquifers through which precipitation or surface water is transmitted to the subsurface zone of saturation. 
Recreational Marijuana Establishment : A marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business, subject to regulation under Chapter 94G of the Massachusetts General Laws (MGL c. 94G); provided, however, that a Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall not be deemed to be a Recreational Marijuana Establishment. 
Recreational Vessel : Means a vessel that is: 
(a)  Being manufactured or operated primarily for pleasure; or 
(b)  Leased, rented or chartered to another for the latter's pleasure. 
Retail Use : A business establishment where the principal activity is the sale of goods directly to the consumer. Retail business uses include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: antique store, appliance store, book/newspaper store, clothing store, computer store, department store, drug store, dry goods store, furniture store, grocery store, jewelry store, liquor store, musical instruments, stereo/video store, variety store. 
Self-Storage Service Facility : A building or group of buildings consisting of individual, self-contained units leased to individuals, organizations, or businesses for self-service storage of personal property and other non-hazardous durable goods, excluding vehicles. The use of units for other than dead storage is prohibited. 
Shopping Center : A retail business, entertainment, or consumer service establishment or an aggregation of such establishments on the same premises, having a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Sign : Any device, including those on or inside of windows, designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the sign is located, except for those devices specifically not considered signs in Section 4.3.1. 
Sign, Accessory : A sign whose subject matter relates exclusively to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises. 
Sign Area : The area of the smallest horizontally or vertically oriented rectangle which could enclose all the display area of the sign, together with any backing different in color or material from the finish material of the building face, without deduction for open space or other irregularities. Structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included unless internally or decoratively lighted. Only one side of flat, back-to-back signs shall be included in calculating sign area. 
Sign, Free-Standing : A sign erected or affixed to the land, and not attached to a building. 
Sign, Non-Accessory : Any billboard, or sign not an accessory sign. 
Solid Waste : Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. This includes but is not limited to rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material and landscape refuse. 
State Highway : A highway owned by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or one designated as a State Numbered Highway by the Massachusetts Department of Public Works. 
Street : Any public or private way which, by lawful procedure, has been recognized by the City and which has, as determined by the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and sight distances, adequate clearances, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land deriving frontage therefrom, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected on such land. 
Street Line : The right-of-way line of a street, assumed to be twenty (20) feet from the center of the traveled roadway where no such right-of-way line has been established or can be readily determined. 
Structure : Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on the ground, or attachment to something located on the ground. Structures include buildings, mobile homes, billboards, fences that exceed six (6) feet in height, swimming pools, tanks, or the like, or part thereof; boundary walls and fences not exceeding six feet in height are not considered to be structures. 
Swimming Pool : Any constructed pool, located above or below the ground, whether portable or fixed, used or capable of being used for swimming, wading, or bathing purposes. Pools having depth of two feet or more and having a capacity of two hundred cubic feet or more in volume shall be considered structures. 
Temporary Structure : Tent, construction shanty, or trailers, or similarly portable or demountable structures, intended for continuous use for not longer than one year. 
Temporary Use : Use, occupation or occupancy of a parcel of land, building or structure for a period not to exceed one calendar year. 
Trailer Truck Park : A transportation terminal principally used for the parking, storage, and servicing of trailer trucks or other trucks of more than two-ton capacity, may include eating and sleeping facilities for truck drivers. 
Transportation Terminal : Premises principally used for the loading or unloading of cargo from or into vehicles or storage, which may include the parking, storage or servicing of such vehicles, including trucks, rail freight cars, and marine vessels; but not including such activities if customarily accessory to a principal use. 
Utility Trailer : A towed vehicle for transportation of goods or animals, but not intended for human occupancy. 
Water's Edge : The point where land, seawall or bulkhead meets the mean high tide line, or if a pier or dock extends beyond the mean high tide line, the edge of that pier or dock next to the water. 
Watershed : Lands lying adjacent to water courses and surface water bodies which create the catchment or drainage areas of such water courses and bodies. 
Yard : See Section 3.1.8. 
Yard, Front : See Section 3.1.8. 
Yard, Rear : See Section 3.1.8. 
Yard, Side : See Section 3.1.8. 
Yard Sale : The occasional temporary use of a yard or garage for the retail sale of household articles formerly used by the residents of those or neighboring premises. 
(Adopted 7-6-99; amended 12-11-01; Ord. of 6-14-2011(4); Ord. of 7-23-2013(2); Ord. of 8-27-2013(2); Ord. of 11-17-2015(1); Ord. of 5-10-2016(1); Ord. of 9-26-2017(1)) 
APPENDIX A - RULE 25: RULES OF PROCEDURE 
SPECIAL PERMIT PROCEDURES 
PART I: STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS 
The following summary of the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws of Massachusetts that govern the City Council's actions on Special Permits is included for the convenience and information of applicants for Special Permits and other interested citizens. The Council cannot depart from the following prescribed procedures in its handling of such Special Permits as are assigned to it for decision by the Zoning Ordinance. 
These rules are adopted by the City Council in compliance with Section 9, Chapter 40A, M.G.L. 
GENERAL PROCEDURE: 
Special Permits by the City Council shall only be issued following a public hearing(s) held within sixty-five (65) days after the filing of an application with the City Council. The date of filing shall be considered the date a complete application is received by the City Clerk's Office. A complete application will contain all the information required under Section 1.4.2.2 of this Ordinance, and "Major Projects" as defined herein shall be submitted in conformance with the additional requirements of Section 5.7.2. Personal Wireless Service Facilities, as defined herein shall be submitted in conformance with Section 1.4.4.2 of the Ordinance and the additional requirements of Section 5.13.5. All reference to Special Permits, without specifying type (i.e., "CC", "CCS", or "Major Projects") shall be considered a "CC" permit. 
The required public hearing may be held before a Committee of the City Council, or before the entire City Council, as the Council so chooses. The entire City Council shall vote on the Special Permit application within ninety (90) days following the close of the public hearing, after receiving a report by the Committee, if any, that held the public hearing. The vote to grant a Special Permit will be by two-thirds vote of all members of the City Council. Failure by the City Council to take final action upon any application for a Special Permit within said ninety (90) days following the close of the public hearing shall be deemed to be a grant of the permit applied for. The Council shall follow the Council Rules on Special Permit Procedures set forth in Part II of this section. 
NOTICE: 
Notice of the public hearing shall be published in the local newspaper of general circulation in each of two successive weeks, the first publication at least fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing, and by posting such notice in the City Hall for a period of not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of said hearing. 
Notice shall also be mailed, postage prepaid, to: 
(a)  The applicant, or petitioner; 
(b)  The Planning Board; 
(c)  The owners of land abutting the applicant's property, and abutters to the abutters within three hundred feet of the property line of the petitioner as they appear on the most recently applicable tax list; 
(d)  The owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way; 
(e)  The owners of all other property deemed by the City Council to be affected; 
(f)  The Planning Boards of all abutting cities or towns. 
The Assessor's Department shall certify to the City Council the names and addresses of parties in interest as defined above and such certification shall be conclusive for all purposes. 
The notice shall contain the name of the applicant, the location of the area or premises for which the permit is applied, the street address, if any, the subject matter of the hearing, the nature of the action or relief being sought, and the date and place of the public hearing. 
PUBLIC HEARING: 
The presiding officer at the hearing may administer oaths, summon witnesses, and call for the production of papers. 
All hearings shall be open to the public. 
DECISION: 
There must be a detailed record of the Council's proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question (or if absent or failing to vote). This record must set forth clearly the reasons for the Council's decisions. City Council decision shall be based upon the written determination of the impact on the items of consideration listed in Section 1.4.2.2(e) of this Ordinance. Copies of the record are to be filed with the City Clerk and the Planning Board. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to all parties in interest, and also to each person at the public hearing who so requests. 
The Council shall issue to the landowner a certified notice of the granting of any Special Permit, containing the name and address of the landowner, identifying the land affected, and stating that a Special Permit has been granted as set forth in the decision on file with the City Clerk. The permit does not take effect until this decision has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds, with the recording fee paid by the owner. 
If an application has been denied by the City Council it may not be again considered on its merits within two (2) years of the decision except with the consent of all but one of the members of the Planning Board. 
APPEALS: 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Council on a Special Permit, whether or not previously a party to the proceeding, or any Municipal Officer or Board may appeal to the Superior Court Department of Essex County, by bringing action within twenty (20) days after the decision has been filed in the Office of the City Clerk. Appeal procedures shall conform to Section 17 of Chapter 40A, M.G.L. 
PART II: COUNCIL RULES ON SPECIAL PERMIT PROCEDURES 
As required by Chapter 40A of the General Laws, the Gloucester City Council adopts the following rules for its procedure in acting on Special Permits assigned to the City Council for decision by the Zoning Ordinance: 
1.  Preliminary Informal Review 
To promote better communication and avoid misunderstanding, applicants for Special Permits are encouraged to submit preliminary materials for informal review by the City Council or its standing committee, the Planning Board, the Building Inspector, the City Planner, and any other City officials or agency that the applicant considers likely to be considered in the decision. On all major projects, in addition to preliminary informal review, an applicant is encouraged at the 25% design stage, to submit materials for an informal interim review; said materials should show the location, height, density, and architectural treatment of buildings, traffic, environmental and utility considerations and the fiscal impact to the City. It is important, however, for applicants to realize that these preliminary informal reviews are not to be thought of as preliminary approvals, and interim informal reviews are in no way binding on the City Council in its action on the final application. 
2.  Applications for Council Special Permits 
a.  The Application shall be submitted on forms available at the City Clerk's Office, which have been prescribed and approved by the City Council. 
b.  The Special Permit shall include a description of whatever criteria are or may be listed in 1.4.2.2(e); for Major Projects there shall be an additional form listing the criteria in 5.7.5. 
c.  City staff shall be available to assist applicants in preparing the applications, including when appropriate the Building Inspector and the City Planner. 
d.  No application shall be received by the City Clerk and placed on the City Council agenda unless it is complete, including the materials required by 1.4.2.2(b), 5.7.2 for a Major Project, and 5.13.5 for Personal Wireless Service Facilities. The City Clerk, in determining the completeness of an application, may at his discretion refer it to the Building Inspector, the City Planner, or other City officials. If it is determined through such review that the project cannot be built unless a zoning variance is granted, the City Clerk shall rule that the application is not complete and return it to the applicant without prejudice, so that the applicant may either appeal to the Board of Appeals for the grant of such variance prior to reapplying to the City Council, or revise the plans to eliminate the need for a variance. 
e.  The City Clerk shall affix the date of receipt of a complete application for Special Permit on the application form. Such date shall constitute the date of filing as set forth in Chapter 40A, M.G.L. 
3.  First Action by City Council 
a.  When a completed special permit application, including a report and recommendation from the City Staff Review Committee, is received by the City Council, the Council shall refer same to its Planning & Development Committee for their initial review, to make a date for a site visit and set a date for public hearing before the full City Council. 
b.  The Planning & Development Committee after review may also make a recommendation to the full City Council on disposition of the application, to be read after the City Council's public hearing. 
c.  Proper notification of the public hearing before the full City Council (as required by State Statute) to the abutters shall be handled by the City Council. However, the applicant shall be responsible for sending out notices to abutters and parties of interest of the date(s) of Planning & Development Standing Committee Review(s). 
d.  The public hearing date shall be set within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of the application with the City Clerk. 
4.  Public Hearing 
a.  The first order of business at the public hearing shall be the reading of the notice of the hearing and a determination that the hearing is being properly held. 
b.  The second order of business shall be a description of the proposed project and the presentation of arguments in favor of the application by the applicant and by any others who wish to speak in favor of the application. There shall be provided by the applicant and displayed within view of the Council and of those attending the hearing such maps, drawings, models, or other graphic materials required to have been submitted with the application as are necessary to explain the proposal. 
c.  The third order of business shall be presentation of all advisory reports requested or required under 3.c. above. These reports shall have been submitted in writing, but may be presented and summarized orally either by a representative of the reporting agency if one is present or by the City Planner. For Major Projects, the Council may request the presence of representatives of one or more of the reporting agencies. 
d.  The fourth order of business shall be arguments opposed to the application. This shall be followed by presentation of all communications not covered in Paragraph 4.c., then by brief opportunities for rebuttal by the proponents and counter-rebuttal by the opponents. 
e.  With all testimony complete, and all questions concerning the proposal answered to the satisfaction of the Council, the public hearing shall be closed. If testimony is not complete, or questions remain to be answered by the applicant(s), opponent(s) or other source(s) of information, as directed by the City Council, the public hearing shall be continued to a time and date certain, and the record shall remain open for additional written communications. Upon reopening the public hearing, such additional testimony or information shall be presented as set forth in 4.b., 4.c. and 4.d. above. At the conclusion of such additional testimony or presentation of information and all rebuttals as stated in 4.d. above, the public hearing shall be closed. 
f.  The final order of business shall be Council action, either final or preliminary. (See 5 below) 
5.  Council Action 
a.  Final action by City Council on a request for Special Permit shall be taken within ninety (90) days following the public hearing. Failure to take action within said ninety (90) day period shall be considered a grant of the permit applied for. 
b.  If in the course of the public hearing it appears that the project cannot be built unless a zoning variance is granted, the Council shall rule that the application is not complete and therefore is not properly before it; and the application shall be returned to the applicant without prejudice for such action or revision as he may choose. 
c.  Final Council action on an application for a Special Permit shall be by adoption, by a two-thirds roll call vote, of a written document which shall have been available to every member of the Council prior to the vote, and subject to normal procedures of debate, amendment, and action. 
d.  This document shall include a specific finding and judgment, in relation to the case in hand, on each of the considerations listed in 1.4.2.2(e) and, where applicable, each of the criteria listed in 5.7.5, 5.13.3 and 5.13.4. It shall conclude with a summary evaluation of the findings and judgments, supporting one of the following actions: 
(1)  Denial of the Special Permit; 
(2)  Approval, subject to specified conditions or modifications; 
(3)  Approval as submitted, without conditions or modifications. 
e.  Drafts of this document to be considered by the Council may have been prepared by any member of the Council, or by any City official or employee upon instruction by the Council. Written material may be submitted by either proponents or opponents prior to the close of the public hearing, as set forth under Section 4 of these rules. 
f.  For a simple or non-controversial case, an acceptable draft of this document may be available to the Council at the time of the public hearing. When this is applicable, the Council will take final action on the application at the close of the public hearing. 
g.  For a complex or controversial case, the Council at the close of the hearing may or may not be ready to make a decision. If the decision is already clear, the Council may pass a motion instructing a specific official or employee to prepare a document in support of the decision for consideration at the next Council meeting. If the decision is not clear, the Council will defer action to its next meeting, but no additional information will be received or considered in addition to the testimony and information obtained during the course of the public hearing and constituting the record of same. 
h.  The City Council, on each permit granted, shall specify a time period, of not more than two years, within which substantial use thereof must commence, or in the case of construction, that the construction must commence, except for good cause, including such time required to pursue or await appeals proceedings as provided for in state law. 
i.  The successful applicant shall be required to provide documentary evidence to the City Council proving that any and all conditions specified by the Council in the Special Council Permit issued have been complied with and there upon, the Council will issue a "Certificate of Conditions Complete" or Occupancy Permit for the premises until the City Council has issued said certification of completion. 
Modification of Application of Rules 
In a specific case the Council may find it necessary or desirable to depart from the letter of one or other or these rules. If or when this is done, the departure will be noted in the record together with the reason for it. 
(Ord. of 11-29-2011(1)) 
APPENDIX B - SCHEDULE OF FEES UNDER THE CITY OF GLOUCESTER ZONING ORDINANCE 
Application for City Council Special Permit ..... $350.00 Application for City Council Major Project Special Permit ..... One percent (1%) of construction costs, but in no event less than $1,000.00 or more than $5,000.00 Application for City Council Personal Wireless Service Facility Special Permit ..... One percent (1%) of construction costs, but in no event less than $1,000.00 or more than $5,000.00 Application to the City Council to amend the Zoning Ordinance ..... $350.00 Application for Planning Board Special Permit ..... $350.00 Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for Special Permit, Variance or Appeal from the Decision of the Inspector of Buildings ..... $250.00 Building Permit ..... $40.00 plus $7.00 per each $1,000.00 of total construction costs Use Permit ..... $40.00 Occupancy Permit ..... No charge  
Revised as of September 2, 2008. Please consult with the Building Department as to possible subsequent revisions. 
APPENDIX C - REZONED AREAS 
1.  Adopted March 9, 1999: To rezone the area of land Northwest of the Goose Cove Watershed from Low Density Residential R-2 (20,000 SF) to Rural Residential R-RA (40,000 SF). (Refer to Zoning Map numbers 25,32,33,42 for the above 500 acres.) 
2.  Adopted March 9, 1999: To rezone the Medium Density Residential R-3 (10,000 SF) corridor along Washington Street between Goose Cove and Folly Cove to Low Density Residential R-2 (20,000 SF). (Refer to Zoning Map numbers 25,32,33,34,35,43 for the above 547 acres.) 
3.  Adopted March 9, 1999: To rezone Area 39, Special Study District #5, Medium Density Residential (R-3) (10,000 SF) corridor district along Concord and Atlantic Streets to Low Density Residential R-2 (20,000 SF). (Refer to Zoning Map numbers 13,14,15,16,24,25 for the above 694 acres.) 
4.  Adopted March 9, 1999: To rezone Area 46, Special Study District #6, South and West of Concord Street from Low Density Residential R-2 (20,000 SF) to Rural Residential R-RA (40,000 SF). (Refer to Zoning Map numbers 9,10,11,14,15,16 for the above 1241 acres.) 
5.  Adopted March 9, 1999: To rezone Area 40, Special Study District #8, the non-urbanized area of Magnolia (excluding Village Business, Neighborhood Business, Extensive Business) currently zoned Medium Density Residential R-3 (10,000 SF) to Low Density Residential R-2 (20,000 SF) which are not within the Watershed. (Refer to Zoning Map numbers 6,7,16,18,19,20,21,22 for the above 1234 acres.) 
6.  Adopted April 27, 1999: To amend by changing the residential zoning for the Little River Sections of the City, Special Study Districts #3 and #4 in the 1998 Buildout Analysis, from R-3, Medium Density Residential 10,000 sq. Ft. Lot size, to R-2, Low-Density Residential, 20,000 sq. ft. Lot. 
7.  Adopted July 20, 1999: To rezone the area of 18 Biskie Head Point, Charles and Susan Kelly Owners, Assessor's Map 232, Lot 3 from EB (Extensive Business) to R-3 Medium Density Residential. 
8.  Adopted October 12, 1999: To rezone a section of land with boundaries as shown on the 1998 Metropolitan Area Planning Council's Buildout Analysis Map of Gloucester as Special Study District #7, including an extension of its southerly boundary to Englewood Road then east to Magnolia Woods Park and north to along the northerly side of Western Avenue to its intersection with Bond Street, all currently zoned R-2, to R-2A, 30,000 sq. Ft. Minimum lot size. In addition, all single and two-family houses within the R-2A district that were in existence or for which a building permit was issued before March 9, 1999, are allowed to be altered, reconstructed, or extended providing they maintain a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet, side yard setback of 10 feet and a rear yard setback of 20 feet. 
9.  Adopted December 7, 1999: To rezone lots in the Woodbury Street area of North Gloucester from Low Density Residential, (R-2) 20,000 square foot minimum lot size to Rural Residential-B (RR-B), 80,000 square foot minimum lot size on the following City Assessors' Maps and Lots: Map 150: Lots 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 16; Map 149: Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16; Map 148: Lots 4, 8, 20, 22, 23, 24. 
10.  Adopted August 21, 2001: To remove 20,040 square feet from the General Industrial (GI) Zoning District and then add the exact same area and location to the High Density Residential (R-4) District. As referenced on Assessor's Map 32 (Map dated August 28, 1986, last revised June 12, 1990) the zoning change encompasses Lots 20, 21, 24 and 25. 
11.  Adopted October 29, 2002: To remove 7,953 square feet at 30 Sadler Street from General Industrial (GI) and then add the exact same area and location to the High Density Residential District (R-4), as referenced on Assessor's Map 262 (Map dated January 1990, last revised May 14, 1998), Lot 9. 
12.  Adopted March 18, 2003: To rezone 147 Essex Avenue as referenced on Assessor's Map 218, Lot 32 from General Industrial (GI) to Village Business (VB). 
13.  Adopted April 15, 2003: To rezone 27 Railroad Avenue as referenced on Assessor's Map 24, Lot 59 from General Industrial (GI) to Neighborhood Business (NB). 
14.  Adopted July 15, 2005: To rezone 88.25 feet along Washington Street, 288.16 feet along Myrtle Square and 190 feet along Maplewood Avenue, by removing 6.74 acres in General Industrial and .4 acres in R-4 high density residential and replacing the exact same area to the Extensive Business district as referenced on Assessor's Map 24, Lot 51. 
15.  Adopted November 29, 2005: To rezone a parcel off Blackburn Circle and Route 128 as shown on Assessor's Map 262, Lot 13 (33.689 acres), zoned medium/high density residential to Extensive Business to allow for retail buildings and assisted living facilities. 
16.  Adopted March 21, 2006. To rezone 85-89 Bass Avenue, Assessor's Map 66, Lot 12, from Extensive Business and R-3 medium/high density residential to Neighborhood Business. 
17.  Adopted January 23, 2007. To rezone 7.9 acres in the General Industrial (GI) district to Extensive Business (EB), and to rezone 4.8 acres in the R-2 district to EB at the intersection of Concord Street and Route 128, Assessors Map 234, Lots 38 and 42 respectively; conditioned upon the five page memorandum of agreement between the City of Gloucester and Demoulas dated 1/3/2007. 
18.  Adopted February 6, 2007: To rezone approximately 1,806 sq. ft. from Civic Center District (CCD) to Central Business (CB) at 18 and 20 Pleasant Street, Assessor's Map 8, Lots 54 and 84. 
19.  Adopted December 11, 2007: To rezone parcel at 73 Comcord [Concord] Street, Assessor's Map 234, Lot 39, from R-2 low/medium residential density to Extensive Business. 
APPENDIX D - INDEX OF ADOPTIONS/AMENDMENTS 
Year Date Section Adoption/Amendment 1998 04/14 1.4.2.2(a) City Council Special Permit Procedures 04/14 1.4.2.2(b)4 City Council Special Permit: Personal Wireless Service 04/14 5.13.5 Personal Wireless Service Facility 09/01 1.4.2.2(b)5 City Council Special Permit: Protein Recovery Plant 09/01 2.3.4, #41A Protein Recovery Plant 11/10 Appendix B, II One year building moratorium - Wards 4 and 5 12/08 2.3, 2.3.1 Use Regulations Schedule-One Family to Two 12/08 3.4, 3.4.1 Pork Chop Lots: Conditions for Issuance-Minimum Lot Area 1999 03/02 4.1, 4.1.1 (c) Off-Street Parking 03/09 Appendix C Rezone: Goose Cove Watershed 03/09 Appendix C Rezone: Washington St. corridor between Goose & Folly Cove 03/09 Appendix C Rezone: Concord and Atlantic Streets 03/09 Appendix C Rezone: South and West of Concord Street 03/09 Appendix C Rezone: Non-Urbanized area of Magnolia 03/09 Section VI Definitions: Lot Area 03/09 5.13.3.3g (1) Dimensional requirements for Personal Wireless 04/27 Appendix C Rezone: Little River-Districts #3 and #4 05/25 Appendix B, II One year building moratorium-Wards 1 and 3 06/22 2.4.3(a) Use Regulations-Minimum Setbacks, R-RA & R-2 06/22 3.2 Footnote 1 Dimensional Regulations-Yard Setbacks 07/06 2.3.3 - Para. 29 Open Uses-Permitted Use Area-Casino Boats 07/06 2.3.3 - Ftnote (2) Definition: Cruise Ship/Casino Ship 07/06 Section VI Definition: Cruise Ship/Casino Ship 07/06 4.1, 4.1.2 Off-Street Parking-Casino Boat Water Uses 07/20 Appendix C Rezone: Biskie Head Point 08/10 Appendix B, II One year building moratorium - Ward 2 10/12 Appendix C Rezone: District #7 - Magnolia 10/12 Section VI Definitions: Building Height 10/26 5.5.4 Lowland Requirements 12/07 Appendix C Rezone: Woodbury Street area 2000 05/03 Appendix B, I West Gloucester Interim Planning Overlay District 06/20 5.14 Assisted Living Facilities 06/20 5.7 Major Projects 06/20 2.3.1 Residential Use 08/29 1.3.3 (a) Procedures to Obtain Permits 08/29 1.3.4 Drainage and Grading Requirements 2001 08/21 Appendix C Rezone: District-GI to R-4, Map 32, Lots 20, 21, 24, 25 10/09 1.4.2.2(b) City Council Special Permits 11/27 3.1.8 Term usage - "building", MGL Ch. 41, Sec. 81L 12/11 Section VI Definitions: Dwelling: Two-Family 2002 01/22 2.4.3 (a & b) Non-Conforming Uses, Structures & Lots 01/22 3.2 ftnotes (k & 1) Intensity of Use Schedule Footnotes 08/20 5.15 Open Space Residential Development 10/29 Appendix C Rezone 30 Sadler Street (7,953 sf) from GI to R-4 2003 02/04 5.16 Village Development Overlay District 03/18 Appendix C Rezone 147 Essex Avenue (Map 218, Lot 32) from GI to VB 04/15 Appendix C Rezone 27 Railroad Avenue (Map 24, Lot 59) from GI to NB 06/24 1.3.6; 
1.4.2.1(a); 
1.4.2.2(a) Fee changes 09/16 3.2 Footnote (e); 
3.2.1(4); 
3.2.2(3) Building Height 2004 07/13 5.17 Drive-Through Facilities Added 2005 06/23 1.4.2.2(a) Submittal fee for Special Permits $250.00 to $350.00 07/13 Appendix C Rezone Myrtle Square area from GI & R-4 to EB 09/06 2.3.1, #4 Allow by right dwelling units above retail in CB and VB 09/20 3.2.1 Add VB to R-4 column 11/15 2.3.1, #11A Assisted Living Residences; change VB to "CCS" and GI to "N" 3.2.3 Assisted Living Residences amended 5.14 Assisted Living Residences ordinance amended 11/29 Appendix C Rezone land off Blackburn Circle and Rt. 128 from R-3 to EB; Gloucester Crossing 2006 03/21 Appendix C Rezone 85-89 Bass Ave. from EB and R-3 to NB 08/22 5.9.7(a) Cluster Development: replace language 5.9.8(a) Cluster Development: delete second sentence. 2.3.1,#11 OSRD: Change R-4, CCD, NB, VB from "Y" to "N" 5.15.7.3(a) OSRD: Replace language and formula 2007 01/23 Appendix C Rezone area at intersection of Concord St. & Rt. 128 to EB; Demoulas 02/06 Appendix C Rezone 18 & 20 Pleasant St. from CCD to CB. 05/15 2.3.7, #77A Commercial Land-Based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities 2.3.7, #77A(a) Wind Monitoring or Meteorological Tower 2.3.7, #77B Residential Land-Based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities 5.22 Commercial Land-Based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities 5.23 Residential Land-Based Wind Energy Conversion Facilities 5.24 Accessory In-Law Apartments ordinance 12/11 Appendix C Rezone 73 Concord St. from R-2 to EB - Demoulas. 2008 05/27 5.11 Inclusionary Housing Requirements amended 09/02 Sections I, II, III Amended  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Beginning with the 2015 republication, this Code Comparative Table lists, in a chronological order, the ordinances of the City used in this codification. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance of Section Section this Code  9- 2-2008(1) 3.2.2, 3.2.6  9- 2-2008(2) 3.1.7  9- 2-2008(3) 2.3.4(15)  9- 2-2008(4) Section I-III, §§ 1.1-1.10, 
2.1-2.4, 
3.1-3.2  3-30-2010(1) 2.3.2(14) 2.3.3(1), (3) 2.3.4(10), (11), (13)       Added 2.3.4(26) 2.3.7(2)  3-30-2010(2) 2.3(FN. #1)  3-30-2010(3)       Added 2.3.5(FN. #3)  3-30-2010(4)       Rpld 5.8       Added 5.8, §§ 5.8.1-5.8.11  3-30-2010(5) 2.2.1  3-30-2010(6) 5.18  4-27-2010(1)       Added 2.3.6(8)-(10) 5.22.3(a), (b)       Added 5.22.6(b)2.iii.       Rnbd 5.22.6(b)2.iii., iv).       as 5.22.6(b)2.iv., v. 2.3.1(FN. #3)  6-14-2011(1)       Rpld 2.3.1(5)       Added 2.3.1(5)(a), (5)(b)  6-14-2011(2)       Added 3.2.3 (FN. g.)  6-14-2011(3) 2.2.3  6-14-2011(4) Section VI 11-29-2011(1) 1.5.3(a)-(c), App. A  5- 8-2012(1)       Added 5.25, §§ 5.25.1-5.25.7 10-23-2012(1)       Added 5.26, §§ 5.26.1-5.26.7 10-23-2012(2) 3.1.8  7-23-2013(1)       Added 5.27, §§ 5.27.1-5.27.6  7-23-2013(2) Section VI  8-27-2013(1)       Rpld 5.5.4  8-27-2013(2) Section VI       Added 2.3.5(8), (FN. #4) 11-12-2013(1)       Rpld 5.27, §§ 5.27.1-5.27.6       Added 5.27, §§ 5.27.1, 5.27.2       Added 2.3.2(15), (16), (FN. #4)  6-23-2015(1) 2.3.1(10)  9- 8-2015(1) 1 2.3.1(5)(a), (b), (6)       Added 2.3.1(FN. #8) 2 2.4.4(b)       Added 2.4.4(c) 
3.2.1 11-17-2015(1) Section VI 12-15-2015(1) 5.28.1-5.28.3  4-12-2016(1) 1.3.1(c)  5-10-2016(1) 2.3.2(Tbl.) 5.7.1       Rpld 5.27, §§ 5.27.1, 5.27.2       Added 5.27, §§ 5.27.1-5.27.10 Section VI  6-28-2016(1)       Rpld 5.13, §§ 5.13.1-5.13.13       Added 5.13, §§ 5.13.1-5.13.8  7-12-2016(1) 2.1.1  4-25-2017(1)       Added 5.29, §§ 5.29.1-5.29.10  8-22-2017(1) I, II 2.3.1 III 1.8.3 IV 1.8.4(b) V       Added 5.30, §§ 5.30.1-5.30.4  9-26-2017(1)       Added 5.31, §§ 5.31.1, 5.31.2 Section VI  9-11-2018(1)       Added 5.31, §§ 5.31.1-5.31-12  9-11-2018(2) 2.3.2 2.3.4 2.3.5  9-25-2018(1)       Rpld 5.31, §§ 5.31.1, 5.31.2 11-13-2018(1) 5-31.4 11-13-2018(2)       Rpld 1.2.5 5.1.2(d) 5.23.3(g)  

CITY OF GLOUCESTER
Rules and Regulations
Governing the
Subdivision of Land
Gloucester, MA
July 2008
GLOUCESTER PLANNING BOARD
RULES and REGULATIONS
GOVERNING the SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GLOUCESTER, MA
PURPOSE ………………………………..…………………………......….……………..… 1
SECTION I. AUTHORITY …………..…………………………...…......…………..…… 1
SECTION II. GENERAL …………………………………………………………….....… 3
2.1 Definitions ………………………………………………………………….…..3
2.2 Plan Believed Not To Require Approval ……………………………………… 5
2.2.1 Applicability……..……………………………………...……………….. 5
2.2.2 Submission of Plan ………………………...……………………….…… 5
2.2.3 Submission Requirements …………………………….…………..……. 5
2.2.4 Plan Form and Contents ……………………………...…………….……. 6
2.2.5 Determination Criteria……………………...………………………….… 7
2.2.6 Procedure for Review and Determination ……………….………………. 8
2.2.7 Providing Adequacy of Access to Existing Lots …………………...…… 9
2.3 Right to Make a Subdivision in Gloucester …………………………...….…… 14
2.4 One Dwelling Per Lot………………………………………………………….. 15
2.5 Adequate Access from Public Way………………………………………….… 15
2.5.1 Improvements to Way of Access………………………………………… 15
2.5.2 Dedication of Land for Purpose of Improving Access………………...… 15
2.5.3 Common Driveways…………………………………...………………… 15
2.6 Subdivisions of Three or Fewer Lots…………………….…………………….. 17
2.6.1 Preliminary Plans………………………………………..............….…… 17
2.6.2 Definitive Plans……………………….…………………………….….… 17
2.7 Fees……………………………………………………….…………………..... 17
2.7.1 Modification, Extension, and Automatic Rescission…………………...... 17
2.8 Special Account for Subdivision Review………………………………..…….. 18
2.9 Pre-application…………………………………………...…………………….. 19
SECTION III. PROCEDURE FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
PRELIMINARY AND DEFINITIVE PLANS
3.1 Preliminary Plan ………………………………………………………………..21
3.1.1 General………………………………………………….………………. 21
3.1.2 Filing Procedure……………………………………….…………….….. 21
3.1.3 Contents…………………………………………….…...……………… 22
3.1.4 Approval or Disapproval…..………………………………………….…23
3.2 Definitive Plan……………………………………….………………………… 23
3.2.1 General……………………………………….…………………….…… 23
3.2.2 Filing Procedure…………………………………..………………….…. 26
3.2.3 Designer…………………………………….……………………….….. 26
3.2.4 Contents……………………………………...…………………….…… 27
3.2.5 Staking…………………………………………………………..……… 30
3.3 Review by Board of Health as to Suitability of Land………………..………. 30
3.4 Review by Other City Officials…………………………...…...............………. 30
3.4.1 DPW Review………………………..……………………………….…. 30
3.4.2 Fire Department Review………………..……………..…………………30
3.4.3 Building Inspector Review………………………….……………….…. 30
3.4.4 Conservation Commission Review…….…………………………….…. 30
3.5 Public Hearing…………………………………………………………………. 31
3.6 Approval of a Definitive Plan………………………….………………………. 31
3.7 Inspection Fees…………………………………………….…………………… 31
3.8 Performance Bond Guarantee…………………………………………….….… 32
3.8.1 Election by Applicant………..…………………………….…………….32
3.8.2 Performance Bond………………………………………….……………32
3.8.3 Covenant………………….………………………………………….…. 32
3.8.4 Lender’s Guarantee of Performance…………………………………… 33
3.8.5 Change in Security, Reductions and Extensions………….…………….. 33
3.9 Conveyance of Utilities and Easements and Dedication of Streets……………. 34
3.9.1 Conveyance of Travel Easements………………………..……………... 34
3.9.2 Conveyance of Drains…………………………………….…………….. 34
3.9.3 Conveyance of Water System…………………………………………... 34
3.10 Evidence of Satisfactory Performance………………………..…..……………. 35
3.10.1 Payment of Fees……………...…………………………..……………. 35
3.10.2 Written Approvals……………...………………………...............……. 35
3.10.3 Engineer Inspection…...………………………………….…………… 35
3.10.4 Submission of As-Built Plan……………………………..……………. 35
3.11 Release of Performance Guarantee……………………………….……….…… 35
3.12 Retainage to Insure Adequate Work……………………….…….…………..… 36
3.13 Time for Completion……….….………………………………….…….………36
3.14 Endorsement…………………..…………………………………………..…… 36
SECTION IV. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR AN
APPROVED SUBDIVISION
4.1 General………………………….………………….………………………...… 37
4.1.1 Design Standards………………………......………….…...…………… 37
4.1.2 Conformance with Plan and Regulations….…………..………….…….. 37
4.1.3 Monuments………………………………………………………..……. 37
4.1.4 Tests of Materials…………………………………………………….… 37
4.1.5 As-Built Plans………………………………………………….…..…… 37
4.1.6 Installation of Services………………..…………………….……..…… 38
4.2 Lot Improvements……………………………………………………………… 38
4.2.1 Lot Configuration………………………………………………….…… 38
4.2.2 Lot Dimensions…………………………………………..…..………… 38
4.2.3 Lot Access…………………………………………………...…………. 38
4.3 Streets………………………………………………………………….………. 38
4.3.1 Location and Alignment……………………………………………….. 38
4.3.2 Width………………………………………………………….……….. 40
4.3.3 Grades…………………………………………………….……………. 40
4.3.4 Dead-End Streets………………………………………………...…….. 41
4.3.5 Construction .…………………………………………..…………..…. 41
4.3.6 Signage………………………………….……………………..………. 42
4.3.7 Lighting………………………………..………………………………. 43
4.3.8 Damage………………………………..………………………………. 43
4.4 Sewerage………………………………...…………………………………….. 43
4.4.1 Public Sewers………………………………………………………….. 43
4.4.2 Private On-Site Sewage Disposal……………………………….…….. 44
4.5 Water…………………………………………………………………….…….. 44
4.5.1 Water Mains…………………………………………………..….……. 44
4.5.2 Fire Hydrants…………………………………………………….……. 45
4.6 Surface Drainage……………………………………………………….……… 46
4.6.1 General……………………………………………………………….… 46
4.6.2 Specifications………………………………………………………..…. 46
4.7 Sidewalks…………………………………………………………………….… 47
4.7.1 General……………………………………………………….…….….. 47
4.7.2 Specifications……………………………………………….……….… 47
4.8 Utilities……………………………………………………………………….… 47
4.8.1 Easements……………………………………………………..…….…. 47
4.8.2 Installation………………………………………………….……….…. 48
4.9 Public Uses………………………………………………………….…….…… 48
4.9.1 Easements……………………………………………….……..………. 48
4.9.2 Open Space………………………………………………..…..……….. 48
4.9.3 Bikeways and Walkways………………………………………………. 48
4.10 Natural Features and Amenities……………………………………….………. 48
4.10.1 Preservation……………………………………………………..…….. 48
4.10.2 Grass Plots…………………………………………………………….. 49
4.10.3 Trees…………………………………………………………..……….. 49
4.10.4 Bank Plantings………………………………………………..….…….. 49
4.11 Fire Protection……………………………………………………….…….…… 50
4.11.1 Fire Protection Device Barriers……………………………….….……. 50
4.11.2 Overhead Obstructions………………………………………………….50
4.11.3 Sprinkler Systems…………………………………………….….…….. 50
4.11.4 Fire Alarms…………………………………………………………….. 50
4.12 Cleaning Up…………………………………………………………..……….. 50
SECTION V. ADMINISTRATION
5.1 Inspection……………………………………………………………..….……. 51
5.2 Variation……………………………………………………………..….…….. 51
5.3 Rescission…………………………………………………………..….……… 51
5.4 Reference…………………………………………………………….………… 51
5.5 Building Permit……………..…………………………………………………. 51
5.5.1 Release of Lots……………………………………………..………….. 51
5.5.2 Enforcement by Denial of Building Permit…………………...……….. 52
5.6 Separability……………………………………………………………………. 52
SECTION VI. RULES AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE CITY OF
GLOUCESTER OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(OSRD) ZONING ORDINANCE
6.1 Purpose …………..…………………………………..…………………………. 53
6.2 Detailed Design Standards ……………………………………………………. 53
A. Disturbed Areas ………………………………………...…………………. 53
B. Traffic and Circulation ………………………………………………….… 53
C. Landscaping & Screening …………………………………………….…… 54
D. Drainage …………………………………………………………………... 55
E. Building Orientation and Building Massing ………………...……………. 55
6.3 Submission of Plans & Documents for OSRD …………………………….…. 55
A. Pre-application ……………………………………………….…………… 55
B. Site Plan …………………………………………………………………… 55
C. Review Procedure and Policies Pertaining to OSRD Site Plans ………….. 57
Appendix 6.A Yield Plan Map Checklist ……………………….……………. 57
Appendix 6.A2 Yield Plan Narrative Checklist …………………...………….. 58
Appendix 6.B Sketch Plan Map Checklist …………………………….……… 59
Appendix 6.B2 Sketch Plan Narrative Checklist …………………………...… 60
APPENDICES:
Appendix A Environmental Impact Evaluation…….……………………...…...…. 63
Appendix A-1 Stormwater Management……..……………………………………… 66
Appendix B Methodology and Standards for Determination of Nutrient Loading... 71
Appendix C Design Standards for Street and Related Construction………………. 72
Appendix D Planning Board Forms (Form A through Form N)………………… 75
Appendix E Index of Amendments to Subdivision Rules and Regulations………. 77
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 1 -
RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GLOUCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS
Adopted under the “Subdivision Control Law”, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 41,
Sections 81-K through 81-GG, which was enacted in 1953.
PURPOSE
The Subdivision Control Law has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of the cities and towns in which it is, or may
hereafter be, put in effect by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in
subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein, but which have not become
public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parks
and open areas.
The powers of a planning board and of a board of appeal under the Subdivision Control
Law shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the
lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for reducing
danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case
of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; for insuring compliance with the applicable
zoning ordinances or by-laws; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage,
drainage, and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision and for coordinating
the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the city or town in
which it is located and with the ways in neighboring subdivision.
It is the intent of the Subdivision Control Law that any subdivision plan filed with the
Planning Board shall receive the approval of such Board if said plan conforms to the
recommendations of the Board of Health and to the reasonable Rules and Regulations of
the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land; provided, however, that such board
may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in section 81-R, such portions of the Rules
and Regulations as is deemed advisable.
(MGL Chapter 41, Section 81-M)
SECTION I. AUTHORITY
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the City of Gloucester,
Massachusetts, by MGL Chapter 41, Section 81-Q, said Board hereby adopts these
“Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in the City of Gloucester,
Massachusetts” (hereinafter “Rules and Regulations”). Such Rules and Regulations shall
be effective on and after the 1st day of April 1970.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 2 -
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 3 -
SECTION II. GENERAL
2.1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these Rules and Regulations, the following words and terms used
herein are hereby defined or the meaning there of is explained or limited as follows:
APPLICANT. The person who applies for approval of a subdivision or construction of a
way. An applicant must be an owner or owners of equitable or legal interest of all the
land included in the proposed subdivision. If the applicant is represented by an agent,
written evidence shall be submitted with the application accompanying the subdivision
plan that the agent has authority to submit said application for each owner involved.
BOARD. The Planning Board of the City of Gloucester.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street which collects, or may reasonably be expected to
collect, traffic from several minor streets, or which handles traffic equivalent to that
generated by 50 homes or more, or which serves non-residential abutting property.
COURT. A street which, by its location and design, serves as a means of access for no
more than three single-family dwellings, is not more than two hundred (200) feet in
length, and has no potential to serve additional lots.
DEFINITIVE PLAN. A plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision of land drawn
in accordance with Section III of these Rules and Regulations.
DEVELOPER OR SUBDIVIDER. The person undertaking the subdivision of land.
ELEVATION. Height relative to mean sea level.
LANE. A street which, by its location and design, may not service non-residential
property, or serve as a means of access to more than ten homes, and is not more than five
hundred (500) feet in length.
LOT. An area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries, used, or available for
use, as the site for one or more buildings. A lot within a subdivision shall mean any area
of land with boundaries recorded or to be recorded without any interior division.
MINOR STREET. A street which cannot qualify as a "Lane" but which can be
expected to handle less traffic than a "Collector" street, and is not more than five hundred
(500) feet in length.
NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision in which any of the lots are
used for business, industrial or any other non-residential purposes.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 4 -
PRELIMINARY PLAN. A plan of a proposed subdivision or re-subdivision of land
drawn in accordance with Section 3.1 of these Rules and Regulations.
REGISTERED ENGINEER. A person registered or legally permitted to practice
professional civil engineering in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person registered or legally permitted
to practice landscape architecture in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
REGISTERED SURVEYOR. A person registered or legally permitted to practice land
surveying in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision in which the lots are used solely for
residential purposes.
STEEP SLOPE. A slope greater than 25%; slope is defined as the ratio elevation
change to horizontal distance. Slope is computed by dividing the vertical distance
(“rise”) by the horizontal distance (“run”). Slopes of 25% or greater shall be determined
based on two (2) foot contours analyzed over a twenty (20) foot horizontal interval.
Greater resolution may be required after initial plan review.
SUBDIVISION. The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, including resubdivision;
provided, however, that the division of a tract of land into two or more lots
shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has
frontage on (a) a public way or a way which the City Clerk certifies is maintained and
used as a public way, or (b) a way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or (c) a way in existence when the
Subdivision Control Law became effective in the City of Gloucester, having, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of
the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services
to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is required by zoning or other
ordinance for erection of a building on such lot. Conveyances or other instruments adding
to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not to
leave any lot so affected without the frontage set forth above, or the division of a tract of
land on which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law
went into effect in the City of Gloucester into separate lots on each of which one of such
buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a subdivision. (After MGL Ch. 41,
Section 81-L.)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW. Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 41, Section
81K - 81GG, inclusive, as amended.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 5 -
2.2 PLANS BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
2.2.1 Applicability
Pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law, MGL Chapter 41, Section 81L, a division of a
tract of land into two or more lots shall not constitute a "subdivision" if, at the time when
it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has the following: (a) Frontage on a way,
as described in Section 2.2.5 below, with the distance required by the Zoning Ordinance,
and each lot has adequate access to the buildable portion of the lot from the way upon
which the lot derives its frontage; (b) Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking
away from, or changing the size and shape of, lots in such a manner as to not leave any
lot without frontage as required above; and (c) A plan that shows the division of a tract
of land on which two or more buildings were standing when the Subdivision Control Law
went into effect in the City of Gloucester (December 8, 1960), into two or more lots on
each of which one of the buildings remains standing. Any other plan which divides a
tract of land into two or more lots shall constitute a subdivision.
2.2.2 Submission of Plan
Any person who wishes to record a plan of land and who believes that the plan does not
require approval under the Subdivision Control Law, may submit a plan accompanied by
a Form A application to the Planning Board at a regularly scheduled meeting for a
determination that the subject plan does not require subdivision approval. The day of the
meeting shall be considered the date of submission for plans believed not to require such
approval.
After submitting the plan with the Planning Board, the applicant shall give written notice
to the City Clerk by delivery or by registered mail, postage prepaid, that such a plan has
been submitted to the Planning Board. Proper notice to the City Clerk shall include a
stamped copy of the completed Form A application as prescribed by the Planning Board.
Prior to submitting a plan of land and application to the Planning Board, the Applicant
may deliver the plan and application to the Planning Division of the Community
Development Department for review by staff who shall determine whether the
submission requirements of Sections 2.2.3 and 2.2.4 are met.
2.2.3 Submission Requirements.
Any applicant who submits a plan of land for a determination that subdivision approval is
not required under the Subdivision Control Law shall submit to the Planning Board the
following:
1. A properly executed Plan of Land and Form A Application with 11 copies of each.
2. The required filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100) per lot or lot line change.
3. The Mylar or linen reproducible.
4. Statement as to why the plan is entitled to endorsement by the Planning Board.
5. If the applicant is different from the owner, written proof of authority to act or
ownership interest or both shall be provided.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 6 -
2.2.4 Plan and Contents
The plan submitted for a determination that approval is not required shall show the
following:
1. The name, signature and stamp of the registered land surveyor who prepared the plan.
2. A locus plan at one thousand (1,000) feet to the inch shall be included on the plan.
3. North point arrow and scale.
4. A title block, including the name of the owner of record, the street address of the land
in question, assessors map and parcel number, the surveyor, and the plan date.
5. A block for Planning Board member's signatures bearing the notation "Planning Board
Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required" and a space for the date of
endorsement.
6. The following statement: "Endorsement by the Planning Board is not a determination
as to conformance with zoning regulations".
7. Zoning classification and the delineation of any zoning district boundaries that may lie
within the plan or locus of the plan.
8. Location of nearest fire hydrant.
9. All lots affected by the plan must be shown in their entirety, and when a new lot is
created, the remaining land areas and frontage of the land shall be shown.
10. Boundaries, dimensions, and areas of any lots which are being revised, corrected or to
be recorded without change. Proposed lots shall be numbered for identification.
11. The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent assessor's list,
including abutters across the street, and any adjacent properties owned by the applicant
shall be labeled on the plan.
12. The names, width, and status (i.e. "public" or "private") of all ways which abut the
applicant's land, and the extent of the paved improvements within the ways.
13. Sufficient data to determine location, width, direction and length of every street and
way, lot line and boundary line, including the radius, tangent and delta angle for all
curvatures.
14. Location of rights-of-way, easements, and all existing buildings or structures,
including front, side and rear yard setbacks. Documentation of easements should show
proof of recording.
15. Location of existing and proposed permanent bounds and distance to the road or other
permanent monument, clearly differentiated, including detail of all monumentation with
offsets North-South and East-West.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 7 -
16. On vacant lots, topography with contour lines at intervals of five (5) feet or less from
the proposed point of access and street frontage to the buildable portion of the lot as
appropriate. Greater resolution may be required after initial plan review or site visit.
17. All existing slopes of 25% grade or greater, on all affected or proposed lots.
18. The location of significant natural features such as mapped wetland areas and ledge
outcroppings.
19. Except for plans to be registered with the Land Court, a certification clause signed by
the surveyor stating that the plan conforms to the rules and regulations of the registry of
deeds.
20. Except for plans to be registered with the Land Court, a three and one half inch (3
1/2") square labeled "For Registry Use".
21. Notation which identifies whether the plan was developed by an "on the ground
survey" or "compiled plan", including partial ground survey or partially compiled plan.
22. Notation of any variance issued as to the land or buildings within the parcel giving
description of the variance and date granted by the City of Gloucester Zoning Board of
Appeals.
2.2.5 Determination Criteria
The Planning Board shall determine that the plan does not require subdivision approval
under the Subdivision Control Law if each of the lots shown on the plan, or altered by the
plan, meets one or all of the following criteria:
1. The lot has frontage on a public way or a way which, at the time of application, the
City Clerk certifies in writing to the Planning Board is maintained and used as a public
way; or
2. The lot has frontage on a way shown on a subdivision plan previously approved and
endorsed in accordance with Subdivision Control Law; or
3. The lot has frontage on a way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became
effective in Gloucester, December 8, 1960, which frontage the Planning Board finds has
sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of
vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served
thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings
erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be at least the minimum frontage
distance of the zoning district as required by the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance.
A “way in existence” must have physically existed on the ground and provided
meaningful access prior to the adoption of the Subdivision Control Law in Gloucester.
The Planning Board shall consider the present condition of any way in relationship to the
design standards found in Section IV of these Rules and Regulations. The Planning
Board may request an opinion from the Director of the Department of Public Works or
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 8 -
his/her designee as to the construction and condition of any such road from which
frontage is proposed to be derived. The Planning Board may also request an opinion
from the Fire Chief as to whether any way in question can accommodate and provide
access for fire-fighting equipment and other emergency vehicles.
Where direct access to a lot from the way providing the frontage is not possible due to
physical, legal or regulatory impediments or easements, or due to steep slopes of greater
than 25% or the presence of resource areas as defined in the Gloucester Wetlands
Ordinance (Section 12 of the Code of Ordinances), the Planning Board may consider the
lot as not having adequate frontage to allow a division of land without approval under the
Subdivision Control Law.
4. The lot has been clearly marked on the plan that is to be joined with an adjacent lot,
also shown on the plan, and is not intended to be a separate lot.
5. The lot is part of a division of a parcel of land which division creates separate lots,
each of which contains existing building(s) that was standing on the parcel when the
Subdivision Control Law went into effect in Gloucester. Compliance with this section
does not alleviate the applicant of Special Exception approval from the Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to 3.1.8 of the Zoning Ordinance.
6. In accordance with MGL Ch. 41, Section 81X, any plan bearing a certificate by a
registered land surveyor that no new lines for division of existing ownerships or for new
ways are shown, shall not require an endorsement by the Planning Board. The recording
of any such plan shall not relieve any owner from compliance with the provisions of the
Subdivision Control Law or of any other applicable provision of law.
2.2.6 Procedure for Review and Determination
1. The Planning Board, in considering an application for a determination that the plan
does not require subdivision approval under the Subdivision Control Law, shall first
determine whether the application is a complete.
If the Planning Board determines that the plan does not require subdivision approval
under the Subdivision Control Law, it shall, without a public hearing and within twentyone
(21) days of submission of the plan, endorse the plan accordingly. The plan shall be
returned to the Applicant and the Board shall notify the City Clerk in writing of its action
as to the reason why the plan is not subject to the Subdivision Control Law. Such
endorsement shall not be withheld unless such plan shows a subdivision.
One print of the endorsed plan shall be retained in the files of the Planning Board with a
notation of the Board's action, and copies of the plan shall be sent to the City Engineer
and Assessor.
2. If the Planning Board determines that the plan does require subdivision approval
under the Subdivision Control Law, it shall, within twenty-one (21) days of such
submittal, give written notice of the determination to the City Clerk and shall send such
notice to the applicant by certified mail and return the plan.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 9 -
3. If the Planning Board fails to act upon such a plan or fails to notify the City Clerk and
the person submitting the plan of the Board’s action within twenty-one (21) days after the
plan’s submission, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have determined that approval
under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, and the Board shall make such an
endorsement on the plan. Should the Planning Board fail to do so, the City Clerk shall
issue a certificate stating that the plan is approved because of the Planning Board’s failure
either to act on the plan or to file with the City Clerk notice of its action within the
specified time period, and shall send such certificate by certified mail to the person
submitting such plan.
(Amendments Adopted 8/27/07)
2.2.7 PROVIDING ADEQUATE ACCESS TO EXISTING LOTS
A. Introduction
Prior to issuing a Building Permit for new construction on existing lots, the Building
Inspector/Zoning Administrator may obtain a determination from the Planning Board that
the existing lot upon which the building is being erected has frontage upon a street.
Section VI of the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance defines a street as "any public or private
way which, by lawful procedure, has been recognized by the City and which has, as
determined by the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and site distances,
adequate clearances and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land deriving frontage therefrom, and for the
installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be
erected on such land" and which complies with one of the following criteria under MGL,
Chapter 41, Section 81-L:
1. a public way, or way which the City Clerk certifies as used and maintained as a public
way;
2. a way shown on a subdivision plan previously approved and endorsed by the Planning
Board and recorded at the Registry of Deeds; or
3. a private way existing prior to the date (December 8, 1960) on which subdivision
control was adopted by the City that has adequate width, grade and construction to
provide adequate access and in order to install municipal services. A “way in existence”
must have physically existed on the ground and provided meaningful access prior to the
adoption of the Subdivision Control Law in Gloucester. The Planning Board shall
consider the present condition of any way in relationship to the design standards found in
Section IV of these Rules and Regulations. The Planning Board may request an opinion
from the Director of the Department of Public Works as to the construction and condition
of any such road from which frontage is proposed to be derived. The Planning Board
may also request an opinion from the Fire Chief as to whether any way in question can
accommodate and provide access for fire-fighting equipment and other emergency
vehicles.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 10 -
B. Purpose
1. For an existing lot which has frontage on one of the aforementioned ways, which lot
existed prior to the date on which subdivision control was adopted by the City on
December 8, 1960, but does not meet the construction standards described above (i.e.,
"sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of
vehicular traffic existing...on such land"), the Planning Board hereby adopts rules and
regulations by which an applicant may improve said way under the Board's "Rules and
Regulations Governing Subdivision of Land in Gloucester, MA."
2. These rules and regulations are as follows:
C. Applicability
Prior to implementing these rules, the Board must find that the lot in question falls under
the criteria described in the above paragraphs. To make this determination, the Board
requires applicants to submit, as part of their application, the following information:
1. Existence of Lot Prior to Subdivision Control
To demonstrate that the lot in question existed prior to the date on which subdivision
control was adopted by the City, the applicant shall provide a copy of the recorded deed
and plan (if any) as recorded in the Essex County Registry of Deeds, which shows that
the lot existed in its current form prior to December 8, 1960.
2. Existence of Public Way
a) If the applicant is attempting to demonstrate that the existing lot in question has
"frontage on a way which the City Clerk certifies is used as and maintained as a public
way by the City," then the applicant shall provide a letter from the City Clerk in which
the above-described certification is made. Any such certification must contain current
information from the Department of Public Works Director that the way has been or is
being used and maintained as a public way based on DPW records.
b) If the applicant is attempting to demonstrate that the existing lot in question has
"frontage on a way shown on a subdivision plan previously approved and endorsed by the
Planning Board and recorded at the Registry of Deeds", then the applicant shall provide a
copy of the approved definitive subdivision plan as recorded in the Essex County
Registry of Deeds, including the book and page number of said recording.
c) If the applicant is attempting to demonstrate that the existing lot in question has
"frontage on a way existing prior to the date (December 8, 1960) on which subdivision
control was adopted by the City," then the applicant shall provide deeds, maps (including,
but not limited to, United States Geological Survey maps), dated aerial photos, plans
from the Registry of Deeds and other documentation which shows that the road in
question existed prior to December 8, 1960; and
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 11 -
D. Submittal Requirements
The applicant shall submit the following to the Planning Board:
1. Eleven contact prints of a plan certified by a Registered Land Surveyor per CMR 250,
drawn at a scale of at least 1" to 40' (or in lesser detail if approved by the Planning
Director), signed and stamped by a registered land surveyor and civil engineer, and
showing the following information:
(a) Street name, boundaries, north point, benchmarks, date, scale legend, and title "Road
Improvement Plan";
(b) Names of the applicant, surveyor, and engineer;
(c) Existing and proposed boundary lines of Right-of-Way;
(d) Existing and proposed traveled way within the Right-of-Way;
(e) Existing and proposed topography of street;
(f) A locus plan of the subdivision at 1" = 1000', showing proposed street and its relation
to the surrounding area;
(g) Typical cross section at one inch equals five feet horizontal, one inch equals one foot
vertical. Typical cross section of road shall show the width of layout; width and pitch of
pavement including berms and shoulders; and the depth of base course and road
pavements;
(h) Signature block and a space for the date of endorsement. For an existing road that is
adequate in all respects except that it lacks a proper surface, the Planning Board may
determine that the plan does not need to be signed and stamped by a professional civil
engineer, and need not contain the information described the paragraphs (e), (f) and (g) of
section B above.
(i) A fee of two-hundred seventy five dollars ($275.00). This fee shall be used to defray
the cost of the review and administration of the Road Improvement Plan by city staff
persons.
E. Design Standards
The design standards for road construction in the City of Gloucester are described in
Section 4.3 of the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of
Land in Gloucester. As a general rule, however, roads constructed under these rules and
Regulations need to conform only to the following minimum standards:
1) The width of the street right-of-way shall be no less than twenty (20) feet.
2) The minimum width of the traveled way shall be no less than sixteen (16) feet.
3) The maximum centerline grade shall be twelve (12) percent.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 12 -
4) When the grade exceeds six (6) percent on the approach to an intersection, a leveling
area with a slope of not more than four (4) percent shall be provided for a distance not
less than fifty (50) feet from the intersecting street.
5) The road construction standards described in 4.3.5, paragraphs (a) and (c) of the
Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
6) For a dead end street, a "T", "Y" or "hammerhead" shaped turnaround, of a design
satisfactory to the Planning Board.
In some instances, conditions may warrant either stricter or less restrictive standards than
those listed in "Section C Design Standards"; such standards may be imposed by the
Planning Board in any particular case in which such standards are in the public interest
and which are not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of these regulations.
F. Road Surface Requirements
For a way to be of "adequate construction" it must be paved with bituminous concrete
(asphalt) or macadam, and be in good condition. However, in certain situations, the
Board may allow a road surface other than the aforementioned, provided that:
1) The way in question will be serving no more than one additional lot;
2) The grade of the way in question is not more than 5%; and;
3) any one of the following three criteria are met:
(a) the Conservation Commission has requested that the way in question not be paved to
minimize the impact of the road on the surrounding wetlands; or
(b) the way in question is an extension of, or located off of, a public or recognized private
way that is not paved with concrete, bituminous concrete, or macadam and which serves
other house lots; or
(c) the way in question serves as frontage for at least one other existing residential lot.
If the Board does allow a road surface other than pavement, the road surface may be
lynn-pak, man-pak, processed gravel, porous bituminous concrete or other similar
treatment, but in all cases it must be an all-weather surface.
G. Length of Road Improvement Required
At a minimum, the applicant shall improve the roadway to the design and road surface
standards for a length equal to the required frontage for the lot in question unless the
Planning Board determines that developing the roadway would require less paving. Based
on the condition of the remainder of the subject road, as well as the condition of ways
that provide access and egress to and from the subject road, the applicant may be required
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 13 -
to make additional street improvements to the subject road to insure adequate access. The
nature of said improvements shall be determined by the Planning Board.
H. Plan Review and Approval and Appeals of Decision
Plans submitted in accordance with the above requirements shall be reviewed and acted
upon by the Planning Board within sixty (60) days of the submittal. Prior to taking action
the Board will hold a public hearing to obtain public comment on the plan. The hearing
shall be advertised in a newspaper of local circulation at least seven days prior to the
hearing. The cost of advertising the public hearing shall be borne by the applicant.
The Planning Board shall make a final determination on the application no later than
sixty (60) days after submittal, and said decision shall be filed with the City Clerk within
said time.
If a plan is approved, it shall be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board or his/her
designee. If a plan is found to be unsatisfactory, the Planning Board shall deny the
application, and the reasons for denial shall be included in the Board's decision. Once the
applicant has addressed the reasons for disapproval and submitted the revised plan to the
Planning Board, it may be approved by the Board without a public hearing.
Any approval or denial of a plan by the Planning Board may be appealed under MGL
Chapter 41, Section 81 BB within 20 days of the Planning Board's decision having been
registered with the City Clerk, or under MGL C. 249 Section 4, as allowed by law within
60 days after such registration.
I. Recording of a Plan
The Planning Board's approval under these rules and regulations shall not take effect until
an endorsed copy of the plan and decision, certified by the City Clerk and executed by
the Developer, has been recorded with the Essex County South District Registry of
Deeds. A certified copy of the recorded document shall be submitted to the Board prior to
the issuance of a Building Permit.
J. Performance Guarantee
The Planning Board may require the posting of a performance guarantee to ensure
adequate and timely access improvements. If required by the Planning Board, an
applicant may elect to complete a Road Improvement Plan under either a Performance
Bond or a Covenant.
If he/she so elects, the applicant may file a Performance Bond secured by a deposit of
money or negotiable securities conditioned on the completion of all required
improvements within the time period specified at the time of approval of the Road
Improvement Plan; said bond to be in sufficient sum, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, to cover the cost of construction of such improvements and so drawn as
to ensure their satisfactory completion.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 14 -
As an alternative, the applicant may file a covenant to be entered into between the owner
or developer and the City in a form acceptable to the Planning Board prohibiting the sale
of lots served by the Road Improvement Plan and Buildings erected thereon until such
time as the way has been constructed within the time agreed upon and in accordance with
the approved plan.
Upon requirement by the Board, execution of either the Performance Bond or Covenant
by the Applicant must be completed before endorsement of the Road improvement Plan
by the Board.
To ensure compliance with these regulations, the Planning Board also requires a copy of
all Occupancy Permits issued for structures erected on the lots addressed on the Road
Improvement Plan.
K. Completion of Improvements
Upon the Chairman's signing of the "Road Improvement Plan", barring any appeal as
noted in Section F, the applicant may proceed with the improvements.
The applicant shall notify the Planning Board or its designee when the improvements are
completed. Within fourteen (14) days of such notice, the Planning Board or its designee,
upon consultation with the Director of Public Works, shall notify the applicant in writing
as to whether the road improvements have been satisfactorily completed, it shall, within
30 days of the Applicant's notice, release the Bond or Covenant.
If they are found to be unsatisfactory, the Planning Board or its designee shall state the
reasons in the letter to the applicant.
Once the applicant has adequately addressed the reasons for previous disapproval to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board or its designee shall advise the Building Inspector that
the roadway provides adequate access to the applicant's lot and release the Bond or
Covenant.
L. Endorsement
The Road Improvement Plan shall remain valid for a period of three years from the date
of its endorsement by the Planning Board. Prior to the expiration of the three year
approval period, the applicant may request in writing to the Planning Board an extension
of time of up to one year and the reasons for the extension. Extensions may be granted
one time only. An extension fee of $150.00 shall be paid when the extension request is
filed
2.3 RIGHT TO MAKE A SUBDIVISION WITHIN THE CITY OF GLOUCESTER
No person shall create a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law
of any land within the City of Gloucester, or proceed with the sale of lots in a
subdivision, or the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein,
unless and until a Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted and approved
by the Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 15 -
2.4 ONE DWELLING PER LOT
Not more than one building designed or available for dwelling purposes shall be erected
or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in a subdivision or elsewhere in the City
of Gloucester without the consent of the Planning Board. Such consent may be
conditioned upon the providing of adequate ways furnishing access to each site for such
building in the same manner as otherwise required for lots with a subdivision.
2.5 ADEQUATE ACCESS FROM PUBLIC WAY
2.5.1 Improvements to Way of Access
Where the street system within a subdivision does not connect with or have, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, adequate access from a City, County or State (public)
way, the Planning Board may require, as a condition of approval of a plan, that the
developer provide adequate access by creating a new access road, or by making physical
improvements to any existing way deemed inadequate by the Board. Such improvements
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section IV of these regulations.
2.5.2 Dedication of Land for Purpose of Improving Access
Where the physical condition or width of a public way from which a subdivision has its
access is considered by the Planning Board to be inadequate to carry the traffic expected
to be generated by such subdivision, the Planning Board may require the developer to
dedicate a strip of land for the purpose of widening the abutting public way to a width at
least commensurate with that required within the subdivision, and to make physical
improvements to and within such public way to the same standards required within the
subdivision. Any such dedication of land for the purpose of widening the way and any
such work performed within such public way shall be made only with permission of the
governmental agency having jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any such
widening or construction shall be borne by the developer.
2.5.3 Common Driveways
a) When appropriate, the applicant will be encouraged by the Planning Board and/or City
Planner to use common driveways as a beneficial means of traffic and storm water
drainage management for up to four abutting lots established through either the Approval
Not Required or Subdivision process. The Gloucester Zoning Ordinance makes it clear
under Section 3.5.1(a) and (b) that common driveways may not be used to satisfy
frontage requirements and that common driveways are required to access over approved
frontage. A common driveway will not be accepted as either a public or private road.
b) Every person submitting an application to the Planning Board for issuance of a special
permit authorizing the use of a common driveway in accordance with Section 3.5 of the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Gloucester shall submit a plan prepared by a registered
land surveyor. The plan shall be drawn in permanent ink on permanent transparency
material and shall be sealed by the surveyor preparing the plan. The plan shall be labeled
"Plan of a Common Driveway" and shall provide an approval block for the signatures of
a legal majority of the Planning Board, the date of approval, and the words, "Common
Driveway, Approved by the City of Gloucester Planning Board". The Plan shall show
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 16 -
information sufficient to establish on the ground the exact location, direction, width and
length of the common driveway, as well as separate renderings of a profile and cross
section. The plan shall also contain a note which shall read, "The City of Gloucester
shall not be responsible for the maintenance, repairs, plowing, or similar services for the
common driveway shown on this plan." The original plan(s) shall be recorded in the
Southern Essex District Registry of Deeds within 30 days of approval by the Planning
Board.
c) That common driveways shall have a minimum right of way width of 20 feet and a
paved apron 20 feet in length commencing at the existing edge of pavement where it
intersects with the common driveway. Said paved apron shall be constructed to the
following standards:
• 12" of base gravel
• A minimum of 2" of paved surface or greater as specified by the City Engineer.
• A negative 2.0% grade from the existing edge of pavement to an appropriate
drainage way or structure, but in no cases less than 5 feet from the travel surface
of the public way it intersects;
• Approach radius as specified by the City Engineer.
d) Construction of common driveways shall meet the following minimum standards:
NUMBER OF LOTS SERVED
1 2-3 (Court) 4 (Lane)
Minimum Driveway Width 12' 25’ 40’
Minimum Sub-base (Heavy road gravel) 12"
Wearing surface (Fine gravel) 2"
Maximum Length 500'
Maximum Grade 10%
Minimum Grade 0.5%
Turn around at dead end Hammer Head, "Y" or "T"
Storm Water Drainage to a Public Way Approval of City Engineer
e) Prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for lots served by a common driveway, a
registered professional engineer shall inspect the common driveway and shall certify to
the Building Inspector that said driveway has been constructed in accordance with this
section;
f) That notwithstanding other provisions of these Rules and Regulations to the contrary,
no common driveway shall provide access to or serve in any way to provide compliance
with the requirements of the zoning ordinance for more than four individual lots unless
construction of the driveway complies with the local residential street standards, and
subdivision control law, MGL Chapter 41.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 17 -
2.6 SUBDIVISIONS OF THREE OR FEWER LOTS
For preliminary and definitive plans creating three or fewer single-family residential lots,
the following regulations shall apply, unless the Board determines that in order to satisfy
the intent of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations the subdivision needs to comply with
the requirements set forth for subdivisions creating more than three lots.
2.6.1 Preliminary Plans
The plan shall comply with section 3.1 of these regulations, with the following
exceptions:
(a) The filing fee described in 3.1.2 shall be reduced to the following: an amount equal to
seventy-five cents ($.75/foot) times the centerline length of proposed ways in the
subdivision, or one hundred dollars ($100.00), whichever amount is greater. A fee shall
be charged in a like manner for off-site road and utility improvements required by the
Board.
(b) Paragraphs (j) - (u) under section 3.1.3 shall not apply.
2.6.2 Definitive Plans
The plan shall comply with section 3.2 of these regulations, with the following
exceptions:
(a) The filing fee described in 3.2.1(d) shall be reduced to the following: an amount equal
in feet to one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50/foot) times the center line length of proposed
ways in the subdivision. A fee shall be charged in a like manner for off-site road and
utility improvements required by the Board.
(b) Paragraph (i), (l), and (n) of section 3.2.1 shall not apply.
(c) Paragraph (o) of section 3.2.4 shall not apply.
2.7 FEES
The submittal of Approval Not Required, three or fewer lots Preliminary and Definitive
Plans, and four or more lots Preliminary and Definitive Plans shall be accompanied by a
fee, as specified in sections 2.2.3, 2.6.1, 2.6.2, 3.1.2, and 3.2.1, respectively, of these
Rules and Regulations. Upon the approval of the Definitive Plan, the applicant shall pay
an inspection fee as specified in section 3.7 of these Rules and Regulations. In addition,
the following fees shall be required of applicants to partially defray the costs incurred by
the City of Gloucester for plan review and administration:
2.7.1 Modification, Extension, and Automatic Rescission
a. The petition of an applicant to have the Planning Board modify a previously approved
Definitive Plan pursuant to MGL Chapter 41, Section 81-W, shall be accompanied by a
fee in an amount equal to two dollars ($2.00) per foot times the first five thousand (5000)
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 18 -
linear feet and one dollar ($1.00) per foot times the remaining centerline length of
proposed ways in the subdivision. A fee shall be charged in a like manner for off-site
road and utility improvements required by the Board. These fees may be waived by the
Planning Board, in whole or in part, in accordance with the requirements of MGL Ch. 41,
Section 81-R and if in the opinion of the Planning Board it is documented, by the
applicant for an extension, that the City will not incur such additional expenses.
b. The fee for an extension of time beyond six months or any subsequent extension of
time beyond an initial extension, shall be five hundred dollars ($500).
c. The fee for a Definitive Plan submitted after an automatic rescission shall be the same
as required for a Definitive Plan pursuant to section 3.2.1 of these Rules and Regulations.
2.8 SPECIAL ACCOUNT FOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW
When reviewing a Preliminary or Definitive Subdivision Plan, the Board may determine
that the assistance of outside consultants is warranted due to the size, scale or complexity
of the proposed subdivision or because of its potential impacts. The Board may require
that the applicants pay a "review fee" consisting of the reasonable costs incurred by the
Board for the employment of outside consultants engaged by the Board to assist in the
review of an application. The Board may determine that the fees established in sections
2.6.1, 2.6.2, 3.1.2, and 3.2.1 of these Rules and Regulations are adequate to pay for these
costs, or it may determine that additional fees are necessary to pay for the requisite
services.
In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers, land use planners,
lawyers, landscape architects, hydrologists, or other appropriate professionals who can
assist the Board in analyzing a proposed subdivision to ensure compliance with these
Rules and Regulations.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited with the city
treasurer, who shall establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from this
special account shall be made only in connection with the review of a specific
subdivision for which a review fee has been or will be collected from the applicant.
Failure of an applicant to pay a review fee shall be grounds for denial of the subdivision.
Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in connection with the specific
subdivision from which they were collected. Accrued interest may also be spent for this
purpose. At the completion of the Board's review of a subdivision, any excess amount in
the account, including interest, attributable to a specific subdivision, shall be repaid to the
applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. A final report of said account shall be
made available to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. For the purpose of
this regulation, any person or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in interest
shall provide the Board with documentation establishing such succession in interest.
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside
consultant to the City Council. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims
that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 19 -
required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of an educational
degree in, or related to, the field at issue plus three or more years of practice in the field
at issue or a related field. The required time limit for action upon an application by the
Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that no
decision is made by the City Council within one month following the filing of the appeal,
the selection made by the Board shall stand.
2.9 PRE-APPLICATION
Prior to submitting any subdivision plan or special permit application to the Planning
Board, the applicant may prepare a rough existing conditions site plan with a conceptual
overlay of the proposed subdivision or special permit for an informal presentation to and
discussion with the Planning Board. Following this pre-application procedure in 2.9
does not bind or obligate the applicant to further submittal. It is not considered an
application until submittal of a subdivision plan or special permit application.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 20 -
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 21 -
SECTION III PROCEDURE FOR THE SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF
PRELIMINARY AND DEFINITIVE PLANS
3.1 PRELIMINARY PLAN
3.1.1 General
A preliminary plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the developer to the Planning
Board and to the Board of Health for discussion and approval by each Board. The
submission of such a Preliminary Plan will enable the developer, the Planning Board, the
Board of Health, the Department of Public Works, the Fire Department, and other
municipal agencies and owners of property abutting the subdivision to discuss and clarify
the problems of such subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared. Therefore, it is
strongly recommended that a Preliminary Plan be filed in each case. A properly executed
Form B (see appendix) shall be filed with the Preliminary Plan and submitted to the
Planning Board.
To further assist the developer it is suggested that prior to submitting the Preliminary
Plan to the Planning Board that the developer discuss the plan with the City Planner, the
Director of Public Works, the Agent of the Board of Health, the City Engineer, and the
Fire Inspector to obtain the requirements of these Agencies.
3.1.2 Filing Procedure
(a) A completed Form B application (see appendix D) together with the original drawing
and five (5) copies of the Preliminary Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The
applicant shall also file one copy of the Preliminary Plan with the Board of Health, obtain
a receipt thereof, and provide such receipt to the Planning Board as part of the
Preliminary plan submission.
(b) The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.00 plus $100.00
per lot. A Cluster Development Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by $100.00 plus
$50.00 per unit. A fee shall be charged in a like manner for off-site road and utility
improvements required by the Board. The fee shall be used to defray the cost of the
review and administration of the subdivision plan by the Planning Division, Fire Dept.,
and the Board of Health Agent; design review by the Board's engineer; or review by other
professional persons required to assist the Planning Board in its determination as to the
adequacy of the Preliminary Plan with regard to these Rules and Regulations. The
services of the aforementioned engineer or other professional persons shall be paid for as
specified in section 2.8 of these Rules and Regulations.
(c) The day of the Planning Board meeting shall be considered the date of submission for
a preliminary subdivision plan, which has been completed in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations, and accompanied by a completed Form B application.
(d) The Applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with the City Clerk
stating the date of submission for such approval of a Preliminary Plan to the Planning
Board, and accompanied by a copy of the completed Form B application.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 22 -
3.1.3 Contents
The Preliminary Plan may be drawn on tracing paper with pencil at a horizontal scale of
one inch equals forty feet, and shall show the following information:
(a) Subdivision name, boundaries, north point, benchmarks, date, scale, legend and title
"Preliminary Plan";
(b) Names of the Applicant and owner of record, and the name of the designer, engineer
or surveyor;
(c) Names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent tax list;
(d) Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and any public areas within
the subdivision;
(e) Proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing natural waterways;
(f) Approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions;
(g) Names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets;
(h) Topography of the land as shown by contour lines and all slopes greater than 25%;
(i) A locus plan of the subdivision at 1" = 400', showing proposed roads and their relation
to the surrounding area.
It is also recommended that the following additional information be shown on the
Preliminary Plan or submitted with the plan to permit better evaluation of the proposed
subdivision and avoid costly changes and delays in the processing of the Definitive Plan
later on:
(j) Areas of the plan designated as wetlands;
(k) Profiles of existing grades and approximate finish grades of the roadway and drains
and other utilities;
(l) The top and toe of proposed slopes adjacent to the roadways.
(m) Location of soil test site(s) and a description of the soil depths, percolation rate, and
composition and type of soil for each of the lots in the proposed subdivision.
(n) When, in the opinion of the Board, existing soil conditions are unsuitable for the
construction of roadways or building thereon, punchings or other means suitable to the
Board to determine the depth of the unsuitable material shall be taken and the location of
hard bottom shall be shown on the profiles.
(o) Zoning classification of land shown on the plan and the location of any zoning district
boundaries that lie within the locus of the plan.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 23 -
(p) Plan showing in a general manner, the proposed development of any contiguous land
owned by the Applicant that is not presently being subdivided.
(q) Size and location of existing storm drains, sewers and water mains and their
appurtenances;
(r) Location of existing buildings within and adjacent to the subdivision.
(s) Six copies of an Environmental Impact Evaluation, in accordance with section 3.2.1(i)
of these Rules & Regulations.
(t) For any Preliminary Plan involving the creation of twenty (20) or more lots, a
statement describing the proposed content of the Traffic Impact Report, which shall be
submitted to the Planning Board with the Definitive Plan. The statement shall also
indicate the professional traffic engineering consultant(s) who will prepare the report.
(u) If the Applicant seeks a waiver of strict compliance with these Rules and Regulations,
a description of such waiver request(s), as specified in section 5.2.
(v) Eleven copies of a Stormwater Management Plan, in accordance with Appendix A-1
of these Rules and Regulations.
3.1.4 Approval or Disapproval
The Board may approve the Preliminary Plan, with or without modification, or it may
disapprove said plan, stating the reason for its disapproval in accordance with MGL
Chapter 41, Section 81-U. One copy of the plan shall be returned to the Applicant.
Approval, if given, does not constitute approval of a subdivision, but does facilitate the
procedure in securing final approval of the Definitive Plan.
The Planning Board shall act on the Preliminary Plan within forty-five (45) days of the
date of submission. Any plan submitted to the Board in advance of a Definitive Plan
which does not conform to the minimum requirements pertaining to a Preliminary Plan
specified in Chapter 41, Section 81-L shall not be so designated, nor shall such plan be
given approval by the Board.
3.2 DEFINITIVE PLAN
3.2.1 General
An Applicant seeking approval of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision shall file with the
Planning Board the following:
(a) An original drawing of the Definitive Plan and eleven (11) contact prints thereof.
(b) A properly executed application Form C (see appendix D). The application shall be
signed by the Applicant, shall state all easements and restrictions and mortgages to which
the land is subject and all easements and restrictions appurtenant to such land over the
land of others, and shall include reference to any recorded plan of the land in question.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 24 -
(c) A list of all abutters to the subdivision as shown on the Definitive Plan, together with
the address of each as determined from the most recent tax list.
(d) The Definite Plan shall be accompanied by a fee of $1,000.00 plus $250.00 per lot
with a previously approved Preliminary Plan; or $1,000.00 plus $500.00 per lot without a
previously approved Preliminary Plan. A Cluster Development Definitive Plan shall be
accompanied by the requisite special permit filing fee of $350.00 plus $100.00 per unit
with a previously approved Preliminary Plan; or the requisite special permit filing fee of
$350.00 plus $200 per unit without a previously approved Preliminary Plan. A fee shall
be charged in a like manner for off-site road and utility improvements required by the
Board. These fees shall be used to defray the cost of the reviews and administration of the
subdivision plan by the Planning Division, Fire Dept., the Board of Health Agent, the
Treasurer, and the Auditor and to pay, in whole or in part, for all reasonable design
review by the Board's engineer, or by other professional persons required to assist the
Planning Board in its determinations as to the adequacy of the Definitive Plan with regard
to these Rules and Regulations.
The Planning Board shall direct the City Auditor to establish an account to expend such
funds to pay for the services of the aforementioned engineer or other professional persons
as specified in section 2.8 of these Rules and Regulations.
(e) A sketch plan showing a possible or prospective street layout for any adjacent
unsubdivided land owned or controlled by the Applicant or Developer of the subdivision,
when such a plan has not already been submitted with a Preliminary Plan.
(f) Traverse notes, and drainage calculations for the determination of all waterway
openings to justify culvert and drain sizes. Such calculations shall be prepared by a
Registered Professional Engineer, and be accompanied by a watershed area plan
justifying said calculations.
(g) A locus plan of the subdivision at a scale of one inch equals 1000 feet, showing the
exterior lines of all proposed streets and their relation to the surrounding streets.
(h) If not previously submitted with the Preliminary Plan, the location of soil test site(s)
and a description of the soil depths, percolation rate, and composition and type of soil for
each lot in the subdivision.
(i) Twelve copies of an Environmental Impact Evaluation, unless previously submitted
with the Preliminary Plan, shall be submitted in a narrative form, in accordance with
Appendix A, accompanied by such plan, calculations and exhibits as may be appropriate.
The document shall be filed with sufficient information to provide a basis for general
conclusions about the effect of the proposed plan on the environment and the community.
If several alternative methods of subdividing are possible, as regards street patterns,
grading and drainage, the Evaluation shall compare their anticipated impact on the
environment in order to show that the design selected minimizes the adverse and
maximizes the beneficial environmental impacts.
(j) A copy of any variance or exception made by the Zoning Board of Appeals applicable
to the subdivision of the land or any buildings thereon.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 25 -
(k) A statement signed by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer stating that the
relative error of closure is not greater than 1 to 12,000.
(l) Twelve (12) copies of a Determination of Nutrient Loading, for any subdivision which
lies wholly or in part within the watershed or zone of contribution of a freshwater or
coastal pond or embankment, or within the watershed or zone of contribution of the
public water supply (existing or proposed).
The Determination of Nutrient Loading shall measure the nutrient loading of the
proposed subdivision in comparison to: (1) carrying capacity of receiving waters; (2)
existing and potential loading from all other developments and acreage within the
recharge area of the water supply or water body; (3) in a water body, the loading rate
which would produce critical eutrophic levels, or for water supply, the loading rate which
would produce nitrate-nitrogen levels in excess of five parts per million in the
groundwater.
The applicant shall propose measures to reduce nutrient loading if the loading rate from
the proposed development equals or exceeds the critical loading rate when combined with
existing and potential development within the water's recharge area. The methodology
and standards to be used in determining nutrient loading are outlined in Appendix B.
(m) For any Definitive Plan involving the creation of twenty (20) or more lots, twelve
(12) copies of a Traffic Impact Report, prepared by a traffic engineering consultant
approved by the Planning Board. Such Traffic Impact Report shall include, at minimum,
the following information:
1) The average daily traffic (ADT) to be generated by the subdivision.
2) The ADT counts of all streets designated by the Planning Board. If there are
significant seasonal variations in traffic flow, ADT counts taken during the peak
season shall be included.
3) Morning, mid-day, and afternoon peak traffic counts of all streets designated
by the Planning Board.
4) An analysis of the adequacy of the existing street system to provide safe and
convenient access to the proposed subdivision. If system deficiencies are detected,
recommendations for their improvement, along with cost estimates, should be
included.
(n) Documented evidence of provision for ownership and maintenance of open space
shown on the Definitive Plan.
(o) Estimates of the cost of performing the various items of required work shall be
furnished on a separate sheet for consideration in determining the amount of bond to be
furnished if a performance bond is to be filed (see section 3.8.2). The estimates shall
include unit costs and quantity takeoff.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 26 -
(p) If the Applicant seeks a waiver of strict compliance with these Rules and Regulations,
a description of such waiver request(s) as specified in section 5.2.
(q) Eleven copies of a Stormwater Management Plan, unless previously submitted with
the Preliminary Plan, shall be submitted in accordance with Appendix A-1, accompanied
by such plan, calculations and exhibits as may be appropriate.
(r) All plans shall be developed in conformance with the design standards of Section IV
of these Rules and Regulations.
3.2.2 Filing Procedure
(a) The Applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with the City Clerk
stating the date of submission of such Definitive Plan and accompanied by a copy of the
completed Form C application.
(b) The Definitive Plan shall not be deemed to have been submitted to the Board until
the application, filing fee, and other information required under 3.2.1, together with the
Definitive Plan and prints, have been delivered to the Planning Board and are fully
completed in accordance with these Rules and Regulations.
3.2.3 Designer
(a) The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Civil Engineer
who shall sign and place his professional stamp on each sheet and submit with the
Definitive Plan an engineer's certificate (see Form D in Appendix D) which shall include
the following statement:
"This Plan has been designed by me or under my direct supervision, reflects
accepted engineering practice, conforms to the Subdivision Regulations, City of
Gloucester except as noted herein, and represents my best professional efforts."
(b) The Definitive Plan shall also be signed by a Registered Land Surveyor. The
Surveyor shall sign and place his professional stamp on each sheet and submit a land
surveyor's certificate (see Form D1 in Appendix D) which shall include the following
statement:
"The surveying of the land for this plan, including the platting and laying out of
lots and the alignment of streets, and the drafting of the plan, has been done by me
or my firm, reflects accepted land surveying practices and standards, and
represents my best professional efforts. The survey and plan were prepared in
accordance with the Procedural and Technical Standards for the Practice of Land
Surveying in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts."
(c) The Definitive Plan for any subdivision of five (5) or more lots shall be designed in
collaboration with a Registered Landscape Architect. The Landscape Architect shall sign
and place his professional stamp on each sheet and submit a landscape architect's
certificate (see Form D2 in Appendix D) which shall include the following statement:
"This plan has been designed in collaboration with me or my firm, reflects
accepted landscape design practice, and represents my best professional efforts."
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 27 -
3.2.4 Contents
The Definitive Plan shall contain the following information:
(a) A title, appearing in the lower right-hand corner of the plan, showing the name of the
subdivision, the date, scale, the name and address of the Applicant, and the names and
seals of the Engineer and Surveyor (and if applicable, the Landscape Architect) who
made the plan;
(b) North point, benchmark, and boundaries of the subdivision;
(c) Location and ownership of abutting property as it appears on the most recent tax list,
including all land within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of the land shown in
the subdivision;
(d) Lines of existing and proposed streets, sidewalks, bikeways, walkways, lots,
easements, and public or common areas within the subdivision (The proposed names of
the streets shall be shown in pencil until they have been approved by the Planning
Board).
(e) Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and length of every street and way
line, lot line and boundary line, and to establish these lines on the ground. This shall
include the lengths and bearings of the plan and boundary lines of all streets and
easements, and the length, radii, tangents, and central angles of all curves in lot lines and
street lines. All angle points or intersections of tangents along the street lines shall be
shown. For any Definitive Plan involving the creation of five (5) or more lots, all major
boundary points in the subdivision shall be tied into the State Plane Coordinate System.
Adjoining lands of the applicant not included in the subdivision will be shown.
(f) Location of all permanent monuments which shall be shown by a small black square,
properly identified as to whether existing or proposed. These are to be tied into existing
boundaries wherever possible.
(g) The computed area of each proposed lot in the subdivision, lot number, and proposed
street number.
(h) Locations, names, and present widths of streets, ways, and easements bounding,
approaching, or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
(i) Indication of purpose, width and location of all easements outside of street lines.
(j) The top and toe of proposed slopes adjacent to the roadways.
(k) Major features of the land including all areas designated as wetlands; existing
waterways; swamps and water bodies; wells; natural drainage courses; walls; fences;
buildings or other structures; wooded areas; rock ridges and outcroppings; all existing
slopes greater than 25%, and ditches which exist on or near the site at the time of survey.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 28 -
(l) If less than all of the Applicant's land is being subdivided, the size and shape of the
remaining land shall be shown as an insert on the plan, at a scale of one inch equals two
hundred feet.
(m) Unless the subdivision is to be connected to the municipal sewer system, the
following statement shall be included on the Definitive Plan: "No building or dwelling
shall be built on any lot without first securing from the Board of Health the Disposal
Works Construction Permit required by the State Environmental Code."
(n) Suitable space to record the following:
1. Approval Endorsement
2. Performance Guarantee
3. City Clerk's Certificate of No Appeal
(o) There shall be a table prepared and displayed in a convenient place on the plan
showing the following:
1. Zoning district(s) in which the land is located.
2. The total area of the entire subdivision.
3. The number of building lots within the subdivision and the total area of all such
lots.
4. The total area of all ways within the subdivision.
5. The total area of any wetlands within the subdivision.
6. The total area of open space within the subdivision (all land not included in ways
or building lots)
7. The total number of linear feet, measured along the centerline, for each street
proposed on the plan.
8. The total area of each street and drainage, sewer or utility easement in the
subdivision.
9. The total number of bounds to be set.
10. The total area of any floodway or flood plain within the subdivision.
Items (p) - (v) may be submitted on separate sheets of the same size and material as the
plan sheet. Each sheet shall bear the title and signature blocks as required in paragraphs
(a) and (n) above.
(p) Existing and proposed topography at a two (2) foot contour interval.
(q) Existing center, left and right sidelines, and proposed centerline profiles of proposed
streets and of intersecting streets for at least 100 feet each side of the intersection of the
street centerlines at a horizontal scale of one inch equals forty feet and vertical scale of
one inch equals four feet. Existing centerline grades shall be shown in fine solid lines,
existing exterior line grades in fine dash lines, and proposed finished center line grades in
heavy solid lines. Proposed grade elevations shall be indicated every 50 feet on straight
grades, every 25 feet on vertical curves, and at PVC and PVT. Rates of gradient in
percentage shall also be shown. Lines and figures indicating proposed grades shall be in
red; all other data shall be in black. All elevations shall refer to Mean Sea Level. Profile
stationing shall be referenced to a plan drawing.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 29 -
(r) Proposed layout, profiles, and existing and proposed grades of storm drains, including
pipe invert elevations and gradients, sub-surface drains, connecting swales or drainage,
and proposed boundaries of drainage basins or pond catchment areas.
If surface water drains will discharge onto existing streets or onto adjacent properties not
owned by the applicant, the course of discharge should be clearly indicated, and evidence
shall be presented to the Board demonstrating that the discharge is acceptable, permitted
by public or private ownership of adjacent streets or property, and does not cause any
detrimental effects to public or private property.
(s) Proposed profiles of on-site and off-site sanitary sewer line. If sewage pumping
stations are necessary, detailed plans of the proposed stations.
(t) When, in the opinion of the Board, existing soil conditions are unsuitable for the
construction of roadways or building thereon, punchings or other
means suitable to the Board to determine the depth of the unsuitable material shall be
taken and the location of hard bottom shall be shown on the profiles.
(u) Typical cross section at one inch equals five feet horizontal, one inch equals one foot
vertical for each type of street in the subdivision and for any open waterways. Typical
cross sections of road ways shall show the width of layout, width and pitch of pavement,
including berms, shoulders, grass strips, sidewalks and side slopes; the location of street
light standards, hydrants, gas and water mains, sewer line, storm drains, and catch basins;
the depth of road pavement, base courses and sidewalks. A typical cross section of a
leaching catch basin and a drainage manhole shall be shown. Sections shall also be drawn
for all proposed drainage leaching trenches or leaching areas.
(v) Location and species of all proposed street trees and location of all existing trees with
trunks over ten (10) inches in diameter, measured four (4) feet above the finished ground
level, both those which are to be retained and those which are to be removed, within
twenty (20) feet of the exterior right of way lines of each street.
(w) A plan for the control of erosion and siltation both during and after construction
phases. Such plan shall include the proposed construction sequencing, temporary and
permanent erosion control plantings, special constructions, and swale and stream scour
protection.
(x) Such other information as may be required by the Planning Board to evaluate the
proposed subdivision.
(y) A revision table that contains the following information:
1. revision number
2. date of revision
3. explanation of revision
4. initials of reviser
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 30 -
3.2.5 Staking
To facilitate review of the Definitive Plan by the Planning Board, the Applicant shall
stake all corners of the property and all changes of bearing. The Applicant shall also stake
the center line of all proposed streets at fifty (50) foot intervals. The centerline station
shall be marked on each stake.
3.3 REVIEW BY BOARD OF HEALTH AS TO SUITABILITY OF LAND
(a) At the time of filing of the Definitive Plan, the Applicant shall also file with the
Board of Health two prints of the Definitive Plan, and in unsewered areas, shall submit a
topographic plan with two foot contour intervals and comply with other Board of Health
requirements, including percolation tests and test excavations.
(b) The Board of Health shall, within 45 days after filing of the Plan, report to the
Planning Board, in writing, its approval or disapproval of the Plan. If the Board of Health
disapproves the plan, it shall make a specific report of its findings as to which, if any, of
the lots shown on the plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public
health and include such specific findings and the reasons therefore in such report, and,
where possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof. The Board of
Health shall provide a copy of such report, if any, to the applicant.
(c) Every building lot that cannot be served by a connection to the municipal sewer
system shall be provided with a sewage disposal system approved by the Board of
Health.
3.4 REVIEW BY OTHER CITY OFFICIALS
The Planning Board will transmit copies of the Definitive Plan to other City officials for
review and comment. Before the Definitive Plan is approved, the Board will request
written statements from the following agencies or commissions:
3.4.1 Department of Public Works Review
Department of Public Works as to the design of the street and water system, location of
easements, monuments, drainage system, the sewer system, if applicable, and any other
relevant matters.
3.4.2 Fire Department Review
Fire Department as to the location of hydrants, emergency access, adequacy of fire flow,
installation of alarm system, if applicable, and any other relevant matters.
3.4.3 Building Inspector Review
Building Inspector as to compliance with the Gloucester Zoning Ordinance.
3.4.4 Conservation Commission Review
Conservation Commission as to potential involvement with MGL Chapter 131, Section
40, and the effects of the subdivision on streams, wildlife and similar considerations
within the scope of the Commission.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 31 -
3.5 PUBLIC HEARING
Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval of a Definitive Plan is given,
a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. Notice of time and place of such
hearing shall be given by the Planning Board at the expense of the applicant in each of
two successive weeks, the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior thereto,
by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Gloucester. A copy
of said notice shall be mailed to the Applicant and to all owners of land abutting upon the
subdivision or separated therefrom by a street, as appearing in the most recent tax list.
3.6 APPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE PLAN
After the public hearing, the Definitive Plan will be studied by the Board to determine its
conformity with any approved Preliminary Plan, and its compliance with the design
standards and other requirements of these Rules and Regulations. Within ninety (90) days
after the submission of such plan, or within one hundred and thirty-five (135) days if such
plan did not properly evolve from a Preliminary Plan, the Board will take final action
thereon by approving, modifying and approving, or disapproving such plan, unless an
extension of this time period has been requested in writing by the Applicant and granted
by the Board.
If the Board modifies or disapproves a Definitive Plan, it shall state in its vote the reasons
for its action. A Definitive Plan disapproved by the Board of Health shall not be approved
by the Planning Board until the deficiencies noted by the Board of Health have been
corrected. Approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing(s) of the
Definitive Plan by the signatures of a majority of the Planning Board but not until the
statutory twenty day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate of
action of the Planning Board with the City Clerk and said Clerk has notified the Board
that no appeal has been filed. After the Definitive Plan has been endorsed, the applicant
shall furnish the Board with one complete set of Mylar drawings and eleven (11) prints
thereof, which shall include all modifications, if any.
Approval of the Definitive Plan does not constitute the laying out or acceptance by the
City of streets within a subdivision.
3.7 INSPECTION FEES
Prior to the endorsement of a definitive subdivision or cluster development plan as
approved, and prior to the return of such plan to the Applicant, the Applicant shall be
required to submit to the Planning Board an amount equal to six dollars ($6.00/foot)
times the centerline length in feet of proposed ways in the subdivision. A fee shall be
charged in a like manner for off-site road and utility improvements required by the
Board. The Planning Board shall direct the Auditor to establish an account to expend
such funds to pay for all reasonable construction
inspection services and subdivision modification design reviews by its engineer or other
professional persons required to assist the Planning Board in its determination as to the
adequacy of the subdivision construction and as to the adequacy of such design
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 32 -
modification. If the cost of providing such services exceeds the amount submitted, the
Planning Board may require the applicant to submit an additional amount equal to such
cost. If the cost of providing such services is less than the amount submitted, the Planning
Board shall return the balance to the applicant upon the release of the retainage as
specified in section 3.12.
3.8 PERFORMANCE BOND GUARANTEE
3.8.1 Election by Applicant
An Applicant may elect to complete a subdivision under either a Performance Bond or a
Covenant and shall notify the Board of his choice at the time of submission of the
Definitive Plan. Execution of the Performance Bond or the Covenant must be completed
before endorsement of the Definitive Plan by the Board.
3.8.2 Performance Bond
If he so elects, the Applicant shall file with the Board a Surety Company Performance
Bond (see Appendix D, Form G), issued by a Surety Company acceptable to the Planning
Board, or a Performance Bond secured by a deposit of money or negotiable securities
(see Appendix D, Form F) conditioned on the completion of all required improvements
within the time period specified at the time of approval of the Definitive Plan; said bond
to be in sufficient sum, in the opinion of the Board, to cover the cost of construction of
such improvements based on laws affecting how a municipality completes the project and
so drawn as to insure their satisfactory completion. If the Applicant elects to provide a
performance bond secured by a deposit of money or negotiable securities, he shall, prior
to the approval of the Definitive Plan, prepare a schedule covering the cost of
construction of improvements to complete the subdivision, which schedule shall be
submitted to the Board and its engineer for review. The engineer shall determine the cost
to complete the project based on all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations
which govern the manner by which the municipality completes the project and advise the
Board as to the adequacy of the proposed Performance Bond. The bond shall be written
to remain in full force and effect for the time period of the Board's endorsement of a
definitive plan as specified in section 3.11 plus ninety (90) days.
Securing the performance of the required improvements by a bond will allow the
Applicant to construct structures prior to the release of the performance guarantee. Prior
to the issuance of a building permit, however, the street providing access to the proposed
structure shall be paved with, at minimum, a binder course of Class I bituminous concrete
satisfactory to the City Engineer, and a hydrant shall be in working condition satisfactory
to the Fire Inspector within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed structure.
After completion of the subdivision and certification that the work has been completed to
the satisfaction of the Board in accordance with the Definitive Plan as approved, the
Applicant may request discharge of the bond.
3.8.3 Covenant
Under this procedure the Board may approve a Definitive Plan on condition that no lot in
the subdivision shall be sold and no building shall be erected or placed on any lot until
the improvements necessary to adequately serve such lot, in accordance with these Rules
and Regulations, have been satisfactorily constructed and installed.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 33 -
If the applicant elects to accept this procedure, he shall execute and deliver to the Board
before approval of the Definitive Plan a covenant (see Appendix D, Form H) to construct
and install the required improvements.
Such covenant shall be recorded, at the expense of the Applicant, at the Registry of
Deeds, or registered in the Land Court, and shall be binding upon the land within the
subdivision. The Applicant shall notify the Board in writing of the date of such recording,
submitting evidence thereof satisfactory to the Board.
Upon receipt of notification of recording the Board shall file one print of the Definitive
Plan with the Building Inspector. In accordance with the statute, where approval with
covenant is noted thereon, the Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the
construction of a building on any lot within the subdivision without receipt from the
Board of a copy of the Release of Covenant.
Upon completion, to the satisfaction of the Board, of all the improvements necessary to
adequately serve all lots within the subdivision or, if so requested by the Applicant, any
particular lots, the Board will issue a certificate of such performance (Form M), and upon
the approval by the Board and due recording or registering of such certificate, the
conditions applicable to the lots described therein shall terminate.
3.8.4 Lender's Guarantee of Performance
In cases where land in a subdivision has been mortgaged to secure construction funding,
and the mortgage recorded, the Planning Board may, at its option and upon written
request of the Applicant, release lots from the operation of a Covenant upon delivery to
the Board of an agreement (see Appendix D, Form I) executed by the Applicant and the
mortgagee by a lender acceptable to the Board, in which the lender agrees to retain
sufficient funds otherwise due the Applicant to cover the cost of construction of
improvements needed to complete the subdivision based on the laws affecting how a
municipality completes the project, and make such funds available to the City to
complete the required construction in the event of a Applicant's failure to perform the
required work according to the schedule incorporated in such an agreement. Should the
Applicant request the release of lots from the operation of the covenant, he shall prepare a
schedule covering the cost of construction of improvements to complete the subdivision,
which schedule shall be submitted to the Board and its engineer for review. The engineer
shall determine the cost to complete the project based on all applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations which govern the manner by which the municipality
completes the project and advise the Board of the adequacy of the requested retainage of
funds. The form and manner of execution of said agreement shall be subject to approval
by the City General Counsel if the Planning Board makes a written request.
3.8.5 Change in Security, Reductions and Extensions
The Applicant may change the method of securing the required construction for all or
part of a subdivision from a covenant to a bond or other security. The Applicant may
request in writing to the Planning Board and copy to the Homeowners Association or
owners of record in the subdivision, with the written concurrence of the surety company,
if any, reduction in the penal sum of the bond or other security or an extension of time
within which the work specified in a covenant or required to be performed under a bond
or other security may be completed, and the Board may, at its option, grant such
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 34 -
reduction or extension and notify the City Clerk, the Applicant and the surety, if any, of
such reduction or extension. Should the Applicant make such a request, he shall prepare
a schedule covering the cost of construction of improvements to complete the
subdivision, which schedule shall be submitted to the Board and its engineer for review,
And copy to the Homeowners Association or owners of record in the subdivision. The
engineer shall determine the cost to complete the project based on all applicable statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations which govern the manner by which the municipality
completes the project and advise the Board of the adequacy of such reduction or
extension. Board actions with respect to the approval or disapproval of a subdivision
plan, acceptance of a covenant, release of lots or extension of time shall be by a
certificate of action executed by the majority of the Board for recording with the Registry
of Deeds or filing with the recorder of the Land Court.
3.9 CONVEYANCE OF UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS AND DEDICATION
OF STREETS
Prior to the release of a bond or other security, or to the issuance of a certificate of
performance releasing the developer from the conditions of a covenant, or any other
instrument intended to secure the performance of required work, the developer shall,
without cost to the City, convey or transfer title or rights as follows:
3.9.1 Conveyance of Travel Easements
Convey to the City of Gloucester the right to use streets and any travel easements in the
subdivision for the purposes of public travel, installation of utilities and all other purposes
for which streets are or may be used in Gloucester. This shall include the right to enter
said streets and to sweep, remove snow, maintain, reconstruct, and repair them, including
all acts necessarily or customarily incidental thereto; but shall not be construed to relieve
the Developer and his successors in title to any portion of a street in a subdivision from
the responsibility of maintaining said street in good repair until it is accepted by vote of
the City Council of the City of Gloucester.
3.9.2 Conveyance of Drains
Convey to the City of Gloucester the right and easement to construct, extend, operate,
remove, replace, repair and forever maintain all surface and subsurface drains and their
appurtenances, such as inlets, catch basins, manholes, wingwalls, ditches, and paved
sluiceways, in and under streets and easements, and where necessary indicate such
easements on the subdivision plans at least five feet from the centerline of drain on one
side and fifteen feet on the other. This shall not be construed to relieve the Developer and
his successors in title from the responsibility of maintaining all drains in good repair until
the streets and appurtenant drainage easements are accepted by vote of the City Council
of the City of Gloucester.
3.9.3 Conveyance of Water System
Convey to the City of Gloucester the right and easement to construct, extend, operate,
remove, replace, repair and forever maintain all water mains, valves, pipes, hydrants and
other appurtenances in and under streets and easements, indicating where necessary such
easements on the definitive subdivision plan as extending at least five feet from the
centerline of the water pipe on one side and fifteen feet on the other. This shall not be
construed to relieve the Developer and his successors in title from the responsibility of
maintaining all water supply piping and appurtenances in good repair until the streets and
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 35 -
appurtenant easements are accepted by vote of the City Council of the City of Gloucester.
Instruments conveying the title or rights under this section will substantially follow Form
J in Appendix D.
3.10 EVIDENCE OF SATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE
Before the Board will release the interest of the City in a surety bond or deposit, or, in the
case of a covenant, issue a release of covenant, the following must occur:
3.10.1 Payment of Fees
The Applicant shall pay all fees, as specified in section 3.7, to cover the cost of
construction inspection.
3.10.2 Written Approvals
The Applicant shall obtain and submit to the Planning Board statements from the
following:
(a) Department of Public Works Director, indicating he has approved: the streets; the
installation of the drainage system, including appurtenances; the installation of the sewer
system, where applicable; the location, size, and species of street trees.
(b) Fire Chief, indicating that he has approved: the installation of the hydrant system; the
fire flow; if applicable, the installation of fire alarm cable and boxes.
3.10.3 Engineer Inspection
The Board shall obtain from its engineer a completed inspection form (See Form K in
Appendix E), a statement to the effect that all work required by these Rules and
Regulations has been completed for each way in the subdivision, and that he has
approved the methods of construction and the materials used in the performance of such
work.
3.10.4 Submission of As-Built Plan
The Applicant shall submit an As Built Plan in accordance with section 4.1.5 of these
Rules and Regulations and in conformance with the existing record system of the DPW
Water, Sewer, and Highway Divisions.
3.11 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
Upon completion of required improvements set forth under Section IV of these Rules and
Regulations, security for the performance of which was given by bond, deposit or
covenant, or upon performance of any covenant with respect to any lot or group of lots,
the applicant shall send by registered mail to the City Clerk and the Planning Board a
written statement in duplicate that the construction of ways and the installation of
municipal services, in connection with which bond, deposit or covenant has been given,
has been completed in accordance with the requirements set forth under Section IV. If the
Board determines that said improvements have been completed, it shall, within forty-five
(45) days of the receipt of the Applicant's statement, release the City's interest in such
bond, and return the bond or the deposit to the person who furnished the same, or release
the covenant by appropriate instrument (Form M) duly acknowledged, with a copy to the
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 36 -
Building Inspector. If the Board determines that said improvements have not been
completed, it shall, within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the Applicant's statement
by the City Clerk, specify to the Applicant in writing the details wherein said
improvements fail to comply with its Rules & Regulations.
3.12 RETAINAGE TO INSURE ADEQUATE WORK
(a) At the time of the Board's release of the bond or the deposit to the person who
furnished the same, the Board shall retain twenty percent (20%) to insure adequate
construction and installation of the streets and municipal services for eighteen (18)
months after completion of construction and installation or until the streets are accepted
by the City, whichever comes first.
(b) If the required improvements were secured by a covenant, at the time of the Board's
release of the covenant the applicant shall post a bond equal to twenty percent (20%) of
the cost of improvements to insure adequate construction and installation of the streets
and municipal services for the time period specified above.
(c) Approximately sixty (60) days before the expiration of the eighteen months, the
Planning Board shall inspect said streets and municipal services to determine whether or
not it should recommend the release of the final 20%.
(d) Upon expiration of the period for which the applicant is responsible for maintenance
of said streets and municipal services, and if said developer has complied with all the
requirements of the Subdivision Control Law and the Planning Board Rules and
Regulations as set forth in an inspection report of said streets and municipal services, any
monies held by said Board for their maintenance shall be returned forthwith to the
applicant (using Form N in Appendix D).
3.13 TIME FOR COMPLETION
If the ways in any subdivision are not completed and the utilities are not installed within
the time agreed to by the Applicant, or so required by the Board, the Board may rescind
its approval and require the reapplication and filing of a new Definitive Plan, or it may
enforce such bond and apply any such deposit for the benefit of the City. Ways or
portions thereof not completed within the time required shall thereafter be completed in
accordance with the design and construction standards of the Board in effect upon the
expiration of such time.
3.14 ENDORSEMENT
The endorsement of the plan approval by the Board shall be valid for a period of three (3)
years from the date of said endorsement. Prior to the expiration of the three (3) year
approval period, the applicant shall request in writing to the Board an extension of time,
if necessary. Failure to request an extension of time prior to the expiration of the three (3)
year approval period shall result in the Board's notifying the Building Inspector that no
additional building permits shall be issued in said development. The request for an
extension shall state the reasons for the requested extension and also the length of time
requested.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 37 -
SECTION IV DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR AN
APPROVED SUBDIVISION
4.1 GENERAL
4.1.1 Design Standards
All subdivisions shall be designed and laid out to meet the requirement of public safety,
including, but not limited to, precautions against possible natural disasters of vehicle and
pedestrian traffic safety and convenience of adequate storm water drainage and sewage
disposal, and with due regard for the rights, health and welfare of the inhabitants of the
City of Gloucester, including the future residents of the proposed subdivision, and of
future employees or visitors to a non-residential subdivision. .
4.1.2 Conformance with Plan and Regulations
All improvements specified herein or shown on the approved definitive plan shall be
installed by the Applicant or Developer at no cost to the City and in strict conformance
with these Rules and Regulations and the improved plan. Unless otherwise specified, all
materials and the manner and workmanship of their installation shall conform to the
current requirements of the Standard Specifications for Highways, Bridges, and
Waterways, established by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Public
Works.
4.1.3 Monuments
(a) Granite or precast concrete monuments not less than three (3) feet long and five (5)
inches square shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in
direction of curvature of streets, and at other points where, in the opinion of the Board,
permanent monuments are necessary.
(b) The tops shall be set flush with the finished street-line grade and the monuments shall
be set in well-tamped binding gravel. The point at each monument shall be marked by a
three-eighths (3/8) inch drill hole in the top.
(c) No permanent monument shall be installed until all construction which would disturb
or destroy the monument is completed.
(d) The placement and accurate location of all monuments shall be certified by a
Registered Land Surveyor and properly located on the As Built Plan submitted by the
Developer in accordance with 4.1.5 of these regulations.
4.1.4 Tests of Materials
When requested to do so by the City agencies concerned, the Developer shall bear the
cost of tests of materials. Such tests shall be conducted by independent laboratories from
a list maintained by the Planning Board.
4.1.5 As Built Plans
Upon completion of the subdivision and prior to the release of sureties or covenant, the
Developer shall submit to the Planning Board a plan, drawn on Mylar and certified by a
Registered Land Surveyor, or registered professional engineer, showing the actual size,
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 38 -
locations of all utilities (including electric, telephone, and gas underground installations)
and roadway profiles and any changes authorized by the Board. The plan shall be drawn
using the same technical standards and containing all of the details of the definitive plan,
and shall show the actual measurements of all service ties. Four (4) copies of each Mylar
plan required above shall also be submitted to the Planning Board.
4.1.6 Installation of Services
All storm drains, sewers, water mains, related installations, and service connections to be
placed within the limits of a right of way shall be installed, and approved as herein
required, and all gas pipes and other underground utilities shall be installed prior to
completion of the roadway foundation.
4.2 LOT IMPROVEMENTS
4.2.1 Lot Configuration
Lot side lines shall be as nearly perpendicular or radial to street side lines as feasible.
Intersections of lot lines at an angle of less than forty-five (45) degrees should be
avoided. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots should also be avoided.
4.2.2 Lot Dimensions
No subdivision shall be approved by the Planning Board unless the size, shape, width,
and frontage of all lots within the subdivision comply with the applicable provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance.
4.2.3 Lot Access
Access to a lot shall be along the street used to meet the frontage requirement established
by the Zoning Ordinance for such lot.
4.3 STREETS
4.3.1 Location and Alignment
(a) All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the opinion of the Board,
they will allow safe vehicular and pedestrian travel. Due consideration shall also be given
by the Developer to the attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain the maximum
livability and amenity of the subdivision. To the greatest extent possible, streets shall be
laid out to reduce the volume of cut and fill and to avoid existing slopes of 25% or
greater. Guardhouses, decorative structures, and other similar structures are prohibited in
the street rights-of-way.
(b) The proposed streets shall conform to all existing plans of the Planning Board; to the
General Plan or parts thereof adopted by the Board; and, where required by the Board, to
the existing street system.
(c) If adjoining property is not subdivided but is, in the opinion of the Board, suitable for
ultimate development, provision shall be required for proper projection of streets into
such property by continuing appropriate streets within the subdivision to the exterior
boundary thereof.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 39 -
(d) As far as practicable, all proposed residential streets shall be continuous and in
alignment with existing streets, and shall comprise a convenient system with connections
adequate to insure free circulation of vehicles.
(e) Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property shall not be
permitted.
(f) Centerlines of street jogs shall be off set a minimum of one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet.
(g) Streets shall intersect at as nearly right angles as is practicable and in no case at less
than sixty (60) degrees.
(h) The minimum centerline radii of curved streets shall be the following:
• Lanes - 100 feet
• Minor Streets - 150 feet
• Collector Streets - 300 feet
(i) Property lines of street intersections located within residential subdivisions shall be
rounded or cut back to provide for a curb radius of not less than thirty (30) feet at
intersections with a Collector street, and twenty-five (25) feet at intersections involving
only Minor streets or Lanes. However, when the intersection of two streets varies more
than ten (10) degrees from a right angle, the radius of the curve at the acute angle may be
less and at the obtuse angle may be greater than twenty-five (25) feet for a Minor street or
Lane and thirty (30) feet for a Collector street, to the extent approved or required by the
Planning Board. Property lines of street intersections located within non-residential
subdivisions shall be rounded or cut back to provide for a curb radius of not less than
thirty-five (35) feet.
(j) Streets in the subdivision shall connect to and be accessible from a public way or an
existing private way open to the public and in which the Applicant has rights for purposes
for which ways are intended and commonly used.
(k) There shall be provided at least two (2) recognized means of access, as noted in
paragraph above, for each subdivision, except one comprising only one dead-end street.
In the case of an approved definitive subdivision plan under development, the Board will
not release a surety bond or deposit, or in the case of a covenant, issue a release of
covenant for a portion or section of the subdivision under development unless there is
provided and constructed first, except for a dead-end street, two means of access to said
portion or section.
(l) No street or portion of street providing access to a lot shall be less than ten (10) feet
in elevation.
(m) A tangent at least one hundred and fifty (150) feet in length shall separate all reverse
curves on Collector streets.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 40 -
(n) Temporary dead-end streets, laid out to permit future projection, shall conform to the
provisions of alignment, width, and grade that would be applicable to such streets if
extended.
(o) When access to a subdivision crosses land in another municipality, the Planning
Board may require certification, from appropriate authorities, that such access is in
accordance with the subdivision requirements of such municipality, and that such access,
if necessary, will be adequately improved to handle prospective traffic.
4.3.2 Width
(a) The width of street rights-of-way shall not be less than the following:
• Courts - Twenty-five (25) feet, except for streets having a grade in excess of
• six percent, in which instance the minimum right-of-way shall be thirty (30) feet.
• Lanes - Forty (40) feet
• Minor Streets - Fifty (50) feet
• Collector Street - Sixty (60) feet
(b) The minimum width of pavement between curb lines shall not be less than the
following:
• Courts - Sixteen (16) feet, except for streets having a grade in excess of six
percent, in which instance the minimum width of pavement shall be twenty (20)
feet.
• Lanes - Twenty (20) feet
• Minor Streets - Twenty-six (26) feet
• Collector Streets - Thirty-two (32) feet
4.3.3 Grades
(a) Grades of streets shall be the reasonable minimum but not less than 0.5%.
(b) The maximum centerline grades shall be as follows:
• Courts: Twelve (12) percent
• Lanes: ten (10) percent
• Minor streets: eight (8) percent
• Collector streets: six (6) percent
(c) For Lanes, Minor Streets and Collector Streets in a residential subdivision where the
grade is five (5) percent or greater on the approach to an intersection, a leveling area with
a slope of not more than three (3) percent shall be provided for a distance of not less than
seventy-five (75) feet measured from the nearest exterior line of the intersecting street.
For Courts in a residential subdivision where the grade is six (6) percent or greater on the
approach to an intersection, a leveling area with a slope of not more than four (4) percent
shall be provided for a distance of not less than seventy-five (75) feet measured from the
nearest intersecting line of the intersecting street. On any street in a non-residential
subdivision where the grade is three (3) percent or greater on the approach to an
intersection, a leveling area with a slope of not more than two (2) percent shall be
provided for a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet measured from the nearest
exterior line of the intersecting street.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 41 -
(d) Vertical curves are required where changes in grade exceed one (1) percent. Such
vertical curves shall provide a forward sight distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet
on Courts, two hundred (200) feet on Lanes and Minor streets, and three hundred (300)
feet on Collector streets.
4.3.4 Dead-End Streets
(a) Where in the opinion of the Planning Board through streets are not needed for
adequate fire protection and traffic circulation, dead-end streets may be used. Said streets
shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length unless greater length is deemed
desirable by the Planning Board, and that the centerline is measured from the centerline
of the intersecting street.
(b) Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a
diameter at the curb-line of at least one hundred (100) feet and a property-line diameter
of a least one hundred and twenty (120) feet, except for Courts, which shall provide a
turnaround having a diameter at the curb-line of at least eighty (80) feet and a propertyline
diameter of at least ninety (90) feet. Where appropriate, the Planning Board may also
require the placement of a circular landscaped island, with a minimum radius of twenty
(20) feet, at the center of the turn-around. As an alternative to a circular turn-around,
under certain conditions, the Board may allow "T" or "Y" shaped turn-arounds of a
design that would permit a vehicle with a 47 foot outside turning radius and a width of
eight (8) feet to reverse its direction without backing more than once.
4.3.5 Construction
(a) The width of the pavement plus two (2) feet on each side shall be cleared of all
stumps, brush, roots, boulders, trees and like materials, and the remainder of the right-ofway
shall be cleared of such materials not intended for preservation or interfering with
utility installation. All materials not suitable for foundation material shall be removed
from an area two feet wider than the paved width and to a depth of at least fifteen (15)
inches below grade. Peat, silt, loam or similar yielding materials shall be removed to a
firm foundation.
(b) The roadway shall be graded and prepared for pavement as follows:
Traveled ways shall be provided with a foundation consisting of at least twelve (12)
inches compacted thickness of gravel borrow, as specified in Section M1.03.0 type B of
the Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges. The gravel base shall be rolled
and compacted to a center line grade three and one-half (3 1/2) inches below the
proposed finished grade as shown on the profile, and having a transverse grade
conforming to that shown on the Typical Street Half-Section.
The gravel shall be spread in two equal layers, each of which shall be thoroughly watered
and rolled true to line and grade with a roller of not less than twelve tons. All soft and
spongy material below the sub-grade surface shall be removed to a depth determined by
the Director of Public Works and the City Engineer, and the space shall be filled with
gravel borrow. Any depressions that appear during and after rolling shall be filled with
additional gravel borrow and rerolled until the surface is true and even.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 42 -
(c) After the treated roadway base has been subjected to the action of traffic for a time
period specified by the Director of Public Works and the City Engineer, but not in excess
of thirty (30) days, a binder course of Class I bituminous concrete shall be applied,
compacted and rolled to a thickness of two (2) inches with a true surface conforming to
the half-section of the road. A second course consisting of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches
of Class I bituminous concrete top shall be applied, compacted and rolled to grade with a
true surface conforming to the half-section of the road.
(d) Roadways shall be constructed for the full length of all streets in the subdivision. The
center line of such roadways shall coincide with the centerline of the street right-of-way
unless a waiver is specifically authorized by the Planning Board.
(e) Where roadway slopes extend outside of the street right-of-way lines the developer
shall be required to provide temporary construction easements to a line five (5) feet
beyond the top or toe of the proposed slope.
(f) Straight face granite curbs with six (6) inches of reveal shall be installed for the full
radius at all street intersections and behind all catch basins.
Granite or Type I-1 bituminous concrete (machine installed) curbs shall be installed
along:
1. both sides of all Collector and Minor streets.
2. all Lanes and Courts having curves with a radius of sixty (60) feet or less at the
curbline and a central angle of forty-five (45) degrees or more.
3. all Lanes and Courts having grades in excess of three (3) percent.
4.3.6 Signage
(a) Signs shall be required as follows:
1. Reflective street signs, conforming to the standards established by the Department
of Public Works, shall be installed at each intersection.
2. Proposed street names shall be sent to the Engineering Division for review to
avoid duplication and sound alikes. The Engineering Division will develop a
numbering plan consistent with City standards. The street name and numbering
plan will be routed to the appropriate approving agency in accordance with the
City Ordinance on street naming and numbering. The Planning Board will be
notified of the approved street name and numbering plan.
3. At all points at which a private street within the subdivision intersects with an
existing public way, there shall also be erected on the same standard and
immediately below the street sign, a sign of such size as the Director of Public
Works may deem necessary, reading "Private Way."
(b) The Developer shall be required to provide any and all traffic signage deemed
necessary by the Planning Board to serve public safety. Such signage shall include, but
not be limited to, traffic signs, cross walks, and street center and boundary lines, and shall
comply with uniform traffic standards.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 43 -
4.3.7 Lighting
(a) Street lights shall be of cut-off design and installed to conform to the type and style
required by the Planning Board.
(b) Street light stanchions shall be located at such intervals as required by the Planning
Board.
(c) The developer shall be responsible for all trenching, backfilling, and paving for the
installation of the necessary appurtenance for Street Lighting.
4.3.8 Damage
In the event that the surface of any existing way is cut or opened for installation of, or
connection to, required improvements for a subdivision or damaged during construction
of a subdivision, the Developer, at no cost to the City, shall perform the following work:
(a) All trenches or opened areas shall be backfilled with suitable material and compacted
as set forth in Section 4.3.5(b) herein;
(b) All trenches or opened areas shall have a binder course of Class I bituminous
concrete applied, compacted and rolled to a thickness of two (2) inches with a true
surface conforming to the half section of the road;
(c) The entire width of the cut or opened or damaged way shall receive a one (1) inch top
course of Class I bituminous concrete applied, compacted and rolled to a grade with a
true surface conforming to the half section of the road.
4.4 SEWERAGE
4.4.1 Public Sewers
(a) Connection to public sewers is required:
1. if any portion of the subdivision is within 1000 feet of the public sewerage
system, measured along a street or way; although this standard shall not apply in
specific portions of Ward Five (5) Precinct Two (2) unless the area is defined by
City Council as eligible for a sewer service extension according to City
Ordinance, Section 23-42, entitled “Sewer Extensions in Part of Ward Five (5)
Precinct Two (2)”, and as shown on the incorporated wastewater district map; or
2. when required by the Board of Health; although this standard shall not apply in
specific portions of Ward Five (5) Precinct Two (2) when the subject site is
outside an eligible sewer service area unless an amendment to the wastewater
district map is approved by City Council pursuant to City Ordinance Section 23-
42, entitled “Sewer Extensions in Part of Ward Five (5) Precinct Two (2)”, and as
shown on the incorporated wastewater district map. The sewer system shall be
installed in accordance with the Definitive Plan and under the direction of the
Director of Public Works and the City Engineer. Connection to the public sewer
system shall be made at no cost to the City.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 44 -
(b) . If a public sewerage system is included in the City's five year Capital Improvement
Program but not yet constructed, the applicant shall be required to design and install at
his cost in the street and to every lot, sewerage laterals which can be connected later to
the public sewerage system. In order for the applicant to design and install properly such
laterals, the City shall be responsible for establishing and providing the applicant, at the
applicant's expense, with the necessary plan, specifications and design standards of the
proposed public sewerage system.
(c) Where a public sewer connection is required, the following design standards shall
apply:
1. Main sewer lines shall be minimum size of eight inch (8") inside diameter (ID).
Laterals shall be a minimum of six inch (6") ID. Flow velocities shall be between
2 and 10 feet per second.
2. Maximum distance between man-holes shall be three hundred (300) feet.
3. Minimum cover over top of pipe shall be:
o 48" under paving
o 36" under area of zero live load
4. Minimum horizontal distance between a sanitary sewer and a parallel water main
within subdivision streets shall be ten (10) feet.
5. Man-hole covers in flood prone areas shall be of water tight design.
6. A capped watertight lateral shall be installed at an appropriate location to serve
each lot of the subdivision.
7. Connection of footing drains, roof drain or storm drains to a sanitary sewer is
prohibited.
8. At all sewer and water main crossings the water main must pass over the sewer
main with a minimum of eighteen (18) inches vertical separation.
4.4.2 Private On-Site Sewage Disposal
(a) Where a public sewerage system is located at a greater distance from any portion of
the subdivision than 1000 feet and connection to it is not required by the Board of Health,
the Developer may install private on-site sewage disposal systems.
(b) Private on-site sewage disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the
Board of Health's Rules and Regulations, and the Environmental Code ("Title 5
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage"), and shall be
subject to the approval of the Board of Health.
(c) Where private on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted, the Planning Board
may require installation of so-called "dry sewers," in any street where, in its estimation,
sanitary sewers may become accessible within a period of five (5) years.
4.5 WATER
4.5.1 Water Mains
(a) No subdivision shall be approved by the Planning Board unless all lots therein are
provided with adequate water supply for domestic and fire protection purposes.
Connection to the public water supply shall be made by the Developer at no cost to the
City. Water supply shall be deemed adequate if:
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 45 -
1. The water mains in the subdivision conform to the requirements of paragraphs
(b)-(f) of this subsection, and are connected to an existing city water main not less
than eight (8) inches in diameter.
2. The minimum water pressure under normal (non-fire flow) operating conditions is
not less than forty (40) pounds per square inch residual pressure.
3. The fire flow conforms to the requirements of section 4.5.2(d) of these Rules and
Regulations.
(b) Water mains shall be class 52 cement-line ductile iron pipe, of such size as approved
by the Director of Public Works and the City Engineer, and shall not be less than eight
(8) inches in diameter in residential subdivisions and less than twelve (12) inches in
diameter in non-residential subdivisions.
(c) Minimum cover over the top of pipe mains and laterals to buildings shall be five (5)
feet.
(d) Mains shall be no closer than three (3) feet to the face of catch basins or man-holes.
(e) Main line Gate Valves shall be located no more than one thousand (1000) feet apart.
These valves shall also be located at intersecting lines of the system to isolate branch
lines for maintenance purposes.
(f) Before any portion of the water system in a subdivision is charged, all pipes and all
appurtenances shall be flushed, chlorinated and pressure tested to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works and the City Engineer.
4.5.2 Fire Hydrants
(a) Fire hydrants shall be located as close as possible to street intersections and not more
than five hundred (500) feet apart in residential subdivisions and three hundred (300) feet
apart in non-residential subdivisions.
(b) Each hydrant shall be served directly from the water main through a six (6) inch
lateral connection. It shall be gated with a six (6) inch gate valve and box, and shall have
two and one-half (2 1/2) inch hose outlets and one four and one-half (4 1/2) inch outlet.
Hydrant valve openings shall be no less than five and one-quarter (5 1/4) inches in
diameter. The type, specifications and location of each hydrant must be approved by the
Department of Public Works and the City Fire Department prior to installation.
(c) Each hydrant shall be flushed after installation.
(d) Fire flow at the hydrants, as verified by the City Fire Department, shall be no less
than seven hundred and fifty (750) gallons per minute at twenty (20) pounds per square
inch residual pressure for residential subdivisions, and no less than two thousand (2000)
gallons per minute at twenty (20) pounds per square inch residual pressure for nonresidential
subdivisions. Flow tests shall be conducted by the Developer under the
supervision of the City Fire and Public Works Department, and the results shall be
submitted to the City Fire Department and the Planning Board.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 46 -
4.6 SURFACE DRAINAGE
4.6.1 General
(a) The storm drainage system shall be designed to accommodate the run-off from the
entire watershed area, whether inside or outside the subdivision, under conditions of total
potential development permitted under the zoning ordinance, as determined by the
Community Development Department. The responsibility for adequate drainage shall rest
with the Developer.
(b) Where property adjacent to the subdivision but within the same watershed is not
subdivided, provision shall be made for proper projection of the drainage systems by
continuing appropriate drains and easements to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision
at such size and grade as will allow for such projection. When the subdivision creates a
need for drainage improvements outside the subdivision, the Applicant shall be required
to secure the necessary easements and to provide such improvements.
(c) As construction progresses, unforeseen ground water conditions may be encountered
which require additional subdrains or curtain drains. These conditions include potential
problems if construction is in progress at a time of low water table or other dry
conditions. The Planning Board reserves the right to require appropriate systems to
accommodate the problem.
(d) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream,
the Planning Board may require that there be provided a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way of twenty (20) feet or greater width to conform substantially to the
lines of such water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, and to provide for
construction or other necessary purposes.
(e) Where a subdivision is located within one thousand (1000) feet of an existing storm
water drainage system, the Developer, at no cost to the City, shall connect the
subdivision's storm water drainage system to the existing system, and shall repair,
improve or enlarge the existing system to accommodate the anticipated increase in runoff
from the subdivision.
4.6.2 Specifications
The storm drainage system shall be installed according to the following specifications:
(a) Minimum size of pipe for surface runoff shall be twelve (12) inches ID. Footing drain
and subdrain connection pipe size shall be a minimum of six (6) inches ID.
(b) Connection of footing drain, roof drains or storm drains to a sanitary sewer is
prohibited.
(c) A minimum of four (4) feet of cover shall be placed over the top of drain pipes.
(d) Drain pipes within street rights-of-way shall be reinforced concrete, of Class III
specification or of such higher class as required by the Planning Board.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 47 -
(e) Catch basins shall be built on both sides of the roadway at intervals not to exceed
three hundred (300) feet. They shall be built at all street intersections and low points in
the roadway.
(f) The drainage system shall be capable of keeping streets and abutting property free of
surface water based on a twenty-five year frequency storm. Culverts shall be designed to
handle a 50 year frequency storm.
(g) Maximum distance between man-holes shall be three hundred (300) feet. Maximum
distance for street runoff to travel along a berm or gutter to a catch basin shall be three
hundred (300) feet. Maximum distance between a catch basin and man-hole shall be 300
feet.
(h) Storm sewer water velocities shall be between two (2) and ten (10) feet per second.
4.7 SIDEWALKS
4.7.1 General
(a) Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of Collector and Minor streets.
(b) Sidewalks shall be installed on one or both sides of Lanes and Courts if in the
opinion of the Planning Board pedestrian safety would be substantially served by their
construction. Where sidewalks are not required, the Board may require that the grading of
the right-of-way be so executed as to make possible later additions of sidewalks without
major regrading.
(c) Sidewalks shall be separated from the pavement area by a seeded strip, and shall be
located as close as possible to the outside line of the right-of-way.
(d) Sidewalks shall extend the full length of each side of the street.
4.7.2 Specifications
(a) Sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five (5) feet.
(b) Sidewalks shall have transverse slopes or crowns of three-eighths (3/8) of an inch per
foot.
(c) Bituminous concrete sidewalks having a minimum thickness of two and one-half (2
1/2) inches after compaction shall be constructed on a eight inch (8") gravel foundation to
the required lines and grades.
(d) Sidewalks constructed of all-weather materials other than bituminous concrete may
be approved if they are deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
4.8 UTILITIES
4.8.1 Easements
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
where necessary and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 48 -
4.8.2 Installation
(a) All electrical, telephone and other utility wiring shall be placed underground in all
residential subdivisions, unless the Planning Board determines that such placement is not
feasible or is not in the best interests of the City of Gloucester.
(b) All installations shall be to the specifications of the utility company concerned and of
the City of Gloucester.
(c) Where adjacent property is not subdivided or where all the property of the applicant
is not being subdivided at the same time, provisions shall be made for the extension of
the utility system. The Planning Board may require the mains for the full length of streets
and to the exterior limits of the subdivision, at such grade and size which will, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, permit their proper extension at a later date.
4.9 PUBLIC USES
4.9.1 Easements
Access easements to park and conservation land shall be provided, if required by the
Planning Board, and shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
4.9.2 Open Space
Before approval of a plan the Board may also in proper cases require the plan to show a
park or parks suitably located and sized for playground or recreation purposes or for
providing light and air. The Board may by appropriate endorsement on the plan require
that no building be erected upon such park or parks without its written approval for a
period of not more than three (3) years.
4.9.3 Bikeways and Walkways
Bikeways, pedestrian walkways or bridle paths may be required when deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board.
4.10 NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES
4.10.1 Preservation
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, water courses,
scenic points, historic spots, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
Site design and grading on slopes greater than 15% shall provide the minimum disruption
of view corridors and scenic vistas and shall preserve significant natural topographic
features, to the greatest extent possible, including ridgelines. Roads and driveways shall
follow the natural topography to the greatest extent possible to minimize the cutting and
grading of steep slope areas. Existing vegetation on slopes greater than 25% shall be
retained to the maximum extent possible. The Planning Board may also require no cut
zones to protect other natural resources of concern.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 49 -
4.10.2 Grass Plots
(a) All areas between the exterior street lines and the curb lines of the roadways thereon
which are not occupied by sidewalks shall be surfaced with not less than four (4) inches
of quality loam, seeded with lawn grass seed, and rolled to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board. Seeding shall be done at appropriate times of the year in a manner to
insure growth of grass.
(b) The slope of the grass plot shall not exceed one (1) foot vertical to three (3) feet
horizontal in fill; one (1) foot to two (2) feet in cut; and one (1) foot to three-quarters
(3/4) of a foot in ledge.
(c) Slope easements or retaining walls shall be employed where the slope of the grass
plot cannot be contained within the exterior street lines. Grass plots shall be so graded as
to prevent surface water on the street from draining onto private land, except at
designated ponding areas.
4.10.3 Trees
(a) Street trees of species approved by the Planning Board shall be planted on each side
of each street in a subdivision, except where, in the opinion of the Board, existing trees
which are suitable as street trees can be retained. Such trees shall be located outside of
the right of way, at approximately forty (40) foot intervals, and shall be at least twelve
(12) feet in height, two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in caliper measured one (1) foot above
the approved grade, and shall be planted in at least one-half (1/2) cubic yard of topsoil.
(b) All trees shall be well-rooted and free of injury, harmful insects, and diseases. They
shall be well-branched, and the branching construction should be sound.
(c) The Developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of planted trees and
replacement of those which have died or become diseased within eighteen (18) months of
acceptance by the Board.
(d) Where appropriate, the Planning Board may stipulate that in lieu of planting street
trees along the road(s) of a subdivision, the applicant shall provide and plant a
comparable amount of plant materials at off-site locations designated by the Board.
4.10.4 Bank Plantings
(a) All cut bankings must be planted with suitable, well-rooted, low-growing shrubs.
Perennial turf installed as sod is an acceptable alternative for the planting of banks.
(b) If bank plantings are of a type which is properly spaced at close intervals, four (4)
inches of loam shall be spread over the entire bank. If the plantings are to be widely
spread they may be planted in loam pits.
(c) Mulch (wood chips or equal) shall be spread to a minimum depth of six (6) inches
among plantings for purposes of weed and erosion control.
(d) The Developer shall be responsible for maintenance of bank plantings and
replacement of those which have died or become diseased within eighteen (18) months of
acceptance by the Board.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 50 -
4.11 FIRE PROTECTION
4.11.1 Fire Protection Device Barriers
All fire protection devices, including hydrants, standpipes, post and wall indicator valves,
and fire department connections, shall be protected by barriers installed by the Developer.
The location, number, and type of barriers needed to adequately protect all fire protection
devices in a subdivision from damage or blockage by motor vehicles shall be specified by
the City Fire Department.
4.11.2 Overhead Obstructions
The overhead clearance for all streets in a subdivision shall be a minimum of fourteen
(14) feet. Trees and utility wiring or structures shall be located so as not to interfere with
fire rescue operations for all buildings in the subdivision.
4.11.3 Sprinkler Systems
All buildings which do not provide adequate access for fire fighting purposes shall
contain sprinkler systems in accordance with specifications established by the City Fire
Dept. Adequate access for such purposes would require:
(a) For buildings with a height of thirty (30) feet or less at the roof line, a circular area
around the building having a radius determined by dividing the building height by four
(4) and then adding three (3) feet to the quotient.
(b) For buildings with a building height of more than thirty (30) feet at the roof line, a
circular area around the building having a radius of no less than thirty-six (36) feet.
4.11.4 Fire Alarms
Whenever required by the Fire Department, wiring for fire alarm systems shall be
installed underground along all streets in the subdivision, in accordance with the
specifications of the Fire Department, for possible connection to the City fire alarm
system.
4.12 CLEANING UP
Upon completion of all work on the ground, the developer shall clean up any debris
caused by street construction and installation of utilities so as to leave a neat and orderly
appearance. All areas within the street lines destroyed or altered in construction
operations shall be restored to vegetation or other finish satisfactory to the Planning
Board. No stumps or other spoil materials shall be left unburied on any property within or
adjacent to the subdivision. The entire drainage system, including catch basins, manholes
and pipes, shall be cleaned out properly.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 51 -
SECTION V ADMINISTRATION
5.1 INSPECTION
The Planning Board's Construction Inspector shall be given at least three working days
notice of work scheduled in order to make inspections at the following stages:
1. After excavation and trenching, before placement of utilities or foundation
material;
2. Foundation gravel to be approved before placement;
3. After placement of drainage structures, before backfilling;
4. After placing gravel, before placing paving;
5. As required for confirmation of extent of completion for release of security
verifying: placement of finish coat; sidewalks; curbing; street signs; grading
outside traveled way; trees; monuments; clean-up;
6. As required to advise on requested departures from plans as approved.
5.2 VARIATION
Strict compliance with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations may be waived
when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is in the public interest and not
inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law. Written requests for waivers of strict
compliance with these Rules shall accompany the Definitive Plan, and shall indicate the
specific regulation sought to be waived and the nature, location, and extent of the waiver
sought. Such request shall also include justification of each waiver sought and a
demonstration certified by the Applicant's engineer that such waiver is consistent with
each of the purposes set forth in the Purpose statement of these Rules and Regulations,
and is in the public interest.
5.3 RESCISSION
Failure of the Developer to record the Definitive Plan within six months of its
endorsement, or to either initiate construction of improvements or sell lots in a
subdivision or portion thereof within seven years of the approval of the Definitive Plan,
shall constitute sufficient reason for the rescission of such approval in accordance with
the requirements of Section 81-W, Chapter 41, General Laws
5.4 REFERENCE
For matters not covered by these Rules and Regulations, reference is made to
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 41, Sections 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive.
5.5 BUILDING PERMIT
5.5.1 Release of Lots
No building shall be erected within a subdivision without written permission from the
Gloucester Planning Board by Certificate of Release Form M.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 52 -
5.5.2 Enforcement by Denial of Building Permit
The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the erection of a building until he is
first satisfied that the lot on which the building is to be erected is not within a subdivision
or that a way furnishing the access to such lot as required by the Subdivision Control Law
is shown on a plan recorded under Section 81-X of Chapter 41, and that any condition
endorsed thereon limiting the right to erect or maintain buildings on such lot has been
satisfied or waived by the Planning Board, and in the event that more than one building
for dwelling purposes be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot, that the
Building Inspector is satisfied that consent has been obtained from the Gloucester
Planning Board in accordance with section 2.5 of these Rules and Regulations, and
Chapter 41, Section 81-Q, and amendments thereto. For a way furnishing the access to a
lot on which a building is to be erected shown on a plan recorded prior to December 8,
1960, the Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the erection of a building
without the approval of the Planning Board, except for a building on a lot exempted from
Subdivision Control Law as provided under Section 81-FF of Chapter 41.
5.6 SEPARABILITY
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision of these Rules and Regulations
shall be adjudged to be not valid, the adjudication shall apply only to the material so
adjudged and the remainder of these Rules and Regulations shall be deemed to be valid
and effective.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 53 -
SECTION VI RULES AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE CITY OF
GLOUCESTER OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(OSRD) ZONING ORDINANCE
6.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the following rules and regulations is to implement the Gloucester Zoning
Ordinance, Section 5.15, Open Space Residential Development (OSRD). The rules and
regulations provide standards for development of OSRD communities, a preferred
method of land development in residential districts. The ordinance promotes OSRD
developments that are consonant with existing site features, that limit site disturbance
and that promote set-asides of permanently protected open space. OSRDs shall comply
with the standards set forth in this section, unless waivers to one or more of these
standards are judged by the Planning Board to result in a substantially better design.
6.2 DETAILED DESIGN STANDARDS.
A. Disturbed Areas -- A disturbed area is defined as any land not left in its natural
vegetated state and topography. Note: in order to identify locations where disturbed
area is proposed, there are submission requirements for the proposed site plan map
requiring the delineation of: existing vegetative cover; areas where existing vegetative
cover may be altered (such as when it is proposed to remove vegetation); and/or any
area cut or filled, with specific identification of areas changed in elevation by two (2)
or more feet.
1. The OSRD shall be designed to:
a. Minimize disturbance to Primary Conservation Areas (See OSRD zoning
ordinance for definition);
b. Provide minimal disturbed area within Secondary Conservation Areas (See
OSRD zoning ordinance);
c. Provide minimal disturbed area within Potentially Developable Areas (See
OSRD zoning ordinance); and
d. Minimize adverse impacts within the Watershed Protection Overlay District.
B. Traffic and Circulation
1. All Streets, Roads and Driveways in the subdivision shall be designed to provide
for safe vehicular and pedestrian access and egress.
2. Roadways shall form an interconnected pattern of rectilinear or curvilinear streets,
to the extent possible. If one or more properties adjacent to the OSRD site are
undeveloped and have development potential, the OSRD plan shall provide at
least one (1) right of way, suitable to provide future roadway connections to the
adjacent areas, as required by Planning Board under its subdivision review
regulations. Cul de sacs are discouraged.
3. All residences within the OSRD site shall be granted a right of way.
4. The proposal for operation and maintenance of the rights of ways internal to the
site shall be the responsibility and liability of the applicant and future owners. All
rights of ways shall be reviewed by the Board, including public and private street
connections, proposed public and private roads and driveways, and bicycle and
pedestrian paths.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 54 -
5. Minimum pavement width for streets serving more than four (4) units should be
twenty (20) feet or greater in width, unless the Board deems otherwise.
6. Where parking is provided on a street with the consent of the Board, the minimum
pavement width on such streets shall be twenty four (24) feet or greater.
7. Each dwelling unit with two (2) or more bedrooms should be served by two (2)
off street parking spaces; dwelling units with one (1) bedroom can be served by a
minimum of one and a half (1.5) off street parking spaces, unless the Board deems
otherwise. [Note: garages and areas in front of garages may count in this
computation in cases when clear description is specified on the plan and approved
by the Board to ensure when it finds that vehicles operating from the proposed
parking area would not interfere with the circulation of adjacent sidewalk,
driveway or road.]
8. On-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation -- walkways and/or bicycle paths shall
be specified to link residences with parking areas, recreation facilities (including
parkland and open space), and adjacent land uses where appropriate.
9. Where possible, shade trees, or other species of trees, shall be planted in or
adjacent to streets, roads and driveways in a subdivision.
10. Gravel (pervious) surface treatments on streets, roads and driveways may be
preferred; however, specifications/ departures from standards presented in the
Subdivision Review Regulations shall be specified in the site plan.
C. Landscaping & Screening
1. As described in ‘Drainage’, landscaping treatment in the vicinity of buildings,
ways, structures and utilities should be designed and specified to impede rapid
stormwater run-off.
2. There should be attempts to specify non-invasive and drought-resistant species of
plants within disturbed areas.
3. Landscaping treatment in the vicinity of buildings, ways, structures and utilities
should be designed to camouflage infrastructure and blend development with
natural features.
4. Landscaping treatment should be used to minimize direct views of one structure
to another when buildings or groups of buildings are proposed in close proximity
to one another, such as when there is less than fifty (50) feet between the
respective exterior walls of opposing structures (or directly opposing parts of
structures).
5. Landscaping treatment should be provided for shading of ways and parking areas.
6. Permanent maintenance of open space and landscape improvements, including the
stormwater utilities, shall be described in a program document that provides
detailed operation and maintenance procedures and responsibilities.
7. Parking areas with greater than ten (10) spaces shall be screened from public
view.
8. Parking areas with more than fifteen (15) spaces shall be divided into smaller
sections, defined by landscaped strips or buffers consisting of vegetation and/or
earthen berms.
9. Dumpsters and storage area shall be screened by buffers consisting of vegetation
or earthen berms.
10. Proposed lighting shall minimize glare.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 55 -
D. Drainage
1. ‘Soft’, open (nonstructural) stormwater management techniques (such as swales)
and other drainage techniques that slow the rate of runoff, reduce impervious
surface and enable infiltration should be employed where appropriate consistent
with local ordinances pertaining to drainage and grading and Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land (including Appendix A-1
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT).
2. Landscaping treatment in the vicinity of buildings, ways, structures and utilities
should be designed to impede rapid stormwater runoff.
3. A permanent operation and maintenance program for the stormwater system shall
be provided.
E. Building Orientation and Building Massing
1. Proposed structures shall be compatible with nearby structures in terms of
character; scale; mass; volume; color and major design elements.
2. Proposed structures should be situated in relation to the site circulation system
and other structures such that there can be basic evacuation by residents and
access by public safety officials in the event of an emergency.
6.3 SUBMISSION OF PLANS & DOCUMENTS FOR OPEN SPACE
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
A. Pre-application
1. Zoning Ordinance 5.15.6.1 requires that all applicants shall make a written
request for an informal pre-application review as described in Section 2.9 of the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
2. The pre-application stage is intended to promote informal presentation to and
discussion with the Board regarding the notion (concept) for a development. The
forum is intended to establish communication between a potential developer and
the Board so as to establish a dialogue on land development objectives and OSRD
process. Generally, it is not recommended that this forum be used to review
detailed plan specifications, although this is permissible.
3. All submittals under this section shall be clearly labeled "PRE-APPLICATION”.
4. The form of a pre-application required under Section 5.15.6.1 shall be:
a. A written letter, received at the Community Development Department no later
than sixteen (16) days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting.
b. The letter application shall be addressed to the chair, care of the Community
Development Department, and it shall identify:
c. That the applicant seeks pre-application review of a site for a potential OSRD;
d. The property owner;
e. The address(es) of the subject site and the applicable Assessor Map(s) and
Lot(s).
B. Site Plan (Yield and Sketch Plans)
The site plan consists of the Yield Plan and the Sketch Plan. An application will
not be considered complete until there is receipt of both plans.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 56 -
1. Yield Plan
a. The Yield Plan showing the maximum number of lots that can be placed on a site
and submitted as part of an OSRD Site Plan under Zoning Ordinance Section
5.15.7 shall consist of:
i. A Yield Plan Map; and
ii. A Yield Plan Narrative explanation detailing the results of the determination
of proposed yield.
b. The yield plan shall be based upon applicable city ordinances and site plan
standards, including:
i. Zoning Ordinance minimum requirements, including minimum lot
requirements for the applicable zoning district;
ii. Standards in the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of
Land in Gloucester; and
iii. Standards in the Planning Board’s Development Review Regulations.
c. In cases where connection to public sewers is proposed, the yield plan shall show
a conceptual layout of access to the site (such as a road providing required
frontage) along with a conceptual layout of lots for a conventional, grid
subdivision.
d. In addition to the above requirements, for cases where connection to public sewers
is not proposed, the yield plan shall provide evidence that adequate on-site
sanitary wastewater treatment and disposal systems may be constructed to serve
the number of dwelling units proposed. This evidence shall include
documentation, prepared by a Professional Engineer, demonstrating suitable soil
and groundwater conditions as determined by representative sampling and testing
of the buildable areas of the site using methods approved by the Health
Department, guided by state and local standards pertaining to the siting of sanitary
systems. The Planning Board shall consult the Health Department and Board of
Health regarding the methods used and their interpretation of the findings of such
analysis. Note that while Planning Board seeks to encourage flexibility in the
design of development, this standard helps promote early awareness of
relationships between soil capabilities on the site, a sustainable number of
dwellings, and the placement of dwellings respective to soils that will be used to
site sanitary system(s).
e. Required form for Yield Plan
i. The specific required contents of the Yield Plan Map are contained under
APPENDIX 6.A: YIELD PLAN MAP CHECKLIST. Staff will utilize the
checklist in its review of applications on behalf of the Planning Board.
ii. The specific required contents of the Yield Plan Narrative are contained in
the under APPENDIX 6.A2: YIELD PLAN NARRATIVE CHECKLIST.
2. Sketch Plan
a. A Sketch Plan submitted as part of the OSRD Site Plan under Zoning Ordinance
5.15.7 shall consist of:
i. A Sketch Plan Map (plan) of the site containing descriptive site plan
details and information regarding existing features and the proposed
design of an OSRD on the site; and
ii. A Sketch Plan Narrative description regarding the concept for a
development, including the layout of open space, stormwater
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 57 -
management, wastewater management, utilities, landscaping, and other
aspects of open space, infrastructure, and building design.
b. Required Form for Sketch Plan:
i. The specific required contents of the Sketch Plan Map are under
APPENDIX 6.B: SKETCH PLAN MAP CHECKLIST. Staff will utilize
the checklist in its review of applications on behalf of the Planning Board.
ii. The specific required contents of the Sketch Plan Narrative are contained
under APPENDIX 6.B2: SKETCH PLAN NARRATIVE CHECKLIST.
C. Review Procedure and Policies Pertaining to OSRD Site Plans
1. The Planning Board may request an independent technical review of a site plan,
provided for at the expense of the applicant independent of the application filing fee,
pursuant to the Subdivision Review Regulations and M.G.L. Ch. 44 Section 53G.
2. A Site Plan shall be considered a complete application, according to Zoning
Ordinance Section 5.15.8.3, upon the majority vote of the Planning Board at a
meeting when the specific OSRD application is properly posted on a Planning
Board meeting agenda filed with the City Clerk.
3. All application materials (submissions) must be received no less than six (6) days
prior to a scheduled Planning Board meeting.
4. The form of all application plans shall be thirty (30) copies of required drawings
compiled in sets of consecutively numbered pages on twenty four (24) by thirty
six (36) inch size sheets.
5. The form of all narrative application materials shall be thirty (30) copies of a
complete set of all narrative documents with the pages consecutively numbered.
6. The form of proper notice for a Planning Board public hearing on a proposed site
plan is notification of the hearing to all abutters and all abutters to abutters, and to
any other property owner within three hundred (300) feet of the subject site, along
with a notice advertising the public hearing concerning the specific site plan in the
Gloucester Daily Times at least twice prior to the hearing, one point being no
more than fourteen (14) days prior to that hearing.
APPENDIX 6.A: YIELD PLAN MAP CHECKLIST
The Yield Plan map shall contain the following information on a 24 by 36 inch sheet:
A. Title block information along with the notation YIELD PLAN MAP. The title
block shall include the following information:
1. A development name.
2. Assessor map(s) and parcel number(s) for the overall site subject to OSRD.
3. The street address(es) for the overall site subject to OSRD.
4. The name(s) of the record owner(s).
5. Name(s) of the applicant(s).
6. Name of the Landscape Architect and Engineer that prepared the plan.
7. The address and phone numbers of the Landscape Architect and Engineer
that prepared the plan.
8. Sheet number and the total number of sheets in the set, labeled consecutively.
9. A title defining information contained on a specific sheet.
10. A block for revisions, with sufficient space to provide the date of revisions
and notation describing the changes.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 58 -
B. A detailed locus plan of the site and vicinity at one (1) inch equals a 1,000 feet,
showing the area road network, proposed roads, USGS topography, and other
features.
C. Horizontal scale of one inch equals forty feet.
D. A detailed legend;
E. North point;
F. Boundaries of the overall site subject to OSRD application and property lines
within 250 feet of the exterior property lines of the site.
G. Topography as shown by two foot contour lines for the site and within 250 feet;
H. Areas of the plan designated as wetlands, including all on-site local, state, and
federal regulatory (wetland) resource boundaries and buffer zones clearly
identified along with all flag locations numbered and placed upon the plan.
I. Location of existing storm drains and appurtenances on site and outside it
within 250 feet.
J. The location of soil test site(s), with reference labels placed upon the plan, if
applicable.
K. A table that displays the following:
1. Zoning district(s) in which the land is located.
2. The total area of the entire site.
3. The total area of any wetlands within the site.
4. Total number of building lots which could be derived in a grid subdivision
on the site.
L. The approximate location of a road that would provide access to a grid
subdivision on this site and its linear feet.
M. The approximate location of lots lines would define the lots within a grid
subdivision on the frontage and total area in square feet for each lot.
N. If the applicant seeks a waiver of strict compliance with these Regulations, a
note describing the waiver(s) requested.
APPENDIX 6.A2: YIELD PLAN NARRATIVE CHECKLIST
Required contents of the Yield Plan Narrative shall include:
A. A descriptive document title.
B. Name and address of the Landscape Architect and Engineer that prepared the
narrative.
C. Data sheets for the official soil percolation tests together with:
1. descriptions of the soil depth(s),
2. percolation rate(s), and
3. The composition and type of soil within the proposed development, if
applicable.
D. A table showing:
1. The application of Formula One, Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Lots
(see Zoning Ordinance section 5.15.7.3); and
2. Derivation of the Basic Maximum Number of Allowed Lots.
E. Description of anticipated yield, with approximate total number of bedrooms.
F. Description of rationale supporting requests by the applicant for waivers of
strict compliance with these regulations.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 59 -
APPENDIX 6.B: SKETCH PLAN MAP CHECKLIST
The sketch plan map shall contain the following information on a 24 by 36 inch sheet:
A. Title block along with the notation SKETCH PLAN MAP. Note: see the Yield
Plan section of these regulations for a description of the required title block
contents.
B. Notation with specific reference to the Yield Plan with its date of last revision.
C. Names of all abutters as determined from the most recent tax list.
D. Stamp and signature of a Landscape Architect.
E. At the option of the applicant, the stamp and signature of a Professional
Engineer (P.E.) that prepared the plan.
F. Locus plan of the site and vicinity at 1" = 1,000' (duplicate yield plan map
requirements).
G. Horizontal scale of one inch equals forty feet.
H. North point.
I. Lines showing the property boundaries for the overall site subject to an OSRD
application along with any property lines on the site and within 250 feet.
J. Topography of the land as shown by two (2) foot contour lines to an area on or
within 250 feet of the property.
K. Areas with slopes of twenty (20) percent or more on or within 250 feet of the
property.
L. Areas of the plan designated as wetlands, including all resource area (regulatory
wetland) boundaries and buffer zones clearly identified along with all flag
locations numbered and placed upon the plan, and approximate location of any
wetland within 250 feet.
M. The location on the site of existing natural and man-made landscape features
including: forests, fields, meadows, buildings, structures, utilities, archeological
and historic structures or points of interest, rock outcrops, boulder fields, stone
walls, steep slopes including cliffs, high points, major long views, forest glades,
major tree groupings, noteworthy tree specimens, habitats of endangered or
threatened wildlife, and also any of these features within 250 feet of the
property. This includes information identified in the Pre-Application submittals
as well as existing features requested by Planning Board to be included in a the
sketch plan based on a site visit.
N. The location of major watershed drainage divides within 250 feet of the site.
O. The location of any protected open space adjacent to the site.
P. The location of areas in the Watershed Protection Overlay District on site or
within 250 feet.
Q. Existing streets, ways, and/or driveways on the site or within 250 feet.
R. Existing easements on the site or within 250 feet.
S. The location of the site perimeter setback line with any part of this are proposed
to be disturbed by a way provided in an alternative marking.
T. That part of the site perimeter setback proposed to be designated as open space.
U. Area identified as Primary Conservation Area shall be marked, and any part of
that area that will be altered provided with an alternative marking.
V. Approximate Secondary Conservation Area shall be marked, and any part of
that area that area that will be disturbed provided in an alternative marking.
W. Approximate Potentially Developable Area shall be marked, and any part of that
area that will be disturbed provided in an alternative marking.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 60 -
X. The approximate proposed location of the open space set aside pursuant to
Zoning Ordinance Section 5.15.4.
Y. A breakdown of the proposed open space characteristics according to 5.15.4.1.
Z. General building envelopes which locate the individual house sites.
AA. Site features proposed to be demolished, or moved.
BB. Approximate areas where soils or rock are proposed to be altered more than two
(2) vertical feet.
CC. Delineation of areas where existing vegetative cover is proposed to be altered
(such as when it is proposed to remove vegetation) and any area cut or filled
less than two (2) vertical feet.
DD. Approximate areas and dimensions of each lot.
EE. The approximate location of any proposed streets, ways and driveways.
FF. Delineation of associated parking areas.
GG. A conceptual drainage plan showing:
HH. Watershed drainage area boundaries,
II. The approximate location of any major drainage devices;
JJ. The approximate location of major proposed infrastructure improvements,
including any lighting or cross-country utility line layouts.
KK. The approximate location of any trails or sidewalks.
LL. Landscaping plan with proposed location and specifications, including species,
notation to identify where existing vegetation is retained, and the provision of
landscaping for screening purposes. Landscaping plans may be augmented by
planting details, perspective drawings, and landscaping management programs.
MM.Description of rationale supporting requests by the applicant for waivers of
strict compliance with these regulations.
APPENDIX 6.B2: SKETCH PLAN NARRATIVE CHECKLIST
Required Content of the detailed Sketch Plan narrative shall include the following:
A. A qualitative description of the proposed characteristics and layout of open
space.
B. A description of the proposed site development program.
C. Discussion of the rationale for altering topography (providing major cuts and
fills) in Secondary Conservation Areas.
D. Discussion of the rationale for altering topography (providing major cuts and
fills) more than two vertical feet for areas greater than two thousand (2,000)
contiguous square feet within the Potentially Developable Area.
E. Proposed conceptual uses of open space along with an explanation of the
proposed concept for open space stewardship.
F. A description of how the stormwater management system will function on the
site and the proposed off-site impacts, including:
G. Some basic or preliminary calculations and descriptions of how it is proposed to
achieve stormwater management.
H. Description how proposed stormwater management will provide adequate
quantitative control of stormwater emissions.
I. Description how proposed stormwater management will provide adequate
qualitative control of stormwater emissions.
J. Preliminary description of how sanitary wastewater management will be
provided on the site.
K. Preliminary description of how drinking water will be supplied to the site.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 61 -
L. Preliminary description of how other utilities and infrastructure will be laid out
on the site.
M. Preliminary description of how landscaping and screening will be provided on
the site.
N. Description of the proposed landscaping management plan.
O. Description of the proposed site circulation system operation and management
plan.
P. Description of stormwater system operation and management plan.
Q. Description of how the applicant proposes to comply with the detailed design
standards.
R. Description of rationale supporting requests by the applicant for waivers of
strict compliance with these regulations.
S. An explanation of the rationale for major departures from the standards for
subdivision development provided in the Design and Improvement requirements
within the Subdivision Regulations.
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008
- 62 -
APPENDICES
Appendix A - page 63 Environmental Impact Evaluation
Appendix A-1 - page 67 Stormwater Management
Appendix B - page 72 Methodology and Standards for Determination of Nutrient
Loading
Appendix C - page 73 Design Standards for Street and Related Construction
Appendix D - page 75 Planning Board Forms (Form A through Form N)
Appendix E - page 77 Index of Amendments to Subdivision Rules and Regulations











- 74 -
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008

- 76 -
As Amended by the Gloucester Planning Board – July 2008























Page 77
APPENDIX E
Index of Amendments to Subdivision Rules and Regulations
Year Date Section(s) Description of Amendment
1979 03/06
1983 03/07
1986 05/08
1987 02/09
05/05
1988 01/23
04/25
1989 09/19
1990 12/10
2002 04/22 4.3.4 Dead-End Streets: Change 600’ to 500’
09/09 3.8.2, 3.8.4, 3.8.5 Performance Bond Guarantee
2003 02/24 4.4.1(a) 1 & 2 Sewer Connection in Ward 5-2
04/28 2.9 Pre-Application - Adopted
08/25 6.1-6.3 OSRD Rules and Regulations
2006 07/10 2.1, 2.2, 2.2.4, Steep Slopes
2.2.4, 2.2.6, 2.2.7,
3.1.3, 3.2.1(r), 3.2.4(k),
4.3.1(a), 4.10
2007 01/08 3.8.5 Change in Security, Reductions & Extensions
08/27 2.2; 3.1.2; 5.5 ANR Approval; Preliminary Subdivision Filing
2008 04/08 3.1.2,3.2.1,3.7 Cluster Development Filing Fees