Town of Hingham
GENERAL BY-LAWS
Town of Hingham General By-Laws
Revised through 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Last Revision Month/Year or Year Written
Article 1 General Provisions 9/1989
Article 2 Town Meeting and Notice Thereof 7/2013
Article 3 Procedure at Town Meetings 8/2014
Article 4 Officers, Boards and Committees - General 4/1991
Article 5 A Selectmen 5/2017
Article 5 B Town Administrator 8/2015
Article 6 Town Clerk 8/2010
Article 7 Assessors 1936
Article 8 Town Treasurer 8/1996
Article 9 Board of Health 1936
Article 10 Public Ways/Lands
1 No structures on public ways
2 Signs over public ways
3 Other structure over public ways
4 Private persons obstructing travel on public ways
5 Police authority to direct public way traffic
6 Obstruction of public way by vehicles
6A Towing vehicles obstructing snow removal
7 Distribution of printed matter in public place
8 Obstruction of public way by animals
9 Throwing missiles, shooting or playing on public way
10 Improper behavior in public place
11 Loitering or obstructing public way
12 Digging, place structure or moving building on public way
13 Permit to restore public way
14 Discharge of water on public way
15 Coasting on public way
16 Marking public way
17 Driving through funeral processions
18 Firearms on public way
19 Exceptions to fireworks on public way
20 Damage to public property
21 Regulations on entrances to buildings from public way
22 Snow or ice falling from building on public way
23 Horses and automobiles on sidewalk
24 Permit for pole in public way
8/2014
(#9)
25 Vegetation obstructing public way
26 Charges for providing public way lies and grades
27 Marking private way
28 Petitions for acceptance of private way
29 Definition of vehicle in Article 10
30 Peeping and spying in buildings
30A Drinking alcoholic beverages on public way
31 Penalty for violation of Article 10
32 Discharge of firearms on private property
33 Regulation of activity in Bare Cove Park
34 Removal of soil, loam, sand or gravel
35 Unregistered motor vehicles in residential district
36 Size of Street Numbers on Buildings
Article 11 Parades and Open Air Meetings 1936
Article 12 Junk Collectors and Dealers 4/1991
Article 13 Old or Second Hand & Precious Metal Dealers 1981
Article 14 Advisory and Capital Outlay Committees 8/2010
Article 15 Harbor By-Law 8/2010
Article 16 Council On Aging 5/2017
Article 17 Dog Regulations 8/2009
Article 18 Fees for Plumbing and Gas Permits 5/2017
Article 19 Fire Districts 1975
Article 20 Fees for Explosives & Inflammable Materials 4/1997
Article 21 Fees for Building Permits 11/2009
Article 22 Wetlands Protection By-Law 8/2015
Article 23 Sewer Appropriation By-Law 5/2016
Article 24 Parking for Handicapped Persons 8/2003
Article 25 Fees for Weights and Measures 1986
Article 26 On-site Waste Water Disposal System Inspection 1985
Article 27 Publication of Building Permits Issued 1986
Article 28 Historic Districts By-Law 1987
Article 29 Electrical Permit Fees 11/2009
Article 30 Rules/Regulations Governing Conservation Land Use 8/2014
Article 31 Demolition of Historically Significant Buildings or Structures 8/2012
Article 32 Fire Prevention Codes 8/2009
Article 33 Regulations of Vendors, Hawkers and Peddlers 1990
Article 34 Fees for Automatic Amusement Devices 1990
Article 35 Rollerskating and Skateboarding 1992
Article 36 Solicitation 8/2009
Article 37 Country Club Management Committee 8/2009
Article 38 Community Preservation Committee 5/2016
Article 39 Hingham Affordable Housing Trust 6/2018
Article 40 The Naming of Buildings and Public Lane 8/2010
Article 41 False Alarms 8/2010
Article 42 Noise Control 8/2014
Article 43 Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed 6/2018
Article 44 Plastic Bag Reduction and Encourage Reusable Bags 8/2019
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1 - All by-laws adopted prior to March 2, 1936, are hereby repealed.
SECTION 2 - These by-laws may be amended or repealed in whole or in part:
(1) at an annual town meeting, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the voters
present and voting thereon; or
(2) at a special town meeting by the affirmative vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the voters present and voting thereon.
SECTION 3 - If any Article or Section of any Article of these by-laws is declared
unconstitutional or illegal by any court, or is disapproved by any state authority having
jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions of these by-laws shall not be
affected thereby.
ARTICLE 2
TOWN MEETING AND NOTICE THEREOF
SECTION 1 - The annual town meeting for the transaction of all business except the
election of such officers and the determination of such matters as by law are required
to be elected or determined by ballot shall be held on the fourth Monday of April in
each year at seven o'clock P.M., except that in the year 1976 said annual town
meeting shall be held on the first Monday of May at seven o'clock P.M.
SECTION 2 - The annual election of such and the determination of such matters as
by law are required to be elected or determined by ballot shall be held on the
Saturday following the fourth Monday of April in each year. At this and all town
elections the polls shall be opened at eight o'clock A.M. and remain open until eight
o'clock P.M.
SECTION 3 - At state elections the polls shall open at seven o'clock A.M. and remain
open until eight o'clock P.M.
SECTION 4 - (a) Except as otherwise required by law, notice of every town meeting
shall be given by posting, at least seven days before the day appointed for the
meeting, an attested copy of the warrant therefor in the Town Office Building.
Compliance with this paragraph (a) as to any meeting shall constitute valid notice
thereof.
(b) If the Hingham Journal or any other newspaper is at the time circulated
in the town as a local newspaper, the Selectmen shall publish in one such
newspaper, at least seven (7) days before the date on which at any meeting there is
to be an election of officers, or other action by official ballot, a statement of the time
and place at which the polls will be open, and a copy of so much of the warrant as
refers to the business then and there to be done, provided that except as otherwise
provided by law compliance with the provisions of this paragraph (b) shall not be a
requisite of valid notice of any meeting, and noncompliance therewith shall not affect
the validity of any meeting or action taken thereat.
SECTION 5 - (a) At least seven (7) days before the day appointed in the warrant for
any annual town meeting, the Selectmen shall cause a copy of the warrant and a
copy of the report of the advisory committee thereon to be delivered to each occupied
dwelling house, tenement and hotel in the town, by mail or by any method determined
by the Selectmen. Provided, however, that if it appears to the Selectmen that for any
reason timely distribution of the warrant under this paragraph will not be made, and if
the Hingham Journal or any other newspaper is at the time circulated in the town as a
local newspaper, they shall publish an attested copy of the entire warrant in one such
newspaper at least seven (7) days before the day appointed in the warrant for the
meeting.
(b) At least fourteen days before the day appointed in the warrant for any
special town meeting, the Selectmen shall cause a copy of the warrant to be
delivered to each occupied dwelling house, tenement and hotel in the town, by mail
or by any method determined by the Selectmen. Provided, however, that if it appears
to the Selectmen that for any reason the timely distribution of the warrant under this
paragraph will not be made, and if the Hingham Journal or any other newspaper is at
the time circulated in the town as a local newspaper, they shall publish an attested
copy of the entire warrant in one such newspaper at least fourteen days before the
day appointed in the warrant for the meeting.
(c) As soon practicable after the adjournment of any town meeting, on a
vote to adjourn to another day, the Selectmen shall cause a brief statement of the
day and hour to which the adjournment was voted and of the business remaining to
come before the meeting to be posted in the same place where notice of the town
meeting was posted pursuant to Section 4 of this Article, and if the period of
adjournment will permit, shall cause a similar notice to be published in some one
newspaper, if any, circulated in the town as a local newspaper.
(d) Except as otherwise required by law, compliance with this Section 5
shall not be a requisite of valid notice of any meeting of any action taken thereat.
SECTION 6 - In connection with each article made a part of the warrant for a town
meeting there shall be inserted in the warrant, the name of the town board,
department or other town entity proposing the article, and in the case of an article
inserted pursuant to a petition to the Selectmen, the name of the first person signing
such petition and the words ‘and others’.’’
SECTION 7 - The warrant for the annual town meeting shall close on the twentieth
day of January, except that the closing date for all zoning articles shall be December
first; provided, however, that the Selectmen shall open the warrant within such period
for the insertion of additional articles to the extent that compliance with any provision
of law shall require, or whenever in their reasonable opinion there remains sufficient
time for compliance with the provisions of Sections 4, 5, and 6 of this Article and with
the provisions of Article 14. The warrant for a special town meeting shall close on the
day determined by the Selectmen who shall cause notice of said date to be posted in
the Town Office Building.
SECTION 8 - (a) Each matter produced for insertion in a warrant for an annual or
special town meeting, whether by a Town board or by petition, shall be submitted to
the Selectmen in the form of the complete text of the proposed article accompanied
by the full name and contact information of a knowledgeable representative of the
proponent. In the case of an article submitted by petition, the submission also shall
include the required signatures of at least ten registered voters of the Town in the
case of an Annual Town Meeting or 100 registered voters of the Town in the case of
a Special Town Meeting.
(b) The Selectmen, no later than ten days after any of the following: the
January 20th date described in SECTION 7, the closing date of a re-opened warrant
described in SECTION 7 or the closing date of the warrant for a special town meeting
shall: (i) cause to be posted in a clearly identified position on the Town’s website, a
complete copy of each submission described in Section 8(a) above; and, (ii) transmit
a copy of such submissions to the Advisory Committee; and (iii) make available for
viewing or purchase a paper copy of such submissions.”
SECTION 9 - The number of voters constituting a quorum in order to convene the
first session of a Regular or Special Town Meeting shall be three hundred. The
number of voters necessary to convene the second or any subsequent session of a
Regular or Special Town Meeting shall be two hundred. Once convened, the quorum
to transact business at any Regular or Special Town Meeting shall be two hundred;
provided, however, that a number of less than two hundred may from time to time
adjourn the same.
ARTICLE 3
PROCEDURE AT TOWN MEETINGS
SECTION 1 - All sessions of any town meeting shall be public to the extent required
by law. At any session of a town meeting held for the transaction of town business
(other than for the election of such officers as are required by law to be elected by
ballot) no person whose name is not on the list of voters shall be admitted to that part
of the hall reserved for voters, and this provision shall be enforced by use of such list.
The moderator shall determine the bounds of the reserved space.
SECTION 2 - Printed copies of the warrant shall be furnished the voters at all town
meetings.
SECTION 3 - Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their order, unless the
meeting by vote otherwise determines.
SECTION 4 - All reports, motions, and resolutions submitted for the consideration of
the meeting involving the expenditure of money shall be in writing and any other
report, motion, or resolution shall be reduced to writing if the moderator so directs.
SECTION 5 - No person shall speak more than twice upon any question, except for
the brief correction of an error in or misunderstanding of his previous statement,
unless all other who have not spoken on the question shall have spoken if they desire
to do so, and unless leave of the meeting is first obtained.
Section 6 – Without the permission of the moderator, no person shall speak on any
subject for more than six (6) minutes for the first time or more that three (3) minutes
for the second time.
SECTION 7 - Every person desiring to speak shall arise and address the chair and,
after recognition is obtained, shall stand while speaking, unless the moderator
otherwise directs.
SECTION 8 - Except as otherwise required by law, all votes shall be taken in the first
instance by voice vote or by electronic vote (“E-vote”), as determined by the
moderator. In the event of a voice vote, the moderator shall call the vote, including
votes requiring a supermajority as to which the moderator may declare that the
required supermajority has voted in favor, unless a count is required under the
following provisions. If the moderator is in doubt as to the results of a voice vote or if
seven (7) voters rise to request a count, then a standing vote or an E-vote, as
determined by the moderator, shall be taken in such manner as the moderator may
determine, but if the Advisory Committee or fifty (50) voters promptly call for a count,
then a ballot vote or an E-vote, as determined by the moderator, shall be taken, or act
on anything relating thereto?
SECTION 9 - When a question is before the meeting, the following motions, to wit:
To adjourn,
To lay on the table,
For the previous question.
To postpone to a time certain,
To commit, recommit or refer
To amend,
To postpone indefinitely,
shall be received and shall have precedence in the foregoing order, and the first three
shall be decided without debate.
SECTION 10 - No vote shall be reconsidered except after the affirmative vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the voters present and voting on a motion to reconsider such vote.
SECTION 11 - A motion to reconsider any vote must be made before the final
adjournment of the meeting at which the vote was passed; provided, however, that
such motion to reconsider shall not be made at an adjourned session of the meeting
unless the mover has given notice of his intention to make such a motion either at the
session of the meeting at which the vote was passed or by written notice to the town
clerk not less than twelve hours before the hour to which adjournment has been
voted and not more than forty-eight hours after the hour of adjournment of such
session. A vote shall not be reconsidered a second time or after a motion to
reconsider it has failed to pass.
SECTION 12 - At a special town meeting, not held within the annual town meeting,
no amount of money shall be appropriated for any purpose (1) if the Advisory
Committee recommends to the meeting that no amount be appropriated for that
purpose or (2) which is in excess of the amount recommended to the meeting by the
Advisory Committee for that purpose, except in either case by the affirmative vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of the voters present and voting on such appropriation.
(Section 12 was submitted by the Town Clerk to the Attorney General on 7/27/87. It
was adopted after no action by the Attorney General within 90 days as specified in
Chapter 40, Section 32 of the Massachusetts General Laws)
AMENDED
ARTICLE 4
OFFICERS, BOARDS, AND COMMITTEES -- GENERAL
SECTION 1 - With the exception of the town accountant, each head of a town
department and each board or committee, appointed or elected, shall, on or before
the twentieth day of January of each year, file with the selectmen a written report of
his or their doings during the preceding calendar year, with recommendations, if any,
for action by the town.
SECTION 2 - Each officer, department head, board, or committee authorized to
expend money shall, on December twentieth of each year, transmit to the town
accountant all un- paid bills outstanding as of that date. Books of the town shall be
closed December thirty-first of each year.
SECTION 3 - Each officer, department head, board, or committee making any rule or
regulation shall file a copy thereof with the town clerk within ten days after the effective
date thereof.
SECTION 4 - Each officer, department head, board, or other committee shall keep
the original of all plans, whether tracings or sketches, made under his, her or its
direction, or file the same with the Town Clerk.
SECTION 5 - Each officer, shall pay into the town treasury all fees received by him by
virtue of his office, including fees received under the provisions of Section 3 of
Chapter 129A of the General Laws of the Commonwealth (inserted by Section 1 of
Chapter 329 of the Acts of 1933) and Section 147 of Chapter 140 of the General
Laws.
SECTION 6 - No officer, department head, board or committee authorized to expend
money shall make purchases of supplies or material or contract for services to be
rendered to the town without first issuing a written purchase order therefor on
prescribed forms; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not
apply to salaries or wages of part- time or regularly employed officers, clerks, and
wage earners of any department of the town. All purchase orders shall be in
triplicate; one to be designated for the vendor, one to be designated for and delivered
to the town accountant, and one to be designated for the files of the officer,
department head, board, or committee issuing the order. Purchase orders issued by
the School Committee shall be sufficiently authenticated by the signature of the
Superintendent of Schools or of such one assistant to the Superintendent of Schools
as the School Committee may designate for that purpose from time to time. The
order designated for the vendor shall not be delivered to the vendor until the town
accountant shall have certified thereon that there is sufficient unencumbered balance
of the appropriation to be charged to pay the amount due under the order; provided,
however, that verbal orders for supplies, materials, or services to be rendered may be
given for an amount not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00). All verbal orders shall
be confirmed in writing on prescribed purchase order forms on the day the orders are
given and immediately transmitted to the town accountant and shall be subject to his
certification as aforesaid.
SECTION 7 - The town accountant shall prescribe the methods of accounting and
forms to be used by the several departments of the town concerned with the
collection or disbursement of money and such methods and forms shall conform to
the requirements prescribed by the statutes of the Commonwealth and any rules or
regulations made thereunder.
SECTION 8 - PRE-EMPLOYMENT PHYSICAL BY-LAW
A. Nondiscrimination in Employment.
The Town shall not discriminate against qualified handicapped persons by reason of
their handicap(s) in its employment practices. For purposes of this section,
"handicapped person" means any person who (i) has a physical or mental impairment
which substantially limits one or more major life activities (ii) has a record of such an
impairment, or (iii) is regarded as having such an impairment; provided, however, that
such term does not include any individual who is an alcoholic or drug abuser whose
current use of alcohol or drugs prevents such person from performing the duties of
the job in question or whose employment, by reason of such current alcohol or drug
abuse, would constitute a direct threat to the property or the safety of others. For
purposes of this section, "qualified handicapped person" means a person who, with
reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the job in
question.
B. Reasonable Accommodation.
The Town will make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental
limitations of an otherwise qualified handicapped applicant or employee unless the
accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the program in
question, or would impose an unreasonable restriction on the essential functions of
the job in question.
C. Employment Criteria.
The Town will not use employment tests or criteria that unreasonably discriminate
against handicapped persons, as defined herein. Employment tests or criteria will be
adapted for use by persons who have handicaps that impair sensory, manual, or
speaking skills.
D. Preemployment Inquiries.
Except as provided in subsection (E), no one acting for the Town may conduct a
preemployment medical examination or make preemployment inquiry of an applicant
as to whether the applicant is a handicapped person or as to the nature or severity of
a handicap. Preemployment inquiry may, however, be made into an applicant's
ability to perform job-related functions.
E. Medical Examinations.
Town Officers and boards having authority to employ may condition an officer of
employment on the results of a medical examination conducted prior to the
employee's entrance on duty; provided that (i) all entering employees are subjected
to such an examination regardless of handicap, and (ii) the results of such an
examination are used only in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
Each medical examination will be conducted by a physician selected and approved
by the Town, which physician may be the personal physician of the employee to be
examined. Any physician approved to conduct such an examination will be furnished
with a description of the essential functions of the job offered to the applicant. The
approved physician will conduct or cause to be conducted such examination and
laboratory tests as he/she considers appropriate to determine whether the employee
is physically fit for employment.
The examining physician will make his/her report in writing to the Town officer or
board having authority to employ. After reviewing the examining physicians report,
the Town officer or board will notify the employee whether the offer of employment is
to be confirmed or revoked. Before revoking an offer of employment, the Town
officer or board will consider whether reasonable accommodation can be made in
accordance with subsection (B) above. Information obtained in accordance with this
subsection as to the medical condition or history of the applicant shall be collected
and maintained on separate forms that shall be accorded confidentiality as medical
records, except that:
1) Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding restrictions on the
work or duties of handicapped persons and regarding necessary accommodations;
2) First-aid and safety personnel may be informed, where appropriate, if the
condition might require emergency treatment; and
3) Authorized state and federal officials will be provided relevant information
upon request.
ARTICLE 5A
SELECTMEN
SECTION 1 -- To the extent permitted by law and except as otherwise provided by
law or these by- laws, the selectmen shall have the general direction and
management of the property and affairs of the town. This section shall not apply to
property in the custody or use of any town department, officer, or committee. The
selectmen are authorized and empowered, in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 41, section 23A, of the Massachusetts General Laws, to appoint a town
administrator as provided in Article 5B of these by-laws.
SECTION 2 -- The selectmen shall cause to be printed and made available to
residents before the annual town meeting, the annual town report, which shall contain
a selectmen’s report, a report of the town administrator, and the reports provided for
by Section 1 of Article 4 of these by- laws. The report of the doings of the selectmen
shall include the following relating to the town administrator position: (i) a statement
as to the status of any employment contract between the town and the town
administrator describing its key terms, including, but not limited to, the term of the
contract, total compensation (including salary and benefits), termination, removal and
non-renewal provisions; and (ii) a statement clearly indicating any authority or
responsibility listed in Section 5B hereof contemplated to be assigned or delegated to
the town administrator which has not been so assigned or delegated and any which
has been modified or withdrawn from assignment or delegation to the town
administrator and the rationale therefor, together with an affirmation that all other
listed authorities and responsibilities in said Section 5B continue to be assigned or
delegated.
SECTION 3 - The selectmen may appear, either personally or by counsel, before any
court, committee of the Legislature, or by any federal, state, or county board or
commission or other tribunal, to protect the interests of the town, but they are not
authorized hereby to commit the town to any course of action.
SECTION 4 - Except as otherwise provided by law, by these by- laws, or by vote of
the town in any instance, all deeds, conveying land or interests in land executed by
the selectmen, pursuant to due authorization, shall be valid if signed by a majority of
the selectmen and sealed with the town seal.
Section 4A – In addition to such other requirements as are established by law, the
Board of Selectmen shall not transfer or dispose of real property of the Town unless
Town Meeting, by majority vote, has approved the use or uses intended for the
property upon its disposition. For purposes of this section, Town real property shall
mean any land and/or buildings owned, held or controlled in the name of the Town by
the Board of Selectmen, the School Committee or Conservation Commission.
Intended use or uses of the property shall refer only to the use or uses of the property
immediately after disposition and approval of the use shall not operate as a restriction
on the property thereafter.
SECTION 5 - The selectmen shall make and enforce rules and regulations consistent
with law and these by-laws for the government of the police department and shall
cause copies of the same to be printed for the use of the police department.
SECTION 6 - The selectmen, acting on the advice of counsel, may at any time settle
any claim, demand, or suit against the town which in their opinion it is advisable in the
best interests of the town to settle, but only if the amount to be paid does not exceed
the balance then remaining of funds appropriated for or transferred to the claims
account in the then-current year.
SECTION 7 - The selectmen may institute and prosecute any and all actions, suits, or
legal proceedings which they shall deem necessary or advisable in the interests of
the town, and may appear in and defend any action, suit, or legal proceeding brought
against or involving the rights or interests of the town; and they may employ counsel
to act in the foregoing matters whenever they deem it necessary.
SECTION 7A - In the event that any civil action, suit, or proceeding, of whatever
nature, is brought by any party other than the town or the Commonwealth against a
present or former officer, department head, or member of a board or committee in his
individual capacity, based upon or arising out of an act or a failure to act of such
officer, department head, or member which is or purports to be in his official capacity,
the Board of Selectmen shall, upon the written request of such officer, department
head, or member, retain legal counsel of its choice for the defense thereof and pay,
from any available general appropriation for legal services to the town, all costs and
expenses of such defense, including the fees of said counsel, and a payment of
twenty dollars ($20.00) per day to any such officer, department head, or member of a
board or committee who is not a full-time employee of the town and who appears at
such civil action, suit, or proceeding after and upon issuance of a summons, provided
that such officer, department head, or member shall enter into an undertaking, in
such form and with such security or without security as the selectmen shall determine
to repay to the town all such costs and expenses, including any payment or payments
of twenty dollars ($20.00), directly related to the defense of such officer, department
head, or member in his individual capacity as may have been paid or required to be
paid by the town in the event that such officer, department head, or member is finally
adjudged in such action, suit, or proceeding not to have acted in good faith in what he
reasonably believed to be the performance of his official duties.
SECTION 8 – (A) The Town’s Chief Procurement Officer shall be responsible for
disposing of all tangible supplies that are no longer useful to the Town but that have a
resale or salvage value of less than $10,000. The term “supplies” includes motor
vehicles, machinery, computer equipment, furniture, and other items of personal
property, but does not include real property.
(B) Upon the request of any department head, board, or committee, the Chief
Procurement Officer or his / her designee may declare supplies to be surplus, and
may approve the supplies for disposition, if those supplies are no longer useful to the
Town.
(C) Any supplies declared to be surplus and approved for disposition shall be
disposed of in accordance with the following procedures, compliance with which shall
be the responsibility of the Chief Procurement Officer:
(1) The Chief Procurement Officer or his / her designee shall circulate a list of the
supplies to be disposed of to other Town departments, including the School
Department, and shall convey the supplies to any department that wants them;
(2) In the event that no other Town department claims the supplies, the Chief
Procurement Officer or his / her designee shall value the supplies in a commercially
reasonable manner.
(3) (a) If the supplies are valued at $10,000 or more, the Chief Procurement Officer
shall comply with the requirements of Massachusetts General Laws chapter 30B,
sections 15(b) through (d).
(b) If the supplies are valued at less than $10,000 but more than $100, the Chief
Procurement Officer shall utilize any one or more of the following methods of
disposition, with the intent of maximizing the return on revenue to the Town:
(i) Trade-in the supplies with the purchase of equipment;
(ii) Sell the supplies to another governmental unit that is known to be interested;
(iii) Sell the supplies to the highest bidder after advertising the supplies' availability on
the Internet, at the Town Office Building, and / or in a newspaper published in the
Town;
(iv) Sell the supplies at public auction, notice of which shall conform to
Massachusetts General Laws chapter 30B, section 5(c); or
(v) Sell the supplies at private sale, except that no such private sale shall be made to
any employee or elected or appointed official of the Town;
(c) If the supplies are valued at $100 or less, the Chief Procurement Officer may
utilize any one or more of the methods of disposition specified in the preceding
subsection. Alternatively, the Chief Procurement Officer may recycle or trash the
supplies or may donate them to a charitable organization that has received a tax
exemption from the United States by reason of its charitable nature, as he / she
deems appropriate.
(4) The Town shall reserve the right to accept or reject any or all offers to purchase
surplus supplies. All surplus supplies shall be sold on an “as is / where is” basis, with
no warranty of any kind, express or implied.
(5) All monies from the disposition of supplies under this procedure shall be payable
to the Town. All revenue from the disposal of supplies under this procedure shall be
deposited with the Town Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund.
(6) If the Town receives no offers for a surplus supply, the supply may be disposed of
in any commercially reasonable manner.
SECTION 9 - The total assessed upon any individual estate by reason of construction
of a new sidewalk in an abutting way or the reconstruction of a sidewalk already
existing in such way with material of more permanent character than that with which it
was originally constructed shall not exceed one percent (1%) of the value of such
estate as fixed by the last preceding assessment for taxes.
ARTICLE 5B
TOWN ADMINISTRATOR
* See Special Act (An Act Relative To The Town Administrator In The Town Of Hingham
approved on September 9, 2016)
SECTION 1 -- The board of selectmen is authorized and empowered, in accordance with
the provisions of chapter 41, section 23A of the Massachusetts General Laws, to appoint
a town administrator for a term of one or three years or any such longer term as may
hereafter be authorized by law and, in its discretion, for successive terms thereafter, and
to remove him or her at its discretion. The town administrator shall act by and for the
selectmen in any matter which the selectmen may assign to him or her relating to the
administration of the affairs of the town or of any town office or department under the
supervision and control of the selectmen, and, with the approval of the selectmen, may
perform such other duties as may be requested of him or her by any other town officer,
board, committee or commission. A town administrator appointed under the provisions
of this section shall be sworn to the faithful performance of his or her duties. During the
time he or she holds office, he or she shall devote full time to the position of town
administrator and shall not engage in any other business or occupation and shall not hold
elective town office, but may be appointed by the selectmen or, with their approval, by
any other town officer, board, committee or commission, to any other town office or other
position consistent with this office.
The town administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications and shall be a person of proven professional ability fitted by
education, training and previous full-time employment in a responsible public or business
administrative position. No appointee shall have held elective office within the town for a
period of 12 months prior to his or her appointment as town administrator.
The position of town administrator shall not come within the personnel by-law. The board
of selectmen may enter into an employment contract with the town administrator.
The board of selectmen shall provide the town administrator with an annual review of his
or her job performance with input from department heads, employees and members of
elected and appointed boards. As part of its annual review, the selectmen shall evaluate
the town administrator’s performance, including his or her ability to supervise municipal
employees properly, administer town government effectively, effectuate policy and
accomplish established goals.
SECTION 2 -- Subject to chapter 41, section 23A of the Massachusetts General Laws
and subject to assignment of authority to the town administrator by the board of
selectmen, the town administrator is hereby designated the Chief Administrative Officer
of the town and is responsible for (i) the administration and supervision of all town
departments and appointed personnel under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen
and as otherwise provided by law or these by-laws; (ii) directing the overall activity of the
municipality when exercising his/her authority for finances, operations and oversight; and
(iii) implementing town policies. Pursuant to assignment by the board of selectmen, the
town administrator shall have additional authority and responsibility as follows:
A. The authority and responsibility to exercise overall responsibility for human
resources for the town, including but not limited to (i) authority for hiring, supervision,
evaluation, discipline and removal of town employees under the jurisdiction of the board
of selectmen and (ii) the responsibility to assist the personnel board in the implementation
and administration of the personnel by-law and salary and classification plan and in that
regard:
With respect to the appointment of the chief of police, the fire chief and the superintendent
of public works, the town administrator shall coordinate the recruitment and screening of
suitable candidates for consideration and appointment by vote of the board of selectmen.
The town administrator shall provide the selectmen with relevant materials for the
evaluation of no more than five such candidates. In the event that the selectmen do not
appoint any of the candidates, the town administrator will continue to present one or more
candidates until one is appointed. Any of the chief of police, the fire chief and the
superintendent of the department of public works may be removed by vote of the board
of selectmen after consultation with the town administrator.
With respect to the appointment of department heads under the jurisdiction of the board
of selectmen other than the chief of police, the fire chief and the superintendent of public
works and except as may otherwise be provided by law, the town administrator shall
appoint and remove all such department heads. The town administrator shall consult with
the appropriate elected or appointed board, commission, committee or official as well as
the board of selectmen prior to making these department head appointments or
undertaking their removal. Prior to finalizing such a department head appointment, the
town administrator shall provide notice to the board of selectmen of the anticipated
appointment and the terms and conditions of employment for the appointment. The board
of selectmen shall approve or disapprove the appointment and the terms and conditions
of employment within 14 days of such notice. A failure of the board of selectmen to act
within this 14 day period shall be deemed approval of the appointment and the terms and
conditions thereof. Any termination or removal of such department heads shall be subject
to the same notice and approval requirements for appointments as set forth in this
paragraph.
The town administrator or his or her designee shall appoint and remove all other town
employees under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen except as may be required by
Civil Service.
The town administrator shall be responsible for the supervision, management, evaluation
and discipline of all other town employees under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen.
The town administrator annually shall be responsible for performance evaluations of all
department heads and shall oversee the performance evaluation program conducted by
department heads for employees within their respective departments. The town
administrator shall act as hearing officer for appeals of Civil Service disciplinary
suspensions of five days or less and act on behalf of the board of selectmen in the
grievance process under collective bargaining agreements.
B. The authority and responsibility to, in a timely manner, prepare, develop and
assemble the town budget for all non-school departments and accounts and following the
development of the budget, the town administrator shall submit the entire budget
document to the board of selectmen for review. The town administrator shall forward the
budget document, including any alterations approved and incorporated therein by the
board of selectmen, to the Advisory Committee.
C. The authority and responsibility to act as the Chief Procurement Officer for the town.
In that regard, the town administrator shall exercise full authority for procurement as
provided under chapter 30B of the Massachusetts General Laws. The town administrator
shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies, materials, services and equipment,
and shall have the authority to award and sign all contracts up to $50,000, in addition to
all MassHighway contracts and state and federal grants. Any contract over $50,000 shall
require the approval of the board of selectmen. The town administrator shall have the
authority to sign all contracts approved by the board of selectmen on behalf of the town.
All contracts and grants signed by the town administrator shall be promptly reported, in
writing, to the board of selectmen.
D. The authority and responsibility to:
1. Attend all regular and special meetings of the board of selectmen, unless
unavailable for reasonable cause, where he or she shall have a voice, but no vote, in all
of its proceedings and keep full and complete records of the same;
2. Keep the board of selectmen fully informed as to the needs of the town and make
recommendations to the board with regard thereto;
3. Keep the board of selectmen fully informed on departmental operations, fiscal
matters, administrative actions and provide regular reports to the board on all such
matters and provide special reports to the board at its request;
4. Coordinate collective bargaining negotiations under the jurisdiction of the board of
selectmen, on behalf of and at the direction of the board of selectmen;
5. Administer and enforce collective bargaining agreements and other employment
agreements under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen at the direction of and on
behalf of the board of selectmen;
6. Manage all real and personal property of the town under the jurisdiction of the
board of selectmen;
7. Oversee the purchase of all supplies, materials, services and equipment, and
approve the award of all contracts for all town departments exclusive of the schools,
subject to Section C above;
8. Determine the compensation of all non-school employees within the limits of the
town’s salary and classification plan and/or collective bargaining agreements and other
employment agreements and subject to the personnel by-law;
9. Coordinate the activities of all appointed and elected boards, committees and
commissions and have the authority to require such bodies and individuals to meet with
and provide information to the town administrator, at reasonable times for the purpose of
coordination and financial planning. In addition, the town administrator shall be a
resource to all elected and appointed boards and departments;
10. Reorganize, abolish, consolidate or establish any department or position under the
town administrator’s authority as the town administrator deems appropriate from time to
time, subject to the approval of the board of selectmen before implementation and funding
by town meeting, if needed;
11. Supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all town
departments under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen and for all functions for which
the town administrator is given responsibility, authority or control by the board of
selectmen;
12. Delegate, authorize or direct any employee appointed under the jurisdiction of the
board of selectmen to exercise any power, duty or responsibility which the office of the
town administrator is authorized to exercise;
13. Administer and enforce either directly or through a person or persons supervised
by the town administrator, all provisions of the laws of the Commonwealth applicable to
the town, all by-laws, and all regulations and policies established by the board of
selectmen;
14. Investigate or inquire into the affairs of any town department under the jurisdiction
of the board of selectmen and have access to all books and records of the same;
15. Attend all sessions of town meeting, whether regular or special, unless unavailable
for reasonable cause and answer all questions addressed to the town administrator,
particularly those questions that are related to town finances, warrant articles and matters
under the general supervision of the town administrator; and
16. Coordinate the prosecution, defense and/or compromise of all litigation to which
the town is a party solely at the direction of and on behalf of the board of selectmen.
E. The town administrator shall exercise such additional authority and perform such
other duties as are lawfully assigned by the board of selectmen.
ARTICLE 6
TOWN CLERK
SECTION 1 - The town clerk shall provide, for use at each town meeting, in
accordance with the provisions of these by- laws, (1) a voting list and (2) ballots which
shall be divided into two sections by a perforation and shall have the word "Yes"
printed on one section and the word "No" on the other, each in letters approximately
one-half inch high.
SECTION 2 - He shall keep a file of all reports submitted pursuant to Section 1 of
Article 4 of these by-laws and of all documents, plans, and copies of rules and
regulations relating to the affairs of the town which come into his custody. He shall
suitably index all the records of the town in his custody in a manner convenient for
reference and examination.
SECTION 3 - He shall have stated daily hours for the transaction of business and
shall give public notice thereof.
SECTION 4 - Whenever a voter shall have given notice to the town clerk of an
intention to reconsider any vote, pursuant to the provisions of Section 11 of Article 3
of these by- laws, the town clerk shall immediately post a copy of such notice at the
place where the notice of the meeting was posted.
SECTION 5 - The town clerk may in his discretion employ a competent stenographer
to take in shorthand, after being duly sworn, the entire proceedings of any town
meeting, and he or, with the consent of the selectmen, any other town officer,
department head, board, or committee, may require the stenographer to transcribe
the whole or any part of his notes of such proceedings. The stenographer's notes
shall be filed with the town clerk and retained as part of the public records of the
town. The stenographer shall be paid by the town for services as aforesaid. Any
voter may at any time require the stenographer to transcribe and furnish to him a
record of the whole or any part of any proceedings taken by the stenographer
provided he shall pay the stenographer in advance therefor at the usual rates.
SECTION 6 - Except as otherwise may be required by law, the following fees shall be
charged by the town clerk:
(a) For filing and indexing assignment for benefit of creditors, five dollars.
(b) For entering amendment of a record of the birth of a child born out of wedlock,
subsequently legitimatized, ten dollars.
(c) For correcting errors in a record of birth, ten dollars.
(d) For furnishing certificate of a birth, ten dollars.
(e) For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of birth, five dollars.
(f) For entering delayed record of birth, ten dollars.
(g) For filing certificate of a person conducting business under any title other than
his real name, fifty dollars.
(h) For filing, by a person conducting business under any title other than his real
name, of a statement of change or residence, or of his discontinuance,
retirement, or withdrawal from or of a change of location of, such business,
twenty dollars.
(i) For furnishing certified copy of certificate of person conducting business under
any title other than his real name, or a statement by such a person of his
discontinuance, retirement, or withdrawal from such business, three dollars.
(j) For recording the name and address, the date, and number of the certificate
issued to a person registered for the practice of podiatry in the
Commonwealth, ten dollars.
(k) For correcting errors in a record of death, ten dollars
(l) For furnishing a certificate of death, ten dollars.
(m) For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of death, five dollars.
(n) For entering notice of intention of marriage and issuing certificate thereof,
thirty dollars.
(o) For entering certificate of marriage filed by persons married out of the
Commonwealth, ten dollars.
(p) For issuing certificate of marriage, ten dollars.
(q) For furnishing an abstract copy of a record of marriage, five dollars.
(r) For correcting errors in a record of marriage, ten dollars.
(s) For recording power of attorney, five dollars.
(t) For recording certificate of registration granted to a person to engage in a
practice of optometry, or issuing a certificate copy thereof, ten dollars.
(u) For recording the name of the owner of a certificate of registration as a
physician or osteopath in the Commonwealth, ten dollars.
(v) For recording order granting locations of poles, piers, abutments, or conduits,
alterations or transfers thereof, and increase of number of wires and cable or
attachments under the provisions of section twenty-two of chapter one
hundred and sixty-six of the General Laws, fifty dollars, and five dollars
additional for each street or way included in such order.
(w) For examining records of papers relating to birth, marriage, or death upon
application of any person, the actual expense thereof, but not less than five
dollars.
(x) For copying any manuscript or record pertaining to a birth, marriage, or death,
three dollars per page.
(y) For receiving and filing a complete inventory of all items to be included in a
"closing out sale," "going out of business sale," "discontinuance of business
sale," "selling out," "liquidation," "lost our lease," "must vacate," "forced out,"
or other designation of like meaning, two dollars per page.
(z) For filing copy of written instrument or declaration of trust by the trustees of an
association or trust, or any amendments thereof, as provided by section two of
chapter one hundred and eighty-two of the General Laws, ten dollars.
(aa) For recording any paper not specifically provided, five dollars for the first page
and two dollars for each additional page.
(bb) For furnishing a certificate that a person is a registered voter, five dollars.
(cc) For furnishing a burial permit for a death within the town, ten dollars.
ARTICLE 7
ASSESSORS
The assessors shall publish periodically a list of valuations fixed by them on real
estate, the next publication to be in the year 1940 and thereafter at intervals of five
years.
ARTICLE 8
TOWN TREASURER
SECTION 1 - The town treasurer shall have stated daily hours for the transaction of
business and shall give public notice thereof.
SECTION 2 - The town treasurer shall pay no money from the treasury except upon a
warrant or order signed by a majority of the selectmen and by the town accountant.
Such warrant or order shall be sufficient authority to the treasurer to pay money in
accordance therewith, and such payment shall discharge him from all liability on
account of the money so paid.
SECTION 3 - All checks drawn to the order of the town treasurer, any department, or
cash shall be countersigned by the town accountant.
SECTION 4
(a) Maintenance of list of nonpaid taxes, fees, and charges.
The treasurer/collector shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission
or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or
permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or
business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or
refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
charges for not less that a twelve month period, and that such party has not filed in
good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition
before the appellate tax board.
(b) Denial, revocation or suspension of license or permit.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including
renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority from the treasurer/collector; provided, however, that written notice
is given to the party and the treasurer/collector, as required by applicable provisions
of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen (14) days
after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation, or
suspension of said license or permit to any party. The treasurer/collector shall have
the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial,
revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at
law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any
license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be
reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the
treasurer/collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges payable to the
municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
(c) Payment Agreement.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby
allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the
license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the
satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement
shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided,
however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable
provisions of the law.
(d) Waiver of suspension or revocation.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds
there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or
stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in Section 1 of
Chapter 268 in the business activity conducted in or on said property.
(e) Nonapplicable licenses and permits.
This action shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open burning, bicycle
permits, sales of articles for charitable purposes, children work permits, clubs and
associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, dog licenses, fishing, hunting,
trapping licenses, marriage licenses, theatrical events, and public exhibition permits.
SECTION 5
The due date for payment of municipal charges and bills, unless otherwise provided
by law, shall be thirty days after the charge or bill is issued, and thereafter interest on
such charges and bills which remain unpaid shall accrue at the rate of interest
charged on tax bills under the provisions of MGL Chapter 59, Section 57.
ARTICLE 9
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION 1 - The board of health shall have stated daily hours during which its office
shall be open for the transaction of business, and it shall give public notice thereof.
SECTION 2 - The board shall make from time to time such regulations as it deems
necessary for public health and safety, filed the same with the town clerk, and cause
the same to be printed in suitable form for public distribution.
ARTICLE 10
PUBLIC WAYS -- COMMON LANDS
SECTION 1 - No person shall erect, set up, or maintain any fence, portico, platform,
or doorstep extending into, on, or over any sidewalk or other part of any public way.
SECTION 2 - No person shall establish or maintain over any sidewalk or other part of
any public way, any sign, sign board, or advertising device unless he shall have first
obtained a permit therefor from the selectmen; and any such permit may be revoked
by the selectmen at any time.
SECTION 3 - No person shall establish or maintain any shade or awning over any
part of a sidewalk, or other part of any public way, unless the same be secured and
safely supported, and unless the lowest part thereof is not less than seven feet above
the surface of the sidewalk or way, nor in any event without obtaining a permit
therefor from the selectmen.
SECTION 4 - No person other than a public officer or town agent, servant, or
employee in the performance of his duties shall place any obstruction to travel on any
public way without the consent of the selectmen; provided, however, that this section
shall not be construed to prohibit reasonable emergency action to warn travelers of
any obviously dangerous condition observed in the public way, provided the condition
and action taken are reported by the person acting as soon as reasonably may be to
the selectmen, the police or the superintendent of streets. No person shall leave any
rubbish or refuse, or any noxious, dangerous, offensive, or unsightly object or matter
on or in any public way, park, beach, or common lands of the town.
SECTION 5 - Every person operating or having charge of a vehicle in any public way
shall operate it in all respects as may be directed by any police officer.
SECTION 6 - No person having under his care or control any vehicle shall permit the
same or the animal or animals attached thereto, if any, to stand on or across any
public way in such a manner as to obstruct the same for any unnecessary length of
time. No person shall stop with any vehicle in any public way so near another vehicle
as to obstruct public travel or upon or across any foot crossing or so as to obstruct
any private way or private driveway.
SECTION 6A - The superintendent of streets may for the purposes of removing or
plowing snow, or removing ice, from any public way, remove, or cause to be
removed, to some convenient place, including any public garage, any vehicle which
interferes with the removal or plowing of such snow, or the removal of such ice. In
the event that such vehicle is so removed, the owner of such vehicle shall be liable
for the cost of such removal and for the storage charges, if any, resulting therefrom,
but shall not, notwithstanding any other provision of these by-laws, be otherwise
liable to any fine, penalty, or other charge solely by reason of the fact that such
vehicle was interfering with such plowing or removal.
SECTION 7 - No person shall distribute or place, or cause to be distributed or placed,
on or in any public way, park, beach, or other public place any placard, handbill, flier,
poster, advertisement, or paper of any description; provided, however, that this
section shall not be deemed to prohibit placing the same within doors of stores,
offices, or business houses, or at the doors of residences, nor to apply to the
distribution on any election day, to the extent otherwise permitted by law, of stickers
or political notices.
SECTION 8 - No person who owns or has charge of any horse, grazing beast, or
swine shall suffer or permit such animal to run at large or, while at pasture, to be so
tethered that it can, within the limits of its tether, go upon the traveled part of any
street or upon any sidewalk.
SECTION 9 - No person shall throw stones, snowballs, or other missiles, or shoot
with or use any gun, bean blower, bow and arrow, slingshot, or other similar device in,
on, or across any public way, park, beach, or common lands of the town. No person
shall play at any game in which a ball is used, on the traveled part of any street or on
any sidewalk ; provided, there is excepted from the scope and effect of the preceding
language the shooting and use of bow and arrows for the exclusive purpose of
otherwise lawful hunting of deer and fowl as may be allowed by written authorization
and permit on designated portions of any lands under the management, custody or
control of the Town of Hingham Conservation Commission in conformity with the
provisions of Article 30, Section 3, of the Town of Hingham By-laws, as amended
from time to time.
SECTION 10 - No person shall behave himself in a rude or disorderly manner, or use
any indecent, profane or insulting language in any public place.
SECTION 11 - No person shall loiter in any street, or on any sidewalk, or in any other
place after being directed by a police officer to move on. No person shall obstruct the
free use of any public way or sidewalk.
SECTION 12 - No person shall break the surface of or dig up any sidewalk or other
part of any public way or place thereon any staging or other temporary structure or
move any building in or along the same without a written permit from the board of
selectmen. Any permit issued therefor shall be in force for such time only as the
board may specify and shall be subject to such conditions as they may prescribe, and
in every case shall be upon condition that during the whole of every night from sunset
to sunrise lighted lanterns and proper barriers shall be so placed as to secure
travelers from danger; and upon the further condition that the permittee shall
indemnify the town against the claims of all persons who may be injured in their
persons or property by reason of the exercise of the privileges conferred by the
permit. Permits for moving buildings along the public ways shall be issued only after
the applicant has secured from the building commissioner the permit required by
Article 3, Section 20, of the Building By-Law adopted March 15, 1937.
SECTION 13 - A person having a permit under Section 12 of this Article shall restore
the public way to its original condition or to a condition satisfactory to the board of
selectmen. The selectmen shall have the right to revoke any such permit at any time
and may require a bond, either before the work is commenced or during its progress,
to assure the proper performance of the work, the restoration required therein, and/or
the indemnification provided for in Section 12 of this Article.
SECTION 14 - No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any water or other liquid to
run or be discharged from any building owned by him or under his control, onto or
across any curbed or finished sidewalk. Provided, however, that this Section shall
not be deemed to prohibit washing windows or other parts of any building on private
property if the work is done at a time when, and in such manner that, no unsafe
condition results therefrom.
SECTION 15 - No person shall coast upon or across any sidewalk, or other part of
any public way, except at such times and at such places as may from time to time be
designated by the selectmen.
SECTION 16 - No person shall affix, write, paint, print, or otherwise inscribe any
notice, advertisement, work, figure, or pictures on any sidewalk or other part of any
public way, or on any fence, wall, post, stone, tree, building, or structure adjoining any
public way without the consent of the owner thereof.
SECTION 17 - No person, except physicians responding to emergency calls or
drivers of ambulances, patrol wagons, fire apparatus responding to an alarm, or
vehicle transporting United States mail, shall ride a horse or drive a vehicle through a
funeral procession.
SECTION 18 - No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm in or
across any public way or place, or within fifty yards thereof, but this section shall not
prevent the use of such weapons in the lawful defense of one's person, family, or
property, nor in the performance of any duty required or authorized by law.
SECTION 19 - No person shall detonate or ignite any fireworks, or throw any lighted
fireworks in, into, or upon any public way or place except on such days or parts
thereof as shall be designated by the selectmen as periods when this Section will not
apply. No person shall set any bonfire in any public way or place without first
obtaining written permission from both the selectmen and the fire department.
SECTION 20 - No person shall injure, deface, or destroy any street sign, guide board,
lamp post, lamp, or lantern thereon, nor any tree, building, fence, or post or other
thing set, erected, or made for the use or ornament of the town.
SECTION 21 - No person who owns or controls any building to which access is had
through any opening or entrance in a sidewalk or other part of any public way shall
suffer or permit a platform or grate or other covering thereof to raise above the
adjacent surface of the sidewalk or street. Each such entrance or opening shall at all
times when not in use be covered by a suitable grating or other covering, and
whenever it is in use it shall be suitably guarded. The construction of each such
cover and the method of guarding all such openings and entrances when in use shall
be subject at all times to the approval of the selectmen.
SECTION 22 - No owner or person in control of any building which abuts upon any
sidewalk, and which has a roof slanting towards the sidewalk, shall permit the
building to be without a barrier, snow guard, or other device to prevent snow or ice
falling from such roof to the sidewalk.
SECTION 23 - No person shall drive or ride a horse or drive an automobile along any
sidewalk.
SECTION 24 - All petitions for permission to erect poles in any public way shall
contain an accurate description of the location prayed for and be accompanied by
plans showing such location and the bounds of the way for a distance of two hundred
feet on year side thereof, and, as to the part of the way so shown, the location of all
buildings adjacent and thereto and of all poles thereon, and of all shade trees and
hydrants therein or extending thereover. The ownership of all standing poles shall be
designated on such plan.
SECTION 25 - No person shall permit any part of tree, hedge, bush, or shrubbery
growing on his land to extend over or overhang any street, sidewalk, or highway so as
to interfere with the free full use of such street, sidewalk, or highway.
SECTION 26 - The selectmen upon request may, at their discretion, supply any
property owner of the town, or his officer or agent, with the lines and grades for
sidewalks and streets. No charge shall be made for such service furnished within a
reasonable time (as determined by the selectmen) after the first laying out,
acceptance, or relocation of the street or sidewalk. Except as aforesaid the
selectmen shall charge for such service such reasonable fee as shall be fixed by
them. All fees collected hereunder shall be turned over to the town treasurer.
SECTION 27 - At each junction of a private way with a public way there shall be a
sign, erected and maintained on the private way by the owner thereof, reading
"Private Way" or "Not a Public Way," but this section shall not apply to any private
driveway not exceeding twelve feet in width which has a gate, gateway, or bar way at
its junction with the public way, or which is otherwise so constructed and located that,
in the opinion of the superintendent of streets, it cannot reasonably be mistaken for a
public way.
SECTION 28 - Each petition for the acceptance of a way to be acted on at any
annual town meeting shall be presented to the board of selectmen not later than the
first day of October next preceding such meeting.
SECTION 29 - The word "vehicle" as used in this Article shall include every
description of carriage or other artificial contrivance used or capable of being used as
a means of transportation, except as otherwise provided herein or by law.
SECTION 30 - No person shall enter upon the premises of another or upon any
public property with the intention of peeping into the windows of a home or other
building thereon, without the assent of the occupant, or of spying in any manner upon
any person therein. This section shall not apply to an officer of the law in the
performance of his duties.
SECTION 30A - No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages, as defined in Chapter
138, Section 1, of the Massachusetts General Laws, while on, in or upon any public
way or way in which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, or any
consent of the owner or person in control thereof. All alcoholic beverages being used
in violation of this By-Law shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the
charge against the person or persons summoned before the court for such violation,
at which time they shall be returned to the person lawfully entitled to possession
thereof. A police officer may arrest without a warrant anyone who violates this
Section if such person is unknown to the officer and such person's identity is ascertained
or until such person can be taken before a court having jurisdiction of the
offense. Violation of this sec- tion shall be punishable by a fine of not more than Two
Hundred ($200.00) Dollars for each violation.
SECTION 31 - Except as otherwise provided in any Section of this Article, any person
violating any of the provisions of this Article shall forfeit not more than Twenty
($20.00) Dollars for each offense.
Enforcement of Town By-Laws and Rules and Regulations
A. Criminal Process
Whoever violates any provision of these by-laws, may be prosecuted and
penalized in the courts of the Commonwealth as provided by the Massachusetts
General Laws.
B. Non-Criminal Process
Whoever violates the provisions of the by-laws listed below may, at the discretion
of the designated enforcing officer, be subject to imposition of a penalty through
non-criminal process in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40, Section 21D:
1. General By-Law
Article 10, Section 4 Obstruction of public ways
Enforcing Officer
Police Officers
Penalty
First offense: Warning
Second and subsequent offenses: $50.00 fine
2. General By-Law
Article 10, Section 14 Discharge of liquid on public ways
Enforcing Officer
Police Officers
Penalty
First offense: Warning
Second and subsequent offenses: $50.00 fine
3. General By-Law
Article 15 Harbor By-Law
Enforcing Officers
Harbormaster
Assistant Harbormasters
Penalty
First offense: Warning
Second offense and subsequent offenses: $50.00
4. Shellfish Regulations and Management Plan
Enforcing Officers
Shellfish Constable
Assistant Shellfish Constable
Penalty
First offense: $50.00
Second offense and subsequent offenses: $100.00
5. General By-Law
Article 22 Wetlands Protection By-Law
Enforcing Officer
Conservation Officer
Penalty
First offense $ 50.00
Second offense 100.00
Third offense 300.00
6. Town of Hingham Taxi Rules and Regulations
Enforcing Officers
Police Officers
Penalty $100.00
7. Rules and Regulations for Limousine Licenses
Enforcing Officers
Police Officers
Penalty $100.00
For the purposes of this section, the enforcing officer(s) designated above may
enforce the By-Law indicated. The availability of non-criminal process shall not
preclude the use of criminal process or other means of enforcement. Penalties
specified shall apply to each offense, and for purposes of this Section, the existence
of a violative condition shall be deemed a separate offense for each day that such
condition continues.
SECTION 32 - No person shall, except in the performance of legal duty or in military
exercises or funerals, discharge any firearms or any other rifle upon or across any
private property without consent of the owners or tenants thereof. Whoever violates
this provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding Twenty ($20.00) for each
offense.
SECTION 33 - Regulation of Activity within Bare Cove Park.
Section 1 – The Bare Cove Park Committee (the “Committee”) shall oversee the day
–to-day operations of Bare Cove Park, approximately 450 acres of land and
improvements owned by the Town of Hingham. The Committee shall consist of nine
citizens of the Town appointed by the Board of Selectmen of three-year terms.
Section 2 - The Committee shall propose, from time to time, such regulations as it
deems necessary for the governance of Bare Cove Park to be adopted by the Board
of Selectmen (the “Board”). The Board shall file such regulations as it has adopted
with the Town clerk and cause the same to be printed in suitable form for public
distribution.
SECTION 34 - REMOVAL OF SOIL, LOAM, SAND, OR GRAVEL
A. The removal of soil, loam, sand, or gravel from any land in the town not in public
use to any location outside the town is prohibited.
B. The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to any removal activity in lawful operation
on any premises on March 10, 1941, and any such removal activity may continue as
an exempt operation unless and until abandoned. Nor shall the foregoing prohibition
apply to any removal activity pursuant to a permit issued by the Board of Appeals
prior to March 28, 1966
C. Whoever violates the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second
offense, and for each subsequent offense two hundred dollars ($200.00).
D. The provisions of this Article shall be enforced by the Building Commissioner.
SECTION 35 - Unregistered Motor Vehicles in Residential Districts
A. No person shall have more than one unregistered automobile or truck ungaraged
on his premises in residential districts at any one time unless authorized by the Board
of Selectmen. A violation of this Article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
Twenty ($20.00) Dollars.
B. Whoever violates any provisions of this Article may, at the discretion of the
Building Commissioner or a Police Officer of the Town of Hingham, be subjected to
the imposition of a penalty through non-criminal process in accordance with
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D. For purposes of this
paragraph, after the issuance of warning for a violation, a penalty of $50.00 may be
imposed for the second and subsequent violations of this Article. The availability of
noncriminal process and penalties under this paragraph shall not preclude the use of
criminal process or other means of enforcement.
C. Penalties specified shall apply to each offense and for purposes of this Article the
existence of a violation shall be deemed a separate offense for each day that such
violation continues.
SECTION 36 - Size of Street Numbers on Buildings
The owner of each building used as a dwelling place or place of business within the
Town shall maintain the approved street number of the premises in a conspicuous
place, legible from the street, with numerals at least three (3) inches high.
ARTICLE 11
PARADES AND OPEN AIR MEETINGS
SECTION 1 - No person, without having first obtained a permit from the chief of
police, shall form or conduct in any way any parade (other than a military, funeral, or
school parade) or any assembly of people for the purpose of display or
demonstration.
SECTION 2 - No person shall give any public address, speech, or harangue in any
public way, public square, or pubic park without permission therefor from the chief of
police.
SECTION 3 - No permit shall be withheld under this Article for any consideration
other than public order or safety or reasonable public convenience.
SECTION 4 - Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall forfeit not
more than ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense.
ARTICLE 12
JUNK COLLECTORS
SECTION 1 - The selectmen may license suitable persons as junk collectors to pass
over public ways and in the course thereof to purchase and collect junk. No person
shall engage in such business without such license. As used in these by- laws the
word "junk" shall be deemed to describe all articles and material usually so described,
and also old metal and every second-hand article.
SECTION 2 - The selectmen may require each junk collector and each employee and
agent of any such, when engaged in collecting junk, to display upon his person or
vehicle, or both, a badge of such design as they may prescribe.
SECTION 3 - The selectmen may require that any place, vehicle, or receptacle used
for the collecting or keeping of junk shall be subject to examination at any time by the
selectmen or their agent.
SECTION 4 - The selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers in and
keepers of shops for the purchase, sale, and barter of junk, and no person shall be a
dealer in or keeper of a junk shop without such license.
SECTION 5 - Every person so licensed shall keep a book in which shall be written at
the time of every purchase of any article of junk a description thereof, the name of the
person from whom and the time when such purchase was made. Such book shall at
all times be open to the inspection of the selectmen and police department.
SECTION 6 - Every person so licensed shall put in a conspicuous place on his shop
a sign having his name and occupation clearly inscribed thereon and shall at all times
allow his shop and articles therein to be examined by the selectmen or the police
department and shall comply with all directions and requirements of the selectmen or
of the board of health.
SECTION 7 - No person shall use any building, enclosure, or other structure for the
storage, sale, or keeping of rags, waste, paper stock, or other inflammable material
without a written license therefor from the selectmen, which license shall be granted
only after the premises have been inspected and approved by the chief of the fire
department.
SECTION 8 - No person licensed under this Article shall directly or indirectly
purchase or receive from any minor any article of junk, except rags, paper or bottles,
knowing or having reason to believe the minor to be such.
SECTION 9 - Each license granted under this Article shall expire on April 30 following
the date of issuance and may be revoked by the selectmen at any time in their
discretion.
SECTION 10 - Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article or any rules,
regulations or restrictions contained in any license issued to him hereunder or any
requirement of the selectmen made hereunder shall forfeit not more than twenty
dollars ($20.00) for each offense.
ARTICLE 13
DEALERS IN OLD OR SECOND-HAND METALS AND PRECIOUS METALS
PART I - GENERAL
SECTION 1 - LICENSE -- REQUIRED
No person shall deal in or keep a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of old or
second-hand metals or old or second-hand precious metals, hereinafter
sometimes referred to as "such article" or "such articles," (including gold, silver, or
platinum, without regard to the form or amount of such precious metal, or whether
or not such precious metal is an incidental or minor component of some other
article such as jewelry, bric-a-brac, statuary, or the like), or keep or store the same
for purchase, sale, or barter, in any building or place within the limits of the town,
without a license from the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 2 - LICENSE -- ISSUANCE; CONTENTS; TERM; FEE
The Board of Selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers in or keepers
of shops for the purchase, sale, or barter of old or second-hand metals or old or
second-hand precious metals, at such places within the town as may be
designated in such licenses, under such conditions and restrictions as are
prescribed in this Part I, which by the provisions hereof are deemed to be and
shall be incorporated in every such license.
Such license shall continue in force until the first day of May following the effective
date of such license unless sooner revoked. Any such license may be granted in
April to take effect on the first day of May next ensuing. The licensee shall pay to
the Town Clerk, for the use of the town, fifty dollars ($50.00).
SECTION 3 - LICENSE -- RECORDATION BY TOWN CLERK
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep a record of every license granted
under the provisions of this Part I.
SECTION 4 - GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
No person required to be licensed under this Part I shall, directly or indirectly,
either purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any of such articles from
a minor knowing or having reason to believe him to be a minor.
No such article purchased or received shall be sold or altered in appearance, form,
or substance until a period of at least thirty days from the date of its purchase or
receipt has elapsed, except when such period, or portion thereof, is waived by the
Chief of Police or his designee. No such person shall have his shop open for the
transaction of business nor shall he purchase or receive any of such articles,
except between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No person so engaged as a dealer in or
a keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of such articles, licensed under
this Part I, shall keep, store, or deposit such articles other than in a covered
building devoted to that purpose.
Every person required to be licensed under this Part I shall make out and deliver
to the Chief of Police of the Town every day, Sundays and holidays excepted,
before the hour of 10:00 a.m., a clear, legible, and correct list containing an
accurate description of all such articles purchased or receiving during the
preceding business day, the prices paid therefor, the time when such articles were
purchased or received, and the respective numbers of such articles (required by
Section 5 hereof) together with the name and address of the party from whom
such articles were purchased or received. An electronic copy of this record shall
be forwarded to the Police Department within one (1) calendar day of the
transaction.
SECTION 5 - BOOKS TO BE KEPT; NUMBERING OF ARTICLES
PURCHASED; INSPECTION
Every person required to be licensed under this Part I shall keep a book in which
shall be written in English, at the time of every purchase or receipt, a description of
the old or second-hand metal or old or second-hand precious metal so purchased
or received, the name, date of birth, and residence of the person from whom, and
the day and hour when, such purchase or receipt was made.
Every such person shall, at the time of any such purchase or receipt, attach a
number to each such article bought or received, and shall make entry of such
number in the book. Such book shall at all times be open for the inspection of the
Selectmen, Chief of Police, any member of the police force, and by any person
authorized in writing by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 6 - DESIGNATION AND INSPECTION OF SHOPS
Every person required to be licensed under this Part I shall put in some suitable
and conspicuous place in his shop a sign having his name and occupation clearly
and legibly inscribed thereon. Such shops, and all articles therein may at all times
be examined by the Selectmen, Chief of Police, any member of the police force,
and by any person authorized in writing by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 7 - SCALES REQUIRED
Every person required to be licensed under this Part I shall have on the licensed
premises a suitable scale. Said scales shall be annually tested and sealed by the
Sealer of Weights and Measures of the Town of Hingham.
PART II - CONVEYANCES FOR COLLECTION OF METALS
SECTION 8 - LICENSES -- REQUIRED
No person shall drive, operate, or maintain a wagon or other conveyance for the
collection of old or second-hand metals or old or second-hand precious metals
within the limits of the town without a license from the Board of Selectmen. In this
Part II, "such person" shall mean any person driving, operating, maintaining, or
controlling any wagon or conveyance required to be licensed under this Part II.
SECTION 9 - LICENSES -- GENERALLY
The Board of Selectmen may license suitable persons to drive, operate, maintain,
or control wagons or other conveyances for the collection of old or second-hand
metals or old or second- hand precious metals, under such conditions and
restrictions as are prescribed in this Part II, which by the provisions hereof are
deemed to be and shall be incorporated in every such license. Such license shall
continue in force until the first day of May following the effective date of such
license unless sooner revoked; provided, that such license may be granted in April
to take effect on the first day of May next ensuing. The licensee shall pay to the
Town Clerk for the license, for the use of the town, fifty dollars ($50.00)
SECTION 10 - LICENSES -- RECORDATION BY TOWN CLERK
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep a record of every license granted
under the provisions of this Part II.
SECTION 11 - GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
Every such wagon or other conveyance required to be licensed under this Part II
shall bear clearly and conspicuously the licensee's name, and the number of the
license, printed in English on a metal plate affixed to the outside, and each side, of
the wagon or other conveyance. Each driver, operator, or person in control of any
such licensed wagon or other conveyance shall wear on the front of his hat a
metal badge, upon which shall appear in figures not less than one inch square the
number of his license issued under this Part II. Such metal plates and badge shall
be furnished by the Town Clerk at the expense of the licensee. Every license shall
designate the person employed to drive such vehicle. Such driver shall not be
changed without the consent of the Board of Selectmen, and record of such
change shall be made in the Office of the Town Clerk. Every such wagon or other
conveyance and all articles therein may at all times be examined by the
Selectmen, Chief of Police, any member of the police force, and by any person
authorized in writing by the Board of Selectmen.
No such person shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of
barter or exchange any of such articles from a minor knowing or having reason to
believe him to be a minor.
No such person shall purchase or receive any of such articles except on weekdays
between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
No such article purchased or received shall be sold or altered in appearance, form,
or substance until a period of at least fifteen days from the date of its purchase or
receipt has elapsed, except when such period, or portion thereof, is waived by the
Chief of Police or his designee.
Every person required to be licensed under this Part II shall make out and deliver
to the Chief of Police of the Town every day, Sundays and holidays excepted,
before the hour of 10:00 a.m., a clear, legible, and correct list containing an
accurate description of all such articles purchased or received during the
preceding business day, the prices paid therefor, the time when such articles were
purchased or received, and the respective number of such articles (required by
Section 12 hereof), together with the name and address of the party from whom
such articles were purchased or received.
SECTION 12 - BOOKS TO BE KEPT; NUMBERING OF ARTICLES
PURCHASED; INSPECTION.
Every person required to be licensed under this Part 11 shall keep a book in which
shall be written in English, at the time of every purchase or receipt, a description of
the old or second-hand metal or old or second-hand precious metal so purchased
or received, the name, date of birth, and residence of the person from whom, and
the day and hour when, such purchase or receipt was made.
Every such person shall, at the time of any such purchase or receipt, attach a
number to each such article bought or received, and shall make entry of such
number in the book. Such book shall at all times be open for the inspection of the
Selectmen, Chief of Police, any member of the police force, and by any person
authorized in writing by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 13 - SCALES REQUIRED
Every person required to be licensed under this Part II shall have in any such
wagon or conveyance a suitable scale. Said scales shall be annually tested and
sealed by the Sealer of Weights and Measures of the Town of Hingham.
PART III - VIOLATIONS
SECTION 14 - PENALTIES.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article 13 or any regulations or
restrictions contained in any license issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine or
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00); and each day of any such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
ARTICLE 14
ADVISORY AND CAPITAL OUTLAY COMMITTEES
PART 1
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION 1 - There shall be an advisory committee, which shall perform the duties
set forth in the following sections of this Article and be governed by the provisions
thereof. Said committee shall consist of fifteen citizens of the town, and shall be
appointed as provided in the following section. No person holding an elective or
appointive town office shall be eligible to serve on said committee.
SECTION 2 - Prior to the commencement of each fiscal year, the moderator shall
appoint five members of said committee, each to serve a term of three (3) years,
commencing on the first day of the fiscal year next following the appointment;
provided, however, that any incumbent members, whose term would otherwise expire
at an annual town meeting, in accordance with the provisions of this section in effect
a the time of such member's appointment, shall serve through June 30th of the year
in which the term expires. The committee shall choose its own officers, and shall
serve without pay, excepting, however, the secretary, whose compensation shall be
fixed by the committee. The committee shall cause to be kept a true record of its
proceedings.
SECTION 3 - There shall be referred to and considered by the Advisory committee all
articles in any town meeting warrant. A public hearing may be held upon any article,
and a notice of such hearing shall be given either by advertising the same in a
newspaper published in the town, or by posting a copy thereof in at least six public
places in the town five days at least before said hearing. The committee shall report
to the town meeting, in print or otherwise, such recommendations on each article as it
deems best for the interests of the town.
SECTION 4 - The advisory committee shall consider the budget proposed for the
town for the ensuing fiscal year by the Board of Selectmen. Such budget shall show
in detail all estimated income from the proposed tax levy and other sources and all
proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year, and shall
be arranged to show the actual and estimated income and expenditures for the
previous, current and ensuing fiscal years. The advisory committee shall, after
considering such proposed budget, establish the amounts which should, in its
opinion, be appropriated for the ensuing fiscal year, shall add thereto such
explanations and suggestions as it deems expedient, and shall report thereon as
provided in Section 3.
SECTION 5 -Whenever any vacancy shall occur in the committee it shall be filled by
the moderator. If any member is absent from five consecutive meetings of the
committee, for other cause than illness, his position shall be deemed vacant and the
committee shall report such vacancy to the moderator, who shall proceed to fill the
same. Any person chosen to fill a vacancy in the committee shall hold office for the
unexpired term of the person whom he succeeds.
SECTION 6 - The committee shall make an annual report of its doings, with
recommendations relative to financial matters and such other matters at it deems
expedient, to be printed with the annual reports of the town officers.
PART 2
CAPITAL OUTLAY COMMITTEE
SECTION 1 - There shall be a Capital Outlay Committee (Committee), which shall
perform the duties set forth in the following sections of this Article 14 and be
governed by the provisions hereof. Said Committee shall consist of five citizens of
the Town, appointed as provided in the following sections, and the Town Accountant
ex-officio.
SECTION 2 - The moderator shall appoint three members of said Committee. Prior
to the commencement of each fiscal year, the moderator shall appoint one member
to said Committee to serve a term of three years, commencing on the first day of the
fiscal year next following the appointment.
SECTION 3 - The Chairman of the Advisory Committee, at or about the
commencement of each fiscal year, shall appoint, from among the members of the
Advisory Committee, two members of said Committee to serve a term of one year,
beginning on the first day of said fiscal year.
SECTION 4 - Whenever any vacancy shall occur in the Committee, it shall be filled
by the appointing authority which appointed the member whose position shall have
become vacant. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy in the Committee shall hold
office for the unexpired term of the person whom he or she succeeds.
SECTION 5 - The Town Accountant, as an ex-officio member of the Committee, shall
not be entitled to vote on the making of recommendations to be included in its
reports. The Committee shall choose its own officers and shall serve without
compensation.
SECTION 6 - It shall be the duty of the Committee to ascertain annually what capital
outlays will be required by the Town during the next five years. In making this
determination, it may consult with Town, county, and state officials, and with other
boards and committees of the Town. It shall publish and distribute to each voter an
annual report and such further reports as it deems advisable, and shall include in
such reports its recommendation for scheduling capital outlays and for the financing
of such outlays as in its judgment cannot be, or should not be, paid for entirely out of
current revenues.”

ARTICLE 15
HARBOR BY-LAW
SECTION 1 - Authority and Enforcement
The Harbormaster has the authority to enforce this Article 15 and regulations adopted
pursuant hereto; G.L. Chapter 60B: Excise on Boats, Ships and Vessels in Lieu of
Local Property Tax; G.L. Chapter 90B: State Boating Laws; G.L. Chapter 91:
Waterways; G.L. Chapter 102: Shipping and Seamen, Harbors and Harbor Masters;
G.L. Chapter 130: State Marine Fisheries Regulations; G.L. Chapter 131: State
Inland Fish Regulations; CMR 310: Department of Environmental Protection; CMR
320: Public Access Facilities; CMR 321: Division of Fisheries and Wildlife; CMR 322:
Division of Marine Fisheries; CMR 323: Division of Law Enforcement; CMR 527:
Board of Fire Prevention Regulations; and other applicable laws and regulations, to
the full extent permitted by law.
SECTION 2 - Definition of Terms
As used in this Article 15, and in any regulations adopted pursuant to this Article 15,
the following words shall have the following meanings, respectively:
“Anchor” - The holding of a Vessel in place by lowering a heavy weight into the water
by cable, chain, line or other method.
“Channel” - a navigable route for the passage of Vessels, established by customary
use or under the authority of federal, state or municipal law.
“Docking” - The making fast of a boat, raft, or float by means of cables, anchors,
lines, chains, or other device or contrivances, to the ocean bottom, the shore, or a
dock, slip, pier, or marina; meaning and intending that this phrase applies to boats,
rafts or floats which are secured to the ocean bottom, as well as to boats, rafts, or
floats secured to a dock or slip in a marina.
“Harbormaster” - The harbormaster, deputy harbormaster and assistant
harbormasters duly appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
“Hingham Harbor” - The waters of the sea lying within the limits of the Town of
Hingham.
“Hingham Waterways” - The navigable bodies of water within the limits of the Town of
Hingham including, without limitation, the ponds, rivers, streams, seas, and oceans.
“Mooring” - A temporary, semi-permanent, or permanent anchorage installation,
comprising an anchor, chain, and mooring buoy, or their equivalents.
“Person” - An individual; a receiver; a trustee; a partnership; joint venture; a firm; an
unincorporated association; a syndicate; a trust; a corporation; or any other entity
having legal personality.
“Skin Diving” - Swimming underwater with the aid of fins, mask, snorkel tube, or self
contained apparatus for the assistance of breathing.
“Vessel” - The word “vessel” shall mean, inclusively, to the extent permitted by law,
watercraft of every description, including but not limited to ships of all kinds, barges,
sailing vessels, craft and powerboats of any type or kind by whatever means
propelled, every object designed, adapted or capable of being navigated, towed or
operated on water from place to place for the transportation of merchandise, people,
or for any other purpose (except a seaplane), or other artificial contrivance, used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, and as otherwise
construed under Massachusetts and/or federal law.
SECTION 3 – Waterways Regulations
The Harbormaster shall adopt regulations governing the Hingham Waterways;
Vessels on or in the Hingham Waterways, including but not limited to the anchorage,
mooring, and/or operation of such vessels; and/or activities that take place on or in
the Hingham Waterways; and to the extent said vessels and activities affect and/or
are related to or directed to the Hingham Waterways, around the Hingham
Waterways; to the full extent permitted by law, including, without limitation,
anchorage, moorings, floats, mooring waiting lists, docking, and shellfishing. These
regulations shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen for approval and then, if
approved, to the Environmental Police for review and approval to the extent
necessary. After review by the Environmental Police, the Board of Selectmen shall
have the opportunity to consider any comments provided by the Environmental
Police, and resubmit to the Environmental Police for approval to the extent
necessary. Upon approval by the Board of Selectmen, and by the Environmental
Police to the extent necessary, a notice shall be published in a newspaper in
circulation in the Town of Hingham and copies thereof shall be made available
through the Harbormaster's Office upon request. Said regulations may be amended
from time to time in the manner hereinbefore set forth.
SECTION 4 - Wake Restrictions
No vessel shall exceed the speed of six (6) nautical miles per hour or be operated at
speed which shall cause a visible wake within the confines of Hingham Harbor,
except while engaged in water skiing or the use of personal watercraft in areas as
defined on charts issued for such use by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 5 - Skin Diving
Any person skin diving in Hingham Harbor shall:
(a) Obtain the written approval of the Harbormaster in advance, designating the
permitted area;
(b) Operate from a vessel occupied and under the control of at least one other natural
person not less than eighteen (18) years of age;
(c) Display a diver's flag consisting of a red field and a white diagonal stripe not less
than twelve (12) inches square, held upright on a float or other similar device at a
height sufficient to be visible to passing vessels; and
(d) Tow said float and flag with him while he is on surface or submerged in water,
unless for commercial purposes permission in writing is granted by the Harbormaster
to display floats or flags in some other manner for the protection of divers in Hingham
Harbor.
SECTION 6 - Water Skiing
No person shall operate a vessel in Hingham Harbor or in the Hingham Waterways of
the Back River or Weir River (which are Areas of Critical Environmental Concern)
while towing water skiers, aquaplanes or other similar devices except in areas
defined on charts issued by the Board of Selectmen, and in no event shall any such
vessel be operated within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any beach or swimming
float.
SECTION 7 - Obstruction of Channels
No private marker, mooring or anchorage buoy, lobster pot buoy, or other temporary
or permanent marker may be placed in the fairway or channel of Hingham Harbor at
any time without the express written permission of the Harbormaster. Any such
marker or buoy, so placed in any fairway or channel in Hingham Harbor, shall be
construed as a hazard to navigation, and shall be removed by the person causing it
to be in place, upon the order of the Harbormaster, or may be removed by the
Harbormaster, with no liability to the Harbormaster or the Town of Hingham, or the
agents, servants, or employees of either.
SECTION 8 - Unauthorized Boarding or Moving of any Vessel
No person, other than the Harbormaster or a person acting with the Harbormaster's
written consent, shall board or move any vessel in mooring or anchorage or molest
any tender except in case of emergency or with the express consent of the owner or
master of said vessel or as otherwise permitted by law.
SECTION 9 - Conformance with Existing Regulations and Disclaimer
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to conflict with the jurisdiction of the
United States Government with respect to the enforcement of navigation, shipping,
anchorage, and associated laws of the United States, or any lawful regulation of the
Division of Waterways of the Department of Environmental Protection, or the
Environmental Police or any of the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Article shall not invalidate any other
section or provision thereof.
SECTION 10 – Violation
Whoever violates any section or provision of this Article or any regulation adopted
pursuant to this Article shall be liable for a penalty to be determined by the Board of
Selectmen in an amount not to exceed fifty (50) dollars per day for each violation to
the full extent permissible by law, and/or as otherwise authorized by law.
SECTION 11 – Effective Date
This Article shall become effective upon approval of the Director of Environmental
Police and the expiration of five (5) days after publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Hingham. The provisions of Sections 1 through 6 of the
previously existing Article 15 as in effect prior to the enactment of this Article 15 shall
remain in full force and effect until the regulations to be adopted pursuant to Section
3 of this Article 15 become effective.
ARTICLE 16
COUNCIL ON AGING
SECTION 1 - There shall be a Council on Aging for the purpose of coordinating or
carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in cooperation
with programs of the Commission on Aging established under Massachusetts
General laws, Chapter 6, Section 73.
SECTION 2 - The Council on Aging (consisting at the time of amendment of this
section of seven (7) members, the terms of four (4) of whom expire in 1973 and
terms of the other three (3) of whom expire in 1975) shall henceforth consist of
eleven (11) members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Eight (8) members shall
be appointed in 1973, four (4) for a term of three (3) years and four (4) for term of
one (1) year. Thereafter upon the expiration of a term of each member (including
the three present members whose terms will expire in 1975) each appointment shall
be for a term of three (3) years. Any member may be reappointed for subsequent
terms and the members of the Council shall serve without pay.
SECTION 3 - Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Council by
reason of death, resignation, inability to act or for any other reason, the vacancy
shall be filled by appointment by the Selectmen for the remainder of the term.
SECTION 4 - The Council on Aging at its first annual meeting and thereafter,
annually in April of each year, shall elect from its membership a President, 1st Vice
President, 2nd Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer. Each officer shall hold
office until the next annual election. In the event a vacancy occurs in any of the
offices above, the Council shall hold a special meeting for the purpose of electing
one of its members to fill such vacancy.
SECTION 5 - The Council shall prepare and submit an annual report of its activities
to the Town and shall send a copy thereof to the Commission on Aging.
SECTION 6 - The Council may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may
require, providing however that no clerks or employees shall be appointed unless
the Town of Hingham shall previously have appropriated the funds for the salary of
any such clerks or employees or the same shall have been provided by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and/or the Federal Government.
SECTION 7 - In accordance with M.G.L. c. 44, s. 53E½, there is hereby established
in the Department of Elder Services a Department of Elder Services Revolving Fund
for the following purposes:
1. For the receipt of all fees and charges received from Senior Center
Programs
of the Department of Elder Services and/or the Council on Aging.
2. For Expenditures to pay the costs and expenses of said Senior Center
Programs.
The Director of Elder Services shall be authorized to expend from said Revolving
Fund for said purposes in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 44, s. 53E½.
The Director of Elder Services shall report all receipts and expenditures of said
Revolving Fund to the Board of Selectmen at the end of each Fiscal Year.
ARTICLE 17
DOG REGULATIONS
SECTION 1 - No owner or keeper of a dog shall permit the dog to go beyond the
confines of the property of the owner or keeper unless the dog is held firmly on a
leash or attended by a person exercising control of such dog. If, in the sole judgment
of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer, an unleashed dog (That is not
confined to the property of the owner or keeper) is not under voice control, the owner
or keeper shall leash the dog immediately at the direction of said officer.
SECTION 2 - The Animal Control Officer may apprehend and impound any dog
which he determines to be in violation of Section 1.
SECTION 3 - The Animal Control Officer, upon apprehending any dog, shall make a
complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog, its license number,
and the name and address of the owner if known.
SECTION 4 - If the owner of an impounded dog is known, such owner shall be given
notice of the impounding within three days thereof. Such owner may reclaim the dog
upon payment of a fee determined by the Animal Control Officer with the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, together with any unpaid license fees, late fees, fines and
reasonable costs incurred by the Town for impounding and maintaining the dog.
SECTION 5 - No person shall keep within the Town any dog which by biting, barking,
howling or in any other manner disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or
endangers the safety of any person, domesticated animal or farm animal. No owner
or keeper of a dog shall permit the dog to perform its natural body functions on
property other than that of the dog owner or keeper without approval of said property
owner.
SECTION 6 - The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to seek a complaint
against the owner or keeper of a dog who is found to have violated Sections 1 or 5 of
this By-Law and impose fines and reclaiming fees with the approval of the Board of
Selectmen.
SECTION 7 - In addition to the foregoing fines and reclaiming fees, the Animal
Control Officer is also authorized and empowered to muzzle, restrain or order the
owner or keeper of a dog to muzzle or restrain a dog pending a hearing before the
Board of Selectmen as hereinafter provided, when the Animal Control Officer finds
that
a. a dog has bitten or threatened any person, domesticated animal or farm
animal,
b. a dog has chased any vehicle upon any way open to public travel in the Town,
or
c. the owner or keeper has violated any provision of this By-Law more than three
times in any calendar year.
SECTION 8 - The owner or keeper of any dog that has been ordered muzzled or
restrained under the provisions of Section 7 may request the Animal Control Officer in
writing to vacate such order. If such order is not vacated, the owner of such dog may
bring a petition in the District Court praying that the order of restraint be reviewed by
the court as provided in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 140, Section 157 as
amended.
SECTION 9 - In addition to any other statutory authority contained in Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 140, the Animal Control Officer may enter a complaint with
the Board of Selectmen to the control or disposition of any dog found to be
uncontrollable or whose owner or keeper is unresponsive to any other penalties
contained in this By-Law.
SECTION 10 - Dog Licenses and Rabies Vaccinations
a. Each dog in Hingham must be licensed at six months of age and remain
licensed thereafter.
b. No dog license will expire later than the expiration date of the current rabies
vaccination.
c. No dog license will be issued until proof of a current rabies vaccination has
been determined.
d. A fine of $15 will be assessed for failure to license a dog within two months
after (1) the dog reaches six months of age or (2) expiration of the current
license or (3) being acquired or moved into the Town of Hingham without a
current license.
e. A fine of $50 will be assessed for failure to maintain a current rabies
vaccination for a dog unless (1) the dog is under six months of age or (2) the
dog has been acquired or moved into the Town of Hingham less than ninety
days.
f. Any fine may be assessed through non-criminal process in accordance with
MGL Ch 40, Section 21 D. Each day on which any such violation continues
shall be considered a separate violation of this section. The availability of
non-criminal process under this article shall not preclude the use of criminal
process or other means of enforcement.
SECTION 11 - All monies received or recovered from license fees, late fees,
reclaiming fees, reasonable costs and fines shall be paid into the treasury of the
Town of Hingham.
SECTION 12 – Banned or Removed Dogs
a. Dogs “banned” or “removed” from another town or municipality may not be
relocated to or permitted to be kept within the territory of the Town of Hingham.
b. Fines for Violation – Violation of Article 17, Section 12 a shall be punished by a
fine of $50.00 for each offense, each day of violation constituting a separate offense.
ARTICLE 18
FEES FOR PLUMBING AND GAS PERMITS
Residential Plumbing and Gas Fees:
1 Fixture (Minimum) $ 35
Each additional fixture $ 10
New house (complete) $200
Site Visit $ 35
Re-inspection fee $ 75/unit
Commercial Plumbing and Gas Fees:
1 fixture (Minimum) $ 45
Each additional fixture $ 15
Site Visit $ 50
Re-inspection fee $ 75/unit
Work started without permits: Double fee
Permit applications are to include homeowner’s phone number.
Inspections are conducted Monday – Friday After 10:00 am
Inspections to be called in to 781-741-1420 between 8:30 and 10:00 am with the
permit number.
Plumbers must be on premises for all inspections
No Water Piping To Be Installed On Outside Walls. No exceptions
Permit applications cannot be accepted without required fees
Rough and final inspections mandatory
Re-inspection fees will be enforced
In accordance with M.G.L. c. 44, s. 53E½, there is hereby established in the
Building Department a Building Department Revolving Fund for the following
purposes:
1. For the receipt of all fees from plumbing, gas, and electrical inspections
performed by Inspectors.
2. For expenditures to pay wages, salaries, and fringe benefits (as applicable)
for said Inspectors and their staff for performance of their services.
The Building Commissioner shall be authorized to expend from said Revolving
Fund for said purposes in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 44, s. 53E½.
The Building Commissioner shall report all receipts and expenditures of said
Revolving Fund to the Board of Selectmen at the end of each Fiscal Year.
Revised 1/5/12, 5/17
ARTICLE 19
FIRE DISTRICTS
The following districts are established and designated as Fire Districts pursuant
to and in accordance with Article 3 of Massachusetts State Building Code. All
buildings and structures, and all additions, enlargements, and/or extensions to
existing buildings and structures, erected or extended or added after January 1,
1975, in areas so designated shall be governed by the provisions of Article 3 of
the Massachusetts State Building Code:
(1) Fire District No.1: All areas designated on a plan entitled “Town of Hingham
Fire Districts – 1975” as from time to time amended, on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and in the office of the Building Commissioner, including those areas
or zones designated on the Town of Hingham Zoning Map as Business District A,
Business District B, Waterfront District, Industrial District A, Industrial District B,
Industrial Park District, and Office Park District.
(2) Outside Fire Limits: All areas not designated as within Fire District No. 1 are
deemed to be “Outside Fire Limits.”
ARTICLE 20
FEES FOR EXPLOSIVES AND INFLAMMABLE MATERIALS
Fees for licenses, registrations and certificates relative to explosives and inflammable
materials included in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 148, Section 9.
The following fees for initial licenses and for certificates of annual registration are
hereby established and shall be paid to the Town Clerk by all applicants and holders
of licenses excepting from the provisions hereof the Town of Hingham and any
subdivision thereof, including all boards, departments, committees, commissions,
councils, and any body of a similar nature of the Town, prior to issuance of a license
or certificate of annual registration:
(1) Initial License: The fee for initial license pertaining to the keeping, storage,
manufacture or sale, of gunpowder, dynamite, crude petroleum or any of its products,
or explosive or inflammable fluids or compounds, tablets, torpedoes or any
explosives of a like nature, of any substance having such properties that it may
spontaneously, or acting under the influence of any contiguous substance, or of any
chemical or physical agents, ignite or inflame or generate inflammable or explosive
vapors or gases to a dangerous extent, shall be $100.00.
(2) The fee for annual registration and/or certificate of such annual registration
pertaining to the keeping, storage, manufacture or sale of any product or material,
included in subparagraph (1) above, shall be $100.00.
ARTICLE 21
FEES FOR BUILDING PERMITS
The following fees for building permits are hereby established and shall be paid by an
applicant for a building permit, to the Building Commissioner, for use of the Town, at
the time of filing an application and, in any event, prior to the issuance of permit:
Residential
New Construction, Add’n/Altn’s. $10/$1000 of est. cost
Demolition or $50 minimum
Certificate of Occy. (includes Temporary) $35 per unit
Tent $35
Re-inspection fee $75
Work started w/o permit Dbl. Fee & $100
Commercial
New Construction, Add’n/Altn’s. $15/$1000 of est. cost
Demolition or $50 minimum
Certificate of Occy. (Includes Temporary) $35 per unit
Signs $3 sq. ft.or $50 minimum
Tent $35
Re-inspection fee $75
Work started w/o permit Dbl. Fee & $100
The fees set forth herein may be changed and adjusted from time to time by the
Board of Selectmen.
In the case of an application for a building permit submitted by the Hingham Housing
Authority, this fee may be waived at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen, but
only for such projects as are developed solely by the Hingham Housing Authority or
by the Hingham Housing Authority in partnership with other public sector or nonprofit
organizations.
ARTICLE 22
WETLANDS PROTECTION BY-LAW
SECTION 1: PURPOSE AND PROTECTABLE RESOURCES
The purpose of this By-Law is to protect the foreshores, wetlands, and
groundwater supply of the Town of Hingham by controlling activities deemed to
have a significant effect on wetland and water quality values, including, but not
limited to, the following:
Public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion control, storm
damage, water pollution, fisheries, shellfish, wildlife, recreation and aesthetics.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, or alter any bank, freshwater wetland,
coastal wetland, beach, dune, bog, flat, marsh, meadow, vernal pools or swamp,
or any estuary, creek, river, stream, pond, lake, or the ocean, or the land under
or bordering on said waters or wetlands, or any land subject to tidal action,
coastal storm flowage, or flooding, or Riverfront Area without first filing written
notice of his or her intention to so remove, fill, dredge, or alter by sending a
separate letter, by certified mail, or by hand delivery to the Hingham
Conservation Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") or its
authorized agent, and without receiving and complying with an Order of
Conditions, and provided all appeal periods have lapsed. Such Notice of Intent
shall include such plans as required, from time to time, by the Commission and
as may be necessary to describe such proposed activity and its effect on the
environment. The same plans and specifications required to be filed by an
applicant under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40, will be
accepted as fulfilling the requirements of this By-Law.
The Commission may hear any oral presentation under this By-Law at the same
public hearing required to be held under the provision of said Chapter 131,
Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws. Definitions set forth in said
chapter and section of the General Laws and in the regulations issued, as
amended from time to time, by the Department of Environmental Protection, or
any successor thereto, are hereby made a part of this By-Law. The Commission
may, from time to time, adopt such additional definitions, regulations, and
performance standards as it may deem necessary to further the purpose and
protect the interests of this By-Law. Said definitions shall become effective upon
publication following a public hearing.
This Article 22 is intended to utilize the Home Rule authority of this municipality
to protect additional resource areas, for additional values, with additional
standards and procedures stricter than those of the Wetlands Protection Act,
M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40 and regulations thereunder, 310 CMR 10.00.
Activities that may not require review or permitting under the Wetlands Protection
Act, the Rivers Protection Act, or other federal, state or local statutes are not
assumed to be exempt from this By-Law.
SECTION 2: REGULATED ACTIVITIES
2A. Except as permitted by the Commission or as otherwise
provided in this By-Law, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, alter or build upon
or within one hundred (100') feet of any resource area, as outlined in Section 1 of
this By-Law, or within the two-hundred foot (200') Riverfront Area, as defined in
310 CMR Section 10.58. The provisions of this By-Law shall not apply to any
removing, filling, dredging, or altering necessary in the course of maintaining or
repairing, or replacing, but not substantially changing or enlarging, an existing
lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to provide
electric, gas, sewer, water, telephone or telecommunication services. Any
removal, filling, dredging or altering authorized by this section 2A shall be subject
to best management practices for sediment and erosion control.
2B. Except as authorized by the Commission, no activity or
alteration shall be permitted within a fifty (50’) foot Buffer strip between any
wetland resource , bordering vegetated wetland, coastal dune or bank, and/or
isolated vegetated wetland and any proposed site disturbance. Prohibited
activities shall include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) new construction
of any buildings, decks, in-ground and above-ground swimming pools, sheds
and/or driveways of any nature or type (excepting water dependent structures
expressly approved by the Commission); (2) alteration, reconstruction or
relocation of existing buildings, sheds and/or driveways of any nature or type;
and (3) activities which involve or result in the removal, filling or altering of land
within the buffer strip, including vegetation removal and grading. Nothing herein
shall preclude the maintenance of an existing, lawfully constructed structure
located within the BUFFER ZONE. The Commission may allow the prohibited
activities upon an express determination that the applicant has made a clear and
convincing showing that the proposed work in the BUFFER STRIP and its natural
and consequential impact and effects will not adversely affect the wetland values
of this By-Law.
2C. Except as authorized by the Commission, no activity or alteration shall
be permitted within one hundred (100’) feet of a vernal pool, whether it be
certified or uncertified but accompanied by credible evidence of its viability as a
vernal pool. The one hundred feet (100’) around the defined vernal pool
boundaries shall be known as “Vernal Pool Protection Zone”.
Isolated Vegetated Wetlands, Isolated Land Subject to Flooding, and the
adjacent 100 feet surrounding these depressions are protected under the
Hingham Wetlands Protection By-Law. Vernal Pool Habitat is defined as
confined basin depressions which, at least in most years, hold water for a
minimum of two continuous months during the spring and/or summer, and which
are free of adult fish populations, as well as the area within 100 feet of the mean
annual boundaries of such depressions.
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
The term "person" as used in this By-Law shall include any individual, group of
individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company, business,
organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof,
administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, or any other
legal entity or its legal representatives, agents or assigns.
SECTION 4A: REQUEST FOR DETERMINATION
The Commission may make a determination as to whether or not this By-Law
applies to a specific situation prior to the filing of a written Notice of Intent under
the provisions hereof within twenty-one (21) days of the receipt of a written
request by certified mail, or by hand, from any person desiring such a
determination. The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees, may enter
upon the land on which the proposed work is to be done in response to a
Request for Determination, or for the purpose of carrying out its duties under this
By-Law, and make, or cause to be made, such examination or survey as it
deems necessary.
SECTION 4B: NOTICE OF INTENT
The same Notice of Intent, plans and specifications required to be filed by an
applicant under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40, will be
accepted as fulfilling the filing requirements of the By-Law. Within twenty-one
(21) days after receiving a Notice of Intent, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed activity. Notice of the date, time and place of said
hearing shall be given by the Commission at the expense of the applicant not
less than five (5) days prior to such hearing by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town and by mailing a notice to the applicant by mail.
The applicant may be present at said hearing and may be represented by
counsel and shall be entitled to present evidence, call witnesses, and question
any witnesses appearing at the hearing. The Commission shall make and keep a
record of its proceedings and, upon request, shall furnish copies at reasonable
cost. Said hearing shall be conducted simultaneously with the public hearing
required to be held under the provisions of said Chapter 131, Section 40, and in
conformity with said regulations promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Protection. The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees,
may enter upon the land on which the proposed work is to be done in response
to a Request for Determination, or for the purpose of carrying out its duties under
this By-Law, and make, or cause to be made, such examination or survey as it
deems necessary.
SECTION 5: AUTHORIZATION OF COMMISSION TO DENY PROJECT
The Commission is empowered to deny permission for any removal, dredging,
filling or altering on subject lands within the Town if, in its judgment, such denial
is necessary to preserve the environmental quality and to protect the wetland and
water quality values of either or both the subject lands and contiguous lands.
Due consideration shall be given to possible effects of the proposal on all values
to be protected under this By-Law and to any demonstrated hardship on the
petitioner by reason of a denial, as brought forth at the public hearing.
SECTION 6: ISSUANCE OF AN ORDER OF CONDITIONS
The Commission may, as an alternative to denial, impose such conditions as it
deems necessary to contribute to said protection and preservation of subject and
contiguous lands in accordance with the purpose of this By-Law and may issue
an Order of Conditions. Any Order of Conditions issued under this By-Law shall
be considered a "permit obtainable by local by-law”, as defined in Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40 and its regulations.
SECTION 7A: EMERGENCY WORK AND OTHER EXEMPTIONS
Notice required by Section 1 of this By-Law shall not apply to emergency projects
necessary for the protection of the health or safety of the citizens of the
Commonwealth and to be performed or ordered to be performed by an agency of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or of the Town. An emergency project
shall mean any project certified to be an emergency by the Commission or its
authorized agent. If the Commission or its authorized agent, as the case may be,
fails to act within twenty-four hours of receipt of a Request for Certification of an
emergency project, said project may be certified by the Hingham Board of
Selectmen or its authorized agent. In no case shall any removal, filling, dredging,
or altering commence prior to any emergency certification nor extend beyond the
time necessary to abate the emergency.
SECTION 7B: FILING FEES:
The Commission is authorized to establish filing fees to defray costs incurred in
conducting hearings under the Wetlands Protection By-Law and to adopt rules
and regulations regarding the establishment and collection of such fees. Such
rules and regulations may be adopted or amended at any regularly scheduled
meeting of the Commission subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
Upon such approval they shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, shall thereafter be posted for seven consecutive days in
five conspicuous places, and shall become effective upon the expiration of said
seven (7) days.
The Commission may waive fees when an application fee for a permit, filing, or
request for determination or applicability or other application is made by a
government agency, municipality or not-for-profit organization.
SECTION 8: ESTABLISHMENT OF SURETY BONDS
The Commission may require the posting of security, running to the Town,
including, without limitation, a letter of credit, cash, and bond with surety, in such
form and amount and with such conditions as may be determined in the sole
opinion of the Commission, after recommendation by its Town Counsel. Such
security shall secure faithful and satisfactory performance on work required by
any final "Order of Conditions", but shall not be an amount greater than the
estimated cost of the work required for the restoration of affected lands and
properties if the work is not performed as required.
The Commission may also consider a Conservation Restriction, easement or
other covenant enforceable in a court of law as a way to secure adherence to
conditions imposed by the Commission. Such covenant shall be executed and
duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of the
Town, whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before
any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be
used only with the consent of the applicant.
SECTION 9: ENTRY TO PROPERTY FOR REVIEW PURPOSES
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have the authority to
enter upon privately owned land pursuant to warrant, court procedure, or another
appropriate administrative order for the purpose of performing their duties under
the Bylaw and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or
sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
SECTION 10: BURDEN OF PROOF
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance
of credible evidence that the work proposed in the application and depicted on
the plans will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon the
wetland values protected by this Article 22.
SECTION 11 ESTABLISHMENT OF ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY
SECTION 11A:
The Commission shall have the authority to enforce this By-Law, its regulations,
and permits issued thereunder by enforcement orders, violation notices,
administrative orders, and civil and criminal court actions. Upon request of the
Commission to, and with the approval of, the Board of Selectmen, the Town
Counsel may take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of
the Commission, the Chief of Police may take legal action for enforcement under
criminal law.
SECTION 11B: ESTABLISHMENT OF FINES
Any person including, but not limited to, the property owner, landscaper,
contractors and tree cutting services, who violates any provision of this By-Law,
its regulations or any conditions of a permit issued pursuant to it shall be
punished by a fine which shall be set by the Commission. The fine shall be
$100.00 (one hundred dollars) per violation. Each day or portion thereof during
which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation and each By-
Law, regulation or permit violated shall constitute a separate offense. A Hingham
police officer or the Conservation Commission or its agent may enforce this By-
Law by noncriminal complaint pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D.
Upon request by the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and Town Counsel
shall take such legal action as may be necessary to enforce this By-Law and
permits issued pursuant to it.
SECTION 11C: SHOW-CAUSE HEARINGS
The Commission may require a Wetlands By-Law violator to attend a “Show-
Cause” Hearing at a scheduled time and date certain if, in the Commission’s
judgment, the violator has failed to respond to an Enforcement Order, cooperate
with the Commission’s request for remedial actions or take required steps
necessary for ensuring protection of the resources and associated buffer zones
in a timely manner.
SECTION 12: SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this By-Law be found invalid, the validity of
any other section or provision thereof shall not be affected, nor shall it invalidate
any permit, approval or determination which previously has been issued.
ARTICLE 23
SEWER APPROPRIATION BY-LAW
SECTION 1 - Any Article in the Warrant for a regular or special town meeting which
involves the expenditure or appropriation of money for the laying out, construction,
making and/or maintaining a system of main drains and common sewers, within the
Town of Hingham, shall include the following information in the body of the Article or
in the motion under the Article, printed in the Advisory Committee report, or provided
by the Advisory Committee as a printed document to be furnished voters at said
regular or special town meeting:
(a) A complete list of streets, roads, ways or portions thereof in which there is to be
the layout, construction or making of a system of main drains and common sewers;
(b) A financial impact statement including:
(i) The total estimated cost of the project;
(ii)The estimated property tax impact per $1000 of assessment for each and
every year funds are expended or repayments are being made on borrowing
for said project;
(iii) The estimated rate of the assessment upon the owners of the land to be
bettered based on the method of assessment voted by the Town and allowed
by Massachusetts General Laws.
(c) The Board of Health may, but is not required to, submit an advisory statement
indicating the public health and environmental needs for said project;
(d) The Board of Sewer Commissioners may, but is not required to, submit an
advisory statement indicating the scope and constraints of said project; and
(e) Such other information as the Advisory Committee deems appropriate.
ARTICLE 24
PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS
SECTION 1 - REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES
No person shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or like means of transportation
in a designated parking space that is reserved for vehicles owned and operated
by disabled veterans or by handicapped persons unless said vehicle bears a
distinctive license place authorized by Section 2 of Chapter 90 of the General
Laws or by similar laws of other jurisdictions.
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way or of
improved or enclosed property used as off street parking areas for businesses,
shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural
centers, residential dwellings, or for any other place where the public has right of
access as invitees or licensees shall be required to reserve parking spaces in
said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated by a disabled
veteran or handicapped person whose vehicle bears a distinguishing license
plate authorized by Section 2 of Chapter 90 or by similar laws of other
jurisdictions, according to the following formula:
If the number of parking spaces in any such area is more than fifteen (15)
but not more than twenty-five (25), one parking space; more than
twenty-five (25) but not more than forty (40), five (5%) percent of such
spaces but not less than two (2); more than forty (40), but not more than
one hundred (100), four (4%) percent of such spaces but not less than
three (3); more than one hundred (100) but not more than two hundred
(200), three (3%) percent of such spaces but not less than four (4); more
than two hundred (200) but not more than five hundred (500), two (2%)
percent of such spaces but not less than six (6); more than five (500)
hundred but not more than one thousand (1,000), one and one-half (1
1/2%) percent of such spaces but not less than ten (10); more than one
thousand (1,000) but not more than two thousand (2,000), one (1%)
percent of such spaces but not less than fifteen (15); more than two
thousand (2,000) but less than five thousand (5,000), three fourth (3/4 of
1%) percent of such spaces but not less than twenty (20); and more than
five thousand (5,000), one half of the one percent (1/2 of 1%) of such
spaces but not less than thirty (30).
SECTION 2 - SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR HANDICAPPED PARKING
SPACES
Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions hereof shall be
identified by use of the above grade signs with white lettering against a blue
background bearing the words "Handicapped Parking: Special Plate Required.
Unauthorized Vehicles may be Removed at Owner's Expense." Said spaces
shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway; shall be adjacent
to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods permitting sidewalk access to a
handicapped person; and shall be twelve feet wide or two eight foot side areas
with four feet of cross hatch between them.
SECTION 3 - REGULATION OF UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES IN
HANDICAPPED SPACES
Unauthorized vehicles shall be prohibited within parking spaces designated for
use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons as authorized by this By-Law,
and shall be prohibited for use in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp
designated for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or a
public way.
SECTION 4 - PENALTY
The penalty for violation hereof shall be as follows:
First Offense: One Hundred ($100.00) dollars
Second Offense: One Hundred ($100.00) dollars
Three or more offenses, the vehicles may be removed according to the
provisions of Section 120D of Chapter 266 of the General Laws.
ARTICLE 25
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES – FEES
SECTION l - Except as otherwise provided herein and as may be required by law, the
following fees shall be charged by the Sealer of Weights and Measures:
a. For sealing balances and scales:
- over 10,000 pounds, fifty dollars;
- 5,000 to 10,000 pounds, thirty dollars;
- l,000 to 5,000 pounds, twenty dollars;
- 100 to 1,000 pounds, ten dollars;
- more than ten pounds but less than 100 pounds, six dollars;
- ten pounds or less, four dollars;
b. For sealing avoirdupois, metric, apothecary, or troy weights -- forty cents each;
c For sealing liquid - measuring meters:
- for oil or grease, four dollars;
- for gasoline, eight dollars;
- for vehicle tank pump, sixteen dollars;
- for vehicle tank gravity, twenty dollars;
d. For sealing other devices:
- fabric - measuring, four dollars;
- wire, rope, or cordage - measuring, four dollars;
- yard sticks, forty cents
SECTION 2 - From time to time, fees herein may be established, changed, adjusted,
increased, and/or deleted by the Sealer of Weights and Measures, with the approval
of the Board of Selectmen.
ARTICLE 26
ON-SITE WASTE WATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSPECTION
No person or entity shall sell or transfer any real property within the Town, having a
building or structure thereon, which utilizes an on-site waste water disposal system or
systems, without having certified and provided the following:
(1) A written certification to the buyer that an inspection of the system or systems
has been made, within the twelve month period immediately preceding the sale or
transfer of said property, by a Disposal Works Installer licensed by the Town of
Hingham or its subdivisions. Said certification shall disclose that the inspection
was made, and the result(s) of said inspection;
(2) A scale drawing or plot plan to the Board of Health and the Board of Sewer
Commissioners, containing the location, on said property, of the cover or covers
for such system or systems. A copy of said drawing or plot plan shall also be
provided to the buyer.
Any further action to be taken under this by-law shall be in accordance with such
regulations as shall be adopted by the Board of Health.
ARTICLE 27
PUBLICATION OF BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED
Each week the office of the Building Commissioner shall cause to be published, in
a newspaper of general circulation in Hingham, a list of all Building Permits issued
during the previous week, except those issued for interior alterations and re-roofing.
The list shall include the name or names of the applicant or applicants, the address of
the property, the date the Permit was issued, a brief description of the proposed
construction or operations and the statement; Building Permits may be appealed to
the Board of Appeals. The time within which an appeal may be taken by a person
aggrieved by an interpretation, order, requirement, direction or failure to act by the
Building Commissioner, under the State Building code, is 45 days.
ARTICLE 28
HISTORIC DISTRICTS BY-LAW
SECTION 1 - AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
This By-Law shall be known and may be cited as the Historic Districts By-Law of the
Town of Hingham and is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40C of the
Massachusetts General Laws, as amended.
The purpose of this By-Law is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history of the Town, or its
architecture, and through the maintenance and improvement of settings for such
buildings and places and the encouragement of design compatible therewith.
Regulations may be promulgated by the Historic Districts Commission in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 40C of the Massachusetts General Laws, as amended,
in order to fulfill the purposes of this By-Law.
SECTION 2 - HISTORIC DISTRICTS COMMISSION
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40C, Section 4, of the Massachusetts
General Laws, the Historic Districts Commission appointed by the Board of
Selectmen pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 502 of the Acts of 1966 shall be
designated as the Historic Districts Commission under this By-Law. The Commission
shall consist of five citizens of the Town appointed for three-year terms, with the
terms of either one or two members expiring each year. Five alternate members shall
be appointed in a like manner. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment for an unexpired term. One regular member and one alternate
member shall be appointed from each of at least three nominees submitted by the
Boston Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, from at least three nominees
submitted by the Hingham Historical Society, and from at least three nominees
submitted by the Hingham Planning Board. One regular and one alternate member
shall be appointed, where possible, from among the residents of the historic districts,
and one regular and one alternate member shall be appointed at large. If within thirty
days after submission of a request for nominees to an organization entitled to submit
nominations for membership on the Commission no such nominations have been
made, the Board of Selectmen may proceed to make the appointments to the
Commission without nomination by such organization.
In case of the absence, inability or unwillingness to act of a member of the
Commission, his or her place shall be taken by an alternate member designated by
the chairman. Each member and alternate shall continue in office until the expiration
of his or her term or until his or her successor is duly appointed and qualified. All
members shall serve without compensation. The Commission shall annually elect a
chairman and vice-chairman from its number and a secretary from within or without
its number.
SECTION 3 - DEFINITIONS
As used in this By-Law the word "altered" includes the word "rebuilt", "reconstructed",
"restored", "removed", and "demolished" and the phrase "changed in exterior color";
the word "building" means a combination of materials forming a shelter for persons;
animals or property; the word "Commission" means the Commission acting as the
Historic Districts Commission; the word "constructed" includes the words "built",
"erected", "installed", "enlarged", and "moved"; the words "exterior architectural
feature" means such portion of the exterior of the building or structure as is open to
view from a public street, public way, public park or public body of water, including but
not limited to the architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the
kind, color and texture of exterior building materials, the color of paint and other
materials applied to exterior surfaces and the type and style of windows, doors, lights,
signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures; the words "person aggrieved" mean an
applicant, an owner of property adjoining the property of an applicant, an owner of
property within the same historic district as the property of an applicant and within
one hundred feet of said property as measured from a property line and any
charitable corporation one of whose purposes is the preservation of historic
structures or districts; the word "structure" means a combination of materials other
than a building, including a sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway.
SECTION 4 - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS, NON-APLLICABILITY
OR HARDSHIP
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 6 or 7 of this By- Law, no building or
structure within an historic district shall be constructed or altered in any way that
affects an exterior architectural feature unless the Commission shall first have issued
a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a certificate of
hardship with respect to such construction or alteration.
Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Commission shall file with the
Commission an application therefor in such form as the Commission may reasonably
determine, together with such plans, elevations, specifications, material or other
information, including in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the
proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably
deemed necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on the
application.
No building permit for construction of a building or structure or for alteration of an
exterior architectural feature within an historic district and no demolition permit for
demolition or removal of a building or structure within an historic district shall be
issued by the Building Commissioner until the certificate required by this section has
been issued by the Commission.
SECTION 5 - FACTORS CONSIDERED BY COMMISSION IN MAKING
DETERMINATION ON APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE
In passing on matters before it the Commission shall consider, among other things,
the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure,
the general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the features involved,
and the relation of such features to similar features of buildings and structures in the
surrounding area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or
structures the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape
of the building or structure both in relation to the land area upon which the building or
structure is situated and to buildings and structures in the vicinity, and the
Commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements
in addition to those required by other applicable laws or by-laws. The Commission
shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public
view.
The Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement, except for the
purpose of preventing changes or developments incongruous with the historic
aspects or the architectural characteristics of an historic district.
SECTION 6 - EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN MATTER FROM REVIEW
The authority of the Commission shall not extend to the reconstruction, if substantially
similar in exterior design, of a building, structure or exterior architectural feature
damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is
begun within one year of the damage or destruction and carried forward with due
diligence.
The Commission may determine from time to time after public hearing that certain
categories of exterior architectural features, if the provisions of applicable laws or
by-laws do no limit the authority of the Commission with respect thereto, may be
constructed or altered without review by the Commission without causing substantial
derogation from the intent and purposes of this By-Law.
Upon request the Commission shall issue a certificate of non-applicability with
respect to construction or alteration in any category then not subject to review by the
Commission in accordance with this Section 6.
SECTION 7 - ORDINARY MAINTENANCE; LANDSCAPING; CHANGES
OTHERWISE PERMITTED OR REQUIRED
Nothing in this By-Law shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair
or replacement of any exterior architectural feature within an historic district which
does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance
thereof, nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to
prevent the meeting of a requirement certified by a duly authorized public officer to be
necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, nor
construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to
the effective date of the applicable historic district by- law.
SECTION 8 - ADDITIONAL POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF
COMMISSION
The Commission shall be a majority vote of the members thereof promulgate
appropriate procedural rules and regulations for the calling of meetings, the calling
and conduct of hearings, the issuance and filing of certificates and other
determinations, and the keeping of records, provided that the same shall be
consistent with the requirements of Chapter 40C, Sections 10 and 11, of the
Massachusetts General Laws, and other provisions of this By- Law.
The Commission may after public hearing set forth in such manner as it may
determine various designs of certain appurtenances, such as lighting fixtures, which
will meet the requirements of an historic district and a roster of certain colors of paint
and roofing materials which will meet the requirements of an historic district, but no
such determination shall limit the right of an applicant to present other designs or
colors to the Commission for its approval.
The Commission may, where a certain construction or alteration is otherwise
inappropriate, nevertheless determine that owing to conditions especially affecting
the building or structure involved, but not affecting the historic district generally,
failure to approve an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or
otherwise, to the applicant and that such application may be approved without
substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the
intent and purpose of this By-Law. If the Commission so determines, it shall cause a
certificate of hardship to be issued to the applicant.
The Commission may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical and technical
assistants or consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to the carrying on of
its work, and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such purposes.
The Commission shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and duties granted to
it by this By-Law, such other powers, authority and duties as may be assigned to it
from time to time by Town Meeting vote.
SECTION 9 - APPEALS TO AND ENFORCEMENT BY THE SUPERIOR COURT
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within twenty days
after the filing of the notice of such determination with the Town Clerk, appeal to the
superior court for Plymouth County, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
40C, Section 12A, of the Massachusetts General Laws.
The superior court for Plymouth County may, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 40C, Section 13, of the Massachusetts General Laws, enforce the provisions
of this By-Law, and any determination, ruling or regulation issued pursuant thereto,
and may, upon the petition of the Commission or the Board of Selectmen, restrain by
injunction violations thereof; and, without limitation, such court may order the removal
of any building, structure or exterior architectural feature constructed in violation
thereof, or the substantial restoration of any building, structure or exterior
architectural feature altered or demolished in violation thereof, and may issue such
other orders for relief as may be equitable.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this By-Law shall be punished by a fine of
not less than ten dollars nor more than five hundred dollars. Each day during any
portion of which a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 10 - DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED BY SPECIAL ACTS OF THE GENERAL
COURT
The Lincoln Historic District and the Glad Tidings Historic District, established
pursuant to a prior Special Act of the Massachusetts General Court, shall hereafter
be subject to the provisions of this By-Law, notwithstanding the terms of such Special
Act. The provisions of this By-Law shall not affect the validity of these historic
districts.
ARTICLE 29
ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES
A. All inspection requests require a permit number.
B. All service related work requires a utility authorization number.
C. Service alteration fees are in addition to minimum charges.
D. Fees for unusual or special condition not listed on this fee schedule shall
be set by the Inspector of Wires or the Building Commissioner.
E. Electrical permits must be obtained within 5 days of commencing work or a
double fee for that permit will be charged.
F. All jobs must have a final inspection.
Residential
1 Base Residential Fee $35.00
2 Reinspection fee $75.00
3 Inspection(late fee) permits after staging $70.00
4 Service Change 100 to 200 AMP Residential $35/$70
5 Each Addn'l 100 AMPS or portion of (w 1 meter) $35.00
6 Temporary Service , six month limit $40.00
7 New Single Family Dwell/Complete Rehab + 50% $200.00
8 New Home complete with 200 AMP Service $225.00
9 New Home complete with 300 AMP $275.00
10 New Home complete with 400 AMP or more $325.00
11 Trenches each 100' $35.00
12 Audio Visual System $35.00
13 Major Appliances $35.00
14 Septic system wiring motor/pump $35.00
15 Alarm systems, Fire and Burgler $35.00
16 Gas or Oil Burners $35.00
17 Hot Water heater $35.00
18 Electric Heating per 10KW $35.00
19 Each addn'l 100 AMP meter or subpanel, each $35.00
20 Swimming Pools (inground) $90.00
21 Swimming Pools (above ground) $60.00
22 Hot Tubs/Spas/Hydromassage $60.00
23 Private Street Lighting, then $20 per pole $35.00
24 Heat, Vent, & A/C Units $35.00
25 Low Voltage $35.00
26 Grounding of foundation/Metal Siding/Metal Bldg. $35.00
27 Hand holes, each $35.00
Commercial Electrical Permit Fee Schedule
A. All inspection requests require a permit number.
B. All service related work requires a utility authorization number.
C. Service alteration fees are in addition to minimum charges.
D. Fees for unusual or special condition not listed on this fee schedule shall
be set by the Inspector of Wires or the Building Commissioner.
E. Electrical permits must be obtained within 5 days of commencing work or a
double fee for that permit will be charged.
F. All jobs must have a final inspection.
Commercial
1 Base Commercial Fee $50.00
2 Reinspection required $75.00
3 Inspection Fee for Off Hour Inspections (add'l fee) $200.00
4 Annual Maintenance Inspection Fee (up to 5 insp) $225.00
5 Inspection (Late fee) for permits filed after staging work $100.00
6 New Const. - fee calculated @ .10 per sq. ft. $200.00 min $200.00
7 Comm., Indust., Rehab more than 50% use new const. $200.00
8 200 AMP or less $150.00
9 201 AMP to 400 AMP $200.00
401 to 600 AMP (over 600 based on $1 per AMP) $250.00
10 Each Addn'l. Sub Panel or sub-main $50.00
11 Temporary Service , six month limit $70.00
12 Alarm System (Fire or Burglar) $50.00
13 Gas or Oil Burner $70.00
14 Cellular Tower Antenna $500.00
15 Cellular Tower Equipment Room $500.00
16 Gas Pumps (first 2, then $20 per pump) $ 50.00
17 Grounding of foundation, Metal Siding or Metal Building $50.00
18 Ground Mounted Light (up to 3, each addn'l. $20. per pole $50.00
19 Traffic light. (each addn'l. $50) $100.00
20 Trenches per 100' $35.00
21 Low Voltage (first 25 jacks) each addn'l .$1.50 $70.00
22 HVAC Air Conditioner, addn'l. $5 per ton/Max $100 $70.00
23 Tents, Concessions, Carnivals $100.00
24 Energy Management Systems $50.00
25 Hand holes, each $50.00
26 Exit Sign/Emergency Light (each) $10.00
27 Sign Lighting $25.00
28 Motion Picture Machines and Special Apparatus $50.00
29 Motors and Generators 1 HP to 8 HP $25.00
30 Motors and Generators 9 HP and over $35.00
31 Transformers 5 KVA - $250.00
ARTICLE 30
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING USE OF
CONSERVATION LAND IN HINGHAM
SECTION 1 - All people are welcome to use lands under the control of the
Conservation Commission for passive recreation from 1/2 hour before sunrise to 1/2
hour after sunset. No person shall be allowed to use said lands at other times
without the written permission of the Conservation Commission.
SECTION 2 - No cars, trucks, or other powered vehicles or tools are allowed in or on
said lands except authorized Town vehicles and those which may be allowed in or on
said lands with the written permission of the Conservation Commission.
SECTION 3 - (1) No hunting is allowed on any lands under the management, custody
or control of the Town of Hingham Conservation Commission (hereinafter
“Commission”) other than as may be authorized by the Commission in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (2) of this Section 3.
(2) (a) Otherwise lawful hunting of deer and fowl by use and shooting of bow and
arrows may be conducted on those designated portions of any lands under the
management, custody or control of the Commission only as authorized by written
permit issued by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Section 3.
(2) (b) Such authorization and permits, if any, as provided for in subsection 2(a)
hereof shall be granted by the Commission pursuant to a written policy or regulations
developed, adopted, promulgated and implemented by the Commission to (i) comply
with the Commission’s legal obligations, (ii) manage the needs of the hunting
community and the non-hunting community, and the resources involved with the
activity, and (iii) comply with provisions of state and federal laws and regulations
applicable to such hunting.
(2) (c) The Commission shall (i) develop and adopt said written policy or regulations
as provided for under subsection 2(b) hereof through a public hearing process, (ii)
promulgate and implement the initial written policy or regulations no later than
October 1, 2014.
(2) (d) A mandatory provision of any such policy or regulations under subsection (2)
(c) hereof shall require that any such authorization and permits can only be issued
upon written application by each individual seeking such authorization and permit,
which application shall require such information as the Commission deems
reasonable to (i) comply with the Commission’s legal obligations, (ii) manage the
needs of the hunting and non-hunting community, and the resources involved with
the activity, and (iii) comply with provisions of state and federal laws and regulations
applicable to such hunting. The Commission may, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of any such authorization and permit, and with approval of the Selectmen of
the Town of Hingham, charge to and require payment of a uniform fee by all such
applicants for the purpose of defraying the administrative cost of the Commission
incurred in processing such applications and administering this Section 3; and may
as a further condition precedent thereof require a written release of liability and/or
indemnification from the applicant to the extent allowed by law.
SECTION 4 - No person shall cut, break, remove, deface, defile, or ill-use any
structure, fence, sign, stone wall, or have possession of any part thereof in or on said
lands.
SECTION 5 - No unauthorized person shall cut any trees, bushes, plants, or flowers
in or on said lands without the written permission of the Conservation Commission.
SECTION 6 - No trails shall be cut or marked, nor facilities of an enduring nature
such as bridges, towers, lean-tos or buildings be constructed without the written
permission of the Conservation Commission.
SECTION 7 - No person shall engage in business, sell or expose for sale, or give
away goods, wares or circulars, upon said lands without the written permission of the
Conservation Commission.
SECTION 8 - Overnight camping on Conservation lands is not permitted without prior
written approval from the Conservation Commission.
SECTION 9 - No person shall dump or discharge any litter, trash, stumps, brush,
leaves, sand, stones, or fill on any lands under the control of the Conservation
Commission.
SECTION 10- No person except with written permission of the Conservation
Commission under Permit, shall dig or disturb any artifact or archaeological remains.
SECTION 11- All persons 15 years of age and over, while fishing on land under
control of Hingham Conservation Commission, shall possess and display a valid
Massachusetts Fishing or Sporting License and comply with all other Fish & Wildlife
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The Hingham Conservation
Commission encourages a policy of "Catch and Release" of all fish taken from any
waters under control of the Commission.
SECTION 12- No person shall tamper with the operation of any fish ladder or
interfere with migrating adult or juvenile herring in any water courses or water bodies
controlled by the Commission.
SECTION 13- Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited on all
lands under the control of the Conservation Commission.
SECTION 14- Penalties: Any violation of the Rules and Regulations hereunder,
carries with it a penalty of a fine not to exceed $200.00.
ARTICLE 31
DEMOLITION OF HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
SECTION 1 - INTENT AND PURPOSE
This By-Law is adopted for the purpose of protecting the historic and aesthetic qualities
of the Town by preserving, rehabilitating or restoring whenever possible, buildings or
structures which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural or historic
resources of the Town, thereby promoting the public welfare and preserving the cultural
heritage of the Town.
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this By-Law the following words and phrases have the following
meanings:
Commission - The Hingham Historical Commission
Commission Staff – The person(s) regularly providing staff services for the Commission
whom the Commission has designated as “commission staff” for the purposes of this
By-Law.
Commissioner – The person occupying the office of Hingham Building Commissioner or
otherwise authorized in the Town of Hingham to issue permits under the Massachusetts
State Building Code.
Demolition – The act of pulling down, destroying, removing, razing or commencing the
work of any destruction of a regulated building or structure as defined in Section 3 of
this By-Law, or any portion thereof, excluding modifications to the interior of the building
or structure having no effect on the exterior thereof. Without limiting the foregoing,
demolition includes the act of removal or replacement of any historic architectural
element of any regulated building or structure for which a building permit is required
from the Commissioner including, but not limited to, the frame, finish, window(s),
roofing, chimney(s), siding, or any other architectural feature affecting the exterior of a
regulated building or structure.
Permit - A permit issued by the Commissioner for any Demolition (as defined in this By-
Law). A Permit, as this term is used in this By-Law, shall include a building permit for
Demolition activities as defined above and/or a permit for demolition issued by the
Commissioner pursuant to the Massachusetts State Building Code.
Historically Significant – a determination by the Commission that a Regulated Building
or Structure is:
-2-
(1) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the
architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the Town, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the United States of America; or
(2) historically or architecturally important by reason of period, style, method of building
construction or association with a particular architect or builder, either by itself or in the
context of a group of buildings or structures.
SECTION 3 - REGULATED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
The provisions of this By-Law shall apply only to the following buildings or structures
(and the architectural elements thereof) which shall be known for purposes of this bylaw
as “Regulated Buildings or Structures”:
(1) a building or structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Register of Historic Places, or the subject of a pending application for listings on either
of said Registers; or
(2) a building or structure located within 200 feet of the boundary line of any federal,
state or local historic district; or
(3) a building or structure included in the Inventory of the Historic and Prehistoric Assets
of the Commonwealth, the Hingham Comprehensive Inventory of the historic,
architectural and archeological assets of the Town or designated by the Commission for
inclusion in either of said Inventories. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to any building or structure located in a local
historic district and subject to regulation under the provisions of Chapter 40C of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
SECTION 4 - PROCEDURE
A. The Commissioner shall forward a copy of each Permit application for a Regulated
Building or Structure to the Commission within seven (7) days after the filing of such
application. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Article 31, the
procedure set forth in this Section 4 shall not apply, and the Commissioner may issue a
Permit, if the Commissioner determines that: (a) the proposed Demolition is part of a
project which includes the repair or renovation of the structure in question, and (b) the
appearance of the structure subsequent to the completion of the Demolition and related
repair or renovation from the street(s) abutting the property upon which the structure is
located shall be substantially the same as its appearance prior to such Demolition.
B. Within thirty (30) days after its receipt of such application, the Commission shall
determine whether the Regulated Building or Structure is Historically Significant. The
applicant for the permit shall be entitled to make a presentation to the Commission if he
or she makes a timely request in writing to the Commission. The Commission may, by a
majority vote of the Commission, delegate the determination of whether a Regulated
-3-
Building or Structure is Historically Significant to Commission Staff or to a designated
Commission member. In the event that the Commission delegates the determination to
the Commission Staff or to a designated Commission member, the Commission shall
adopt criteria to be followed by the Commission Staff or such member in making the
determination. A determination by the Commission Staff or by a Commission member
pursuant to such delegation shall be deemed a determination by the Commission.
C. If the Commission determines that the Regulated Building or Structure is not
Historically Significant, it shall so notify the Commissioner and the applicant in writing
and the Commissioner may issue a Permit. If the Commission determines that the
Regulated Building or Structure is Historically Significant, it shall notify the
Commissioner and the applicant in writing that a demolition plan review must be made
prior to the issuance of a Permit. If the Commission fails to notify the Commissioner and
the applicant of its determination within thirty (30) days after its receipt of the
application, then the Regulated Building or Structure shall be deemed not Historically
Significant and the Commissioner may issue a Permit.
D. Within sixty (60) days after the applicant is notified that the Commission has
determined that a Regulated Building or Structure is Historically Significant, the
applicant for the permit shall submit to the Commission ten (10) copies of a demolition
plan which shall include the following information: (i) a map showing the location of the
Regulated Building or Structure or architectural element(s) thereof to be demolished
with reference to lot lines and to neighboring buildings and structures: (ii) photographs
of all street facade elevations; (iii) a description of the Regulated Building or Structure or
architectural element(s) thereof to be demolished; (iv) the reason for the proposed
Demolition and data supporting said reason, including, where applicable, data sufficient
to establish any economic justification for Demolition; and (v) a brief description of the
proposed reuse of the parcel on which the Regulated Building or Structure is located.
E. The Commission shall hold a public hearing with respect to the application for a
Permit, and shall give public notice of the time, place and purposes thereof at least
fourteen (14) days before said hearing in such manner as it may determine, and by
mailing, postage prepaid, a copy of said notice to the applicant, to the owners of all
adjoining property and other property deemed by the Commission to be materially
affected thereby as they appear on the most recent real estate tax list of the board of
assessors, to the planning board, to any person filing written request for notice of
hearings, such request to be renewed yearly in December, and to such other persons
as the Commission shall deem entitled to notice. Within sixty (60) days after its receipt
of the demolition plan, the Commission shall file a written report with the Commissioner
on the demolition plan which shall include the following: (i) a description of the age,
architectural style, historic association and importance of the Regulated Building or
Structure or architectural element(s) thereof to be demolished; and (ii) a determination
as to whether or not the Regulated Building or Structure or any architectural element
thereof should preferably be preserved. The Commission shall determine that a
Regulated Building or Structure or architectural element thereof should preferably be
preserved only if it finds that the Regulated Building or Structure or architectural
-4-
element(s) thereof is Historically Significant because it is important to the Town’s
historical and/or architectural resources and is in the public interest to preserve,
rehabilitate or restore.
F. If, following the demolition plan review, the Commission does not determine that the
Regulated Building or Structure and/or architectural element(s) thereof to be
demolished should preferably be preserved, or if the Commission fails to file a report
with the Commissioner within the time limit set out in subparagraph (E) next above, then
the Commissioner may issue a Permit.
G. If, following the demolition plan review, the Commission determines that the
Regulated Building or Structure and/or architectural element(s) thereof to be
demolished should preferably be preserved, then the Commissioner shall not issue a
Permit for a period of six (6) months from the date of the filing of the Commission's
report unless the Commission informs the Commissioner prior to the expiration of such
six (6) month period that it is satisfied that the applicant for the Permit has made a bona
fide, reasonable and unsuccessful effort to locate a purchaser for the Regulated
Building or Structure who is willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the Regulated
Building or Structure, or has agreed to accept a Permit on specified conditions approved
by the Commission.
H. Any material change to the plans filed and approved by the Commissioner and the
Commission that (i) pursuant to the Massachusetts State Building Code, requires the
permit holder to file for a modification, (ii) occurs subsequent to the issuance of a Permit
previously approved by the Commission, and (iii) affects the exterior of a Regulated
Building or Structure or architectural element thereof, must be reviewed by the
Commission. The applicant shall submit plans detailing the requested changes to the
Commission and the Commissioner. The Commission shall issue a written report to the
Commissioner within 30 days of receipt of such plans. Such report shall either approve
the requested changes and authorize the issuance of a Permit pursuant to the revised
plans or shall deny the proposed changes. The changes shall be deemed approved if
such report is not received by the Commissioner within said thirty (30) day period. If the
proposed changes are not approved, the applicant may proceed with the work as
authorized under the original Permit or the work as described in the revised plans will be
subject to Section 4.G above.
SECTION 5 - EMERGENCY DEMOLITION
If the condition of a Regulated Building or Structure poses a serious and imminent
threat to the public health or safety due to its deteriorated condition, the owner of such
Regulated Building or Structure may request the issuance of an emergency Permit from
the Commissioner. As soon as practicable after the receipt of such a request, the
Commissioner shall arrange to have the property inspected by a board consisting of the
Commissioner, the Chairmen of the Commission and the Board of Health, and the Chief
of the Fire Department, or their respective designees. After the inspection of the
Regulated Building or Structure and consulting with this board, the Commissioner shall
-5-
determine whether the condition of the Regulated Building or Structure represents a
serious or imminent threat to public health or safety and whether there is any
reasonable alternative to the immediate Demolition of the Regulated Building or
Structure which would protect the public health and safety. If the Commissioner finds
that the condition of the Regulated Building or Structure poses a serious and imminent
threat to public health or safety, and that there is no reasonable alternative to the
immediate Demolition thereof, the Commissioner may issue an emergency Permit to the
owner of the Regulated Building or Structure. Whenever the Commissioner issues an
emergency Permit, under the provisions of this section 5, the Commissioner shall
prepare a written report describing the condition of the Regulated Building or Structure
and the basis for the decision to issue an emergency Permit with the Commission.
Nothing in this section 5 shall be inconsistent with the procedures for the demolition
and/or securing of buildings and structures established by Chapter 143, Sections 6-10,
of the Massachusetts General Laws. In the event that a Board of Survey is convened
under the provisions of Section 8 of said Chapter 143 with regard to any Regulated
Building or Structure, the Commissioner shall request the Chairman of the Commission
or his designee to accompany that Board of Survey during its inspection. A copy of the
written report prepared as a result of such inspection shall be filed with the Commission.
SECTION 6 - NON-COMPLIANCE
A. The Commission may request that the Board of Selectmen institute any and all
actions or proceedings, in law or equity as the selectmen may deem necessary and
appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this By-Law or to prevent a
threatened violation thereof.
B. Anyone who engages in Demolition in violation of this By-Law may be subject to a
fine of not more than three hundred ($300) dollars. Each day the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense until a faithful restoration of the demolished Regulated
Building or Structure or architectural element is completed or unless otherwise agreed
to by the Commission.
C. No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon which
Demolition has occurred in violation of this By-Law for a period of three (3) years after
the date of such violation. As used herein, "premises" refers to the parcel of land upon
which the Regulated Building or Structure (or architectural element thereof) was located
and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or control.
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the Commission shall, on its own initiative,
or on application of the landowner, determine that earlier reconstruction, restoration or
other remediation of any Demolition in violation of this By-Law better serves the intent
and purpose of this By-Law, it may, prior to the expiration of said three (3) year period,
authorize the Commissioner in writing to issue a Permit upon such conditions as the
Commission deems necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this By-
Law. Upon issuance of such written authorization by the Commission to the
Commissioner, and compliance of the landowner with the conditions, if any, of such
-6-
authorization, the building permit moratorium set forth in subsection 6.C shall cease,
provided that future Permit applications for the premises shall be subject to applicable
provisions of this By-Law.
E. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to exempt a landowner from compliance with
any requirements of the State Building Code or prohibit landowners from complying with
any requirements of the State Building Code.
SECTION 7 - APPEALS TO SUPERIOR COURT
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within twenty days
after the filing of the notice of such determination with the Commissioner, appeal to the
superior court for Plymouth County. The court shall hear all pertinent evidence and shall
annul the determination of the Commission if it finds the decision of the Commission to
be unsupported by the evidence or to exceed the authority of the Commission or may
remand the case for further action by the Commission or make such other decree as
justice and equity shall require.
SECTION 8 - SEVERABILITY
In case any section, paragraph or part of this By-Law is declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, every other section, paragraph
and part of this By-Law shall continue in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 32
FIRE PREVENTION CODES
SECTION 1 - Under the provisions of Chapter 148, Section 38A of the
Massachusetts General Laws, the Town hereby establishes a permit fee in the sum
of two hundred ($200.00) dollars for the removal of an underground gasoline storage
tank.
SECTION 2 - Each compact dumpster shall have one two foot square hinged steel
flap located on the top of the compactor for each ten feet in compactor length for the
purpose of venting and firefighting.
SECTION 3 - Each new underground tank used for storage of a flammable liquid
shall be provided with not less than one separate four-inch (4") diameter PVC pipe
with one end capped. Each open end shall be installed in the tank field under, and
not more than three feet from, the tank. The pipe shall slope continuously downward
to the capped end which shall terminate in an accessible pea-stone sump area
located on the downward slope of the tank field. The purpose of the pipe or pipes is
to provide means for detection of leakage from the tank.
SECTION 4 - All underground tubing used for liquified petroleum gas (LPG)
installations shall be protected against damage or distortion by protective hose or
other covering approved by the Fire Chief.
SECTION 5 - It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, park at,
obstruct or restrict the access to any fire hydrants, fire lanes so marked or any Fire
Department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including
fire hydrants, fire lanes, and Fire Department connections that are located on public
or private streets and access lanes, or private property. Upon receipt of notification
of violation, obstructions or encroachments, the fire official shall proceed to notify the
Police Department to remove same. Cost incurred in the per performance of
necessary work shall be paid for by the owner of record of said land, vehicle or
obstruction.
SECTION 6 - A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a
permit from the Fire Department and the Water Company having jurisdiction. This
section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by and
authorized to make such use by the Water Company having jurisdiction.
SECTION 7 - Any business that is required to have on the premises, material safety
data sheets (MSDS), shall have them stored in one or more protective containers
accessible to the Fire Department, at a location or locations determined by the
Fire Chief.
SECTION 8 - When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult
because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life saving
or fire fighting purposes, the Fire Chief may require a key box to be installed in an
accessible location. The key box shall be of a type approved by the Fire Chief and
shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the Fire Chief.
SECTION 9 - The placement of new hydrants in the Town of Hingham shall be as
follows: Hydrants shall be easily accessible to fire apparatus. There shall be no
obstructions, such as poles or fences to obstruct access to the hydrant. Hydrants
shall not be located where they could be easily hit by automobiles and other vehicles
such as the edge of driveways or directly in line with driveways.
Hydrants installed after the effective date of this By-Law shall not be spaced more
than eight hundred (800) feet apart in residential areas, or more than five hundred
(500) feet apart in mercantile and industrial areas. At no time shall the distance
exceed eight hundred (800) feet to any building in the development. Hydrants shall
be of a make and specifications as prescribed by the Fire Department, and be
connected to a minimum of an 8" water main that will supply a minimum flow that will
be prescribed by the Fire Department.
Hydrants installed after the effective date of this By-Law shall be set plumb with a
minimum of eighteen (18) inches between the finish grade and the bottom of the
large outlet. Hydrants shall be located no further than seven (7) feet from a paved
road, and when placed on the same side as the sidewalk, shall be placed between
the sidewalk pavement and the street pavement. Hydrants should be placed as close
to intersections as possible and on property lines when possible. All expenses
incurred in the placing of such hydrants shall be paid by the developer.
SECTION 10 - For each nuisance fire alarm, after the third nuisance fire alarm within
a 90 day period at the same location, the owner of the premises shall be required to
pay an administrative fee of one hundred fifty ($150.00) dollars to the Treasurer of
the Town of Hingham. A nuisance fire alarm is defined as one caused by the failure
of equipment, not owned by the Town, on the owners premises.
SECTION 11 - Each marina float or pier system which is greater than 500 feet long
from its land-side beginning to its end or ends, or which is determined by the Fire
Chief or the Chief’s designee (Fire Chief) to be inaccessible for firefighting, shall have
a fire protection water piping system (System) installed for firefighting or emergency
use. The System shall be a manual dry standpipe system, with a fire department
connection and removable cap at its land-side end, ready for connection by the Fire
Department to a water source in the event of need. The System shall be constructed
of durable, corrosion-resistant materials, and it shall be equipped with 1½" hose
connections at 100 foot intervals for use in fighting fires. The System shall be
designed and installed in accordance with appropriate and nationally recognized
standards for such systems; where so warranted by special conditions, the Fire Chief
may consider alternative materials and/or design standards for the standpipe system
when such alternatives, in the Fire Chief’s opinion, provide the required protection.
The System shall be maintained in good operating condition at all times when the
float or pier system is in use. The System shall be inspected and tested annually, on
or before May 1, by a qualified testing agency, and a report detailing the results of the
inspection and test shall be forwarded to the Fire Chief within ten days of the
inspection and test. Any components of the System that fail the inspection or test
shall be repaired or replaced within 30 days and the System shall be retested. The
design and construction of all Systems shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Fire Chief. Design documents for such Systems shall be submitted to the Fire
Chief prior to the commencement of System construction, and the Fire Chief shall
review and respond to the submittal within 30 days of receipt thereof. No System
shall be constructed, expanded, or otherwise altered without the Fire Chief’s
approval. Installation of such System shall be completed, and the System must
receive the Fire Chief’s approval, before a float or pier system is allowed to be used.
The marina float or pier owner shall pay all costs of the System, including, but not
limited to, its design, construction, maintenance, inspection, and testing. The
provisions of this By-Law shall apply to all new and existing marina floats or piers
meeting the criteria described in the first sentence of this Section 11. A violation of
this Section 11 may result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100) if, after receiving
written notice of a violation from the Fire Chief, the marina owner fails to correct the
violation within 30 days of receipt of such notice, or within such longer time as the
Fire Chief may grant in appropriate circumstances. Each day that an uncorrected
violation exists after the allowed time for correction has elapsed shall be deemed to
be a separate offense.”
SECTION 12 - Violations - Any person or persons in violation of any fire prevention
code By-Law of the Town of Hingham or state laws or regulations applicable to fire
prevention shall be subject to a fine of twenty ($20.00) dollars per day per violation
unless specified in said provisions. Notices of violations shall be in writing and
violations shall be corrected in accordance with said notice. Said fine(s) shall be paid
to the Treasurer of the Town of Hingham within ten working days. Failure to pay said
fine(s) within the specified time shall result in the Fire Chief of his designee initiating a
complaint at the District Court.
ARTICLE 33
REGULATION OF VENDORS, HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS
GENERAL
A person licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as a transient vendor
under the provisions of Chapter 101, Section 3 of the General Laws, or as a hawker
or peddler under the provisions of Chapter 101, Section 22 of the General Laws shall,
before making any sales of goods, wares or merchandise within the limits of the
Town of Hingham, obtain a local license from the Board of Selectmen in the case of a
transient vendor, or register with the Board of Selectmen in the case of a hawker or
peddler. The Board of Selectmen may establish rules and regulations for the
licensure, registration, operation and conduct of transient vendors, hawkers and
peddlers.
PARADES
Transient vendors, hawkers or peddlers selling goods, ware and merchandise in
conjunction with or in the vicinity of any parade, including, without limitation the
Fourth of July Parade, in the Town of Hingham, shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
l. Transient vendors, hawkers or peddlers shall at all times remain a distance of at
least thirty (30) feet from the center-line of the street or roadway of the parade route.
2. No string graffiti products or aerosol spray products shall be sold.
3. No explosive devices such as HAND THROWN CAPS or similar products capable
of making explosive noises shall be sold.
4. All transient vendors, hawkers and peddlers shall display their license number in a
conspicuous manner at all times.
5. All transient vendors, hawkers and peddlers shall make any goods, wares or
merchandise, which they offer or intend to offer for sale, available for inspection by
the Police or Fire Chiefs or their designees.
ARTICLE 34
FEES FOR AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES
The annual fee for a license, issued under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
140, Section 177A, to keep and operate an automatic amusement device shall be
established at one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
ARTICLE 35
ROLLERSKATING AND SKATEBOARDING
SECTION 1 - No person shall rollerskate or skateboard on the following streets or
adjoining public sidewalks:
Main Street from its intersection with Leavitt Street to its intersection with North
Street; and
Central Street from its intersection with Elm Street to its intersection with North Street;
and
North Street from its intersection with Route 3A to its intersection with Lincoln Street;
and
South Street from its intersection with North Street to its intersection with Lafayette
Avenue; and
Fearing Road from its intersection with Cottage Street to its intersection with North
Street; and
Station Street from its intersection with North Street and its intersection with Water
Street.
SECTION 2 - Whoever violates the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than ten ($10) dollars for the first offense, fifteen ($15) dollars for the
second offense and not more than twenty-five ($25) dollars for the third and all
subsequent offenses.
SECTION 3 - The provisions of this Article are severable. If any provisions of the
Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
unconstitutional or invalid by any authority of competent jurisdiction, the application of
such provisions to any other person or circumstance or the application of the
remaining provisions of this Article shall not be impaired.
ARTICLE 36
SOLICITATION
SECTION 1 – Definitions
As used in this By-Law, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
a. ‘Solicitor’ shall include the following: any person who, for himself or another
person, firm, corporation, group or organization travels by foot, automobile, or any
type of conveyance from place to place, house to house, or from street to street,
taking orders or attempting to take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services or
securing or attempting to secure donations.
Solicitor shall also include any person requesting directly or indirectly any money,
credit, property, financial assistance or any thing of value in exchange for goods or
services.
Solicitor shall not include any person who secures money, credit, property, financial
assistance, or any other thing of value on the plea or representation that it will be
used for a charitable, political or religious purpose or that it is to be exchanged for
any such goods or services.
b. ‘Charitable’ shall mean and include the words patriotic, philanthropic, social
service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.
c. ‘Religious’ and ‘religion’ as used herein shall not mean and include the word
‘charitable’ as herein defined, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.
d. ‘Person’ shall mean any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association, or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious denomination,
society, organization or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or
other representative thereof.
SECTION 2
No solicitor or any person as defined in Section 1 shall enter upon the property of a
resident or business which is affixed with a sign prohibiting solicitors or canvassers or
any similar signs prohibiting trespassers or entry onto property.
SECTION 3
All solicitors as defined in Section 1 must obtain a permit if an individual, or a
registration if an organization, prior to soliciting within the Town of Hingham All
individual solicitors must have said permit in their possession when soliciting within
the Town of Hingham. Solicitors are obligated to inform the Police Department as to
areas of Town in which soliciting will take place on each day solicitation is to take
place. Where solicitation will occur after 6:00 p.m., the Solicitor shall inform the
Police Department of the specific streets on which the intended solicitation is to
occur.”
SECTION 4
Solicitors must obtain the following approvals, as applicable: An Organization
Solicitation Registration and an Individual Solicitation Permit.
A. Organization Solicitation Registration: Every organizational solicitor in the Town
of Hingham must submit a fully completed Organization Solicitation Registration form
to the Chief of Police using the Organization Solicitation Registration form available at
the Police Records Office. The Police Chief shall have twenty (20) days to approve
the registration for such organization or notify the applicant that the registration is
denied. The registration is non-transferable.
B. Individual Solicitor Permit: Each individual who seeks to solicit must submit a fully
completed Individual Solicitation Permit application form and a passport-sized
photograph to be used for the permit badge to the Chief of Police. The Individual
Solicitation Permit application form shall be available at the Police Records Office.
The Police Chief shall have twenty (20) days to approve an Individual Solicitation
Permit application or notify the applicant that the permit is denied. Upon approval,
the Chief of Police shall cause an individual permit, with picture identification, to issue
within five (5) business days. The permit is non-transferable and must be displayed
at all times while the permitee is soliciting. Upon request, the permitee shall show
his/her permit to a police officer.
Each permit shall be valid for no more than six (6) months from the date of issue.
The organization registrant shall pay a processing fee of $25 for each permit badge
issued to individuals soliciting on its behalf. The Police Chief, for good cause shown,
may waive this fee.
BASIS FOR DENIAL OF A REGISTRATION
The Chief of Police may refuse to register an organization which has been charged
with fraud, deceptive or misleading advertising, or is under investigation by the
Attorney General’s Consumer Fraud Prevention Division, until such charge or
investigation is disposed of and the organization found not culpable.
No registration shall issue to any organization that the Police Chief determines has
violated this by-law. No registration shall issue if the Police Chief determines that the
application contains any fraudulent or untruthful statements. The Police Chief is
authorized to conduct background checks on applicants to determine suitability
related to reasons for denial.
BASIS FOR DENIAL OF A PERMIT
No permit shall issue if the applicant for the permit has ever been convicted of a
felony, or any one or more of the following misdemeanors:
Assault and battery;
Breaking and entering a building or ship with intent to commit a misdemeanor;
Larceny;
Shoplifting, cheating by check;
Unlawful or fraudulent use of credit cards;
Unlawful taking of money;
Stealing or poisoning of a dog;
Buying, receiving or concealing stolen goods;
Deceptive advertising;
Making or publishing false statements;
Destruction or injury of a building;
Trespass on property after prohibition; and/or
Trespass with internal combustion engine or source of mechanical power.
No permit shall issue to any person who has violated any provision of this by-law. No
permit shall issue if the Chief determines that the individual permit application form is
incomplete. No permit shall issue if the Chief determines that the individual permit
application form contains any untruthful or fraudulent statement. The Police Chief is
authorized to conduct background checks on applicants to determine suitability
related to reasons for denial.
SECTION 5
No permit or registration for solicitation shall be granted by the Police Chief unless
the Police Chief finds that the applicant has presented substantial evidence of the
goods or services he is proposing to solicit.
SECTION 6
No person having received a registration or a permit shall represent to the public that
the same constitutes an endorsement or approval by the Town or its officials.
Should a permitee be arrested and charged with a crime that is alleged to have
occurred in the course of conducting business under the permit, the permit shall be
automatically suspended. Such suspension shall last until the resolution of the
criminal proceedings. Should the permitee be found guilty of the offense, the permit
shall be revoked and no subsequent permit shall be issued.
Upon determination by the Chief of Police that a permitee has been convicted of a
felony or any of the above-named misdemeanors, the permit shall be revoked and
must be returned to the Police Chief within three (3) business days. Upon a
determination that an Organization Solicitor Registration form contains untruthful or
misleading information, or that the registrant has been convicted of fraud or found by
the Attorney General’s office to have violated any consumer protection law or
regulation, the registration and any permits issued under that registration shall be
revoked. All revoked permits must be turned in to the Police Department within three
(3) days of notice by the Chief to the registrant or permitee. Failure to do so shall
constitute a violation of this by-law and each day the permit is not turned in shall
constitute a separate offense. Any person or organization that is denied registration
or a permit or whose registration or permit has been revoked may appeal by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be filed
within five (5) days after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Board of
Selectmen shall hear the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting after the filing of
the written notice of appeal. The Board of Selectmen shall issue a decision with thirty
(30) days of the filing of the appeal.
SECTION 7 – Penalties
If due notice is given of a violation of this Article and that such a violation continues
thereafter on the date of such notice, such a continuation shall constitute a separate
offense. Each day thereafter that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Any person who commits a violation of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of $100.00 for each such offense.
SECTION 8
Each provision of this Article shall be deemed independent of all other provisions
hereof, and it is further the intention of the Town of Hingham that, if any provision
of this Article is declared invalid, all other provisions shall remain valid and
enforceable.
ARTICLE 37
COUNTRY CLUB MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION 1 - There is established effective July 1, 1993 a committee of the Town
which shall be known as the Country Club Management Committee (the
"Committee").
SECTION 2 - The Committee shall consist of five citizens of the Town who shall
initially be the five members of the Country Club Development Committee on June
30, 1993. The terms of such initial members shall expire on June 30, and the
Selectmen shall appoint members for three year terms commencing on July 1, as
follows: two in 1994, one in 1995 and two in 1996. Thereafter upon the expiration of
the term of each member, the Selectmen shall appoint a member for a term of three
years. Whenever any vacancy occurs, a member shall be appointed by the
Selectmen to fill the remainder of the unexpired term.
Section 3 - While the Selectmen may appoint such persons as they deem
appropriate, they should if possible include as members of the Committee persons
with training, experience or understanding with respect to financial controls and
reporting, commercial, contract and municipal law, facilities management, and the
organization and management of golf, swimming and other recreational activities for
which the Country Club facility is or may be used.
SECTION 4 - The Committee shall have care, custody and control of the
approximately 160 acres of land and improvements owned by the Town of Hingham,
numbered 274 South Street and generally known as the South Shore Country Club
("the Facility"), and shall do everything necessary or desirable to operate, maintain
and enhance, in a prudent and business like manner designed to be self sustaining,
the Facility.
SECTION 5 - After notice and a hearing, the Selectmen may remove a member of
the Committee for good cause shown and may also remove a member if such
removal is recommended by a majority vote of all the remaining members of the
Committee (not including the member whose status is at issue) for failure to perform
Committee duties or to abide by Committee rules and procedures duly adopted. If
the Committee makes such a removal recommendation to the Board, the Selectmen
will investigate the facts and circumstances, and hold a public hearing at which the
Committee shall have a right to appear and give evidence.
SECTION6 - The Committee may from time to time after a public hearing adopt rules
for its own governance and adopt rules and regulations for the governance of the
Facility.
SECTION 7 - The Committee shall elect annually from among its members a
Chairman and may elect such other officers as its rules may provide.
SECTION 8 - The Committee shall submit to the Selectmen a comprehensive annual
written report on its operations and activities, and on the financial affairs of the
Facility, and an interim status report on such matters at six-month intervals between
annual reports. The Committee and the Selectmen shall hold semiannual joint
meetings at which the Committee shall summarize its recently submitted report, and
answer any question thereon.
SECTION 9 - The Committee shall submit as part of the regular municipal budget
process, to the Selectmen and the Advisory Committee, an annual operating budget
including utilization in the next fiscal year of funds from operating receipts of the
Facility. Each year the Committee shall present for comment, to the Selectmen and
Advisory Committee, a rolling five year capital and facility plan.
SECTION 10 - The accounts of the Facility shall be audited annually as part of the
Annual Town Audit, and the Committee shall take such additional steps as it may
deem necessary or desirable to insure a high degree of confidence in the controls of
the Facility's receipts and expenditures.
SECTION 11 - For the purposes of Section 12 of Chapter 30B of the Massachusetts
General Laws, the Committee, in conjunction with the Selectmen, may enter into
lease agreements: dealing with the provision of food and beverage at the South
Shore Country Club, for a term of not less than one (1) year but in no event greater
than ten (10) years, with up to three additional extensions of no more than five (5)
years each, based on mutually agreed upon performance criteria; dealing with the
bowling facilities for a term not exceeding seven (7) years; and may enter into golf
maintenance contracts for a term not exceeding five (5) years.
ARTICLE 38
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
Section 1. Establishment
In accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 44B, known as the Community
Preservation Act, there is hereby established a Community Preservation
Committee (“the Committee”) consisting of nine members. The term of office of
each member of the Committee shall be three years. In case of a vacancy,
the designating or appointing authority for that seat shall designate or appoint
a new member to fill the remainder of the unexpired term. The composition
of the Committee and the methods of appointment of the members of the
Committee shall be as follows:
One (1) member of the Conservation Commission as designated by that
Commission;
One (1) member of the Historical Commission as designated by that
Commission;
One (1) member of the Planning Board as designated by that Board;
One (1) member of the Housing Authority as designated by that Authority;
One (1) member of the Recreation Commission as designated by that
Commission;
Two (2) members to be appointed by the Selectmen; and
Two (2) members to be appointed by the Moderator.”
Section 2. Amendments
This Article 38 may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of Town
Meeting, provided that no such amendment may cause this Article to conflict with
the Community Preservation Act.
Section 3. Severability
In case any section, paragraph or other part of this Article shall be for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, every
other section, paragraph and part hereof shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 4. Effective Date
This Article shall take effect immediately upon approval of the Attorney General
of the Commonwealth and proper posting by the Town Clerk in accordance with
Section 32. Each of the appointing authorities designated in Section 1 shall have
thirty (30) days after such approval to make their initial appointments. Should
any such appointing authority other than the Board of Selectmen fail to make its
initial appointment within such time, the Board of Selectmen shall make such
appointment. Should the Board of Selectmen fail to make any of its initial
appointments within such time, the Moderator shall make such appointments.
ARTICLE 39
HINGHAM AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST
SECTION 1. (a) There shall be in the Town of Hingham a Hingham Affordable
Housing Trust Fund, (hereinafter referred to as “the trust”). The purpose of the
trust is to provide for the creation and preservation of affordable housing in the
Town of Hingham for low- and moderate-income households.
(b) There shall be a board of trustees which shall include not less than five (5) nor
more than nine (9) trustees. The trustees shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and shall include one (1) member of the Board of Selectmen and are
designated as public agents for purposes of the constitution of the Commonwealth.
The initial terms of the trustees shall be staggered as one (1) or two (2) year terms.
All terms thereafter shall be for two (2)years.
SECTION 2. (a) The powers of the board of trustees shall include the following:
(1) to accept and receive real property, personal property or money, by gift, grant,
contribution, devise or transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public
or private entity, including but not limited to money, grants of funds or other
property tendered to the trust in connection with the provisions of the Hingham
Zoning By-Law or other by-law, or any general or special law or any other source,
or money from the Community Preservation Act, G.L. Chapter 44B.
(2) to accept and receive municipal, school or other public property, subject to a
majority vote of Town Meeting to transfer said property to the trust, for the purposes
of the trust.
(3) to purchase and retain real or personal property for the purposes of the trust,
including without restriction investments that yield a high rate of income or no
income, and to hold all or part of the trust property uninvested for such purposes
and for such time as the board may deem appropriate.
(4) to manage or improve real property.
(5) to sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any real property for such
consideration and on such terms as to credit or otherwise, and to make such
contracts and enter into such undertakings relative to trust property as the board
deems advisable, notwithstanding the length of any such lease or contract.
(6) to execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges,
leases, covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments
sealed or unsealed, necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the
board engages for the accomplishment of the purposes of the trust
.
(7) to employ and pay reasonable compensation to advisors and agents, such as
accountants, appraisers and lawyers as the board deems necessary.
(8) to apportion receipts and charges between income and principal as the board
deems advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such
purpose, and to create reserves for depreciation, depletion or otherwise.
(9) to carry property for accounting purposes at other than acquisition date values.
(10) to borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such sources as the
trustees deem advisable, to mortgage and pledge trust assets as collateral, subject
to review by the Town Finance Director and approval by a majority vote of the
Board of Selectmen. (Any debt issued by the Trust shall not be deemed to
constitute a debt or liability of the Town of Hingham or a pledge of the faith and
credit of the Town, but shall be payable solely from the revenues, funds and/or
assets of the Trust. Any debt instrument executed by Trust shall contain on the
face thereof a statement to the effect that the Town of Hingham is not obligated to
pay the same or the interest thereof except from revenues, funds and/or assets of
the Trust and that neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the Town of
Hingham is pledged to the payment of the principal of or the interest on such
debt. The issuance of debt by the Trust shall not directly or indirectly or
contingently obligate the Town of Hingham to levy or to pledge any form of taxation
whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment.)
(11) to make distributions or divisions of principal in kind.
(12) to defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in favor or
against the trust, including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either in
total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to
the provisions of this Article, to continue to hold the same for such period of time
as the board may deem appropriate.
(13) to extend the time for payment of any obligation to the trust.
(14) to provide grants or loans to assist low- or moderate-income homebuyers to
purchase or rehabilitate a dwelling unit in the Town of Hingham.
(15) to convey, through sale, lease or transfer, real property purchased under this
act, to any for-profit or non-profit developer or any public agency to provide low- or
moderate-income housing, subject to an affordable housing restriction under
Section 26 or Sections 31-33 of Chapter 184 of the General Laws.
(16) Each year the Trust shall provide to Annual Town Meeting a transparent and
detailed financial report on the year’s activities, as well as a cumulative report on
all the activities of the Trust since inception, reflecting how the Trust has used its
funds. The report shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) sources of funds,
(b) a description of projects undertaken and the status of those projects,
(c) a schedule of all amounts spent, including for preservation of affordable
housing, for creation of affordable housing, for grants or loans to other entities for
preservation or creation of affordable housing, for administrative support, and for
any other purposes permitted under this by-law, and
(d) a prospective view of the Trust’s expected operations for the next year, to the
greatest extent possible.
In addition, the Trust shall provide a narrative report of proposed activities to the
Board of Selectmen and the Advisory Committee in the fall of each year.
(17) Expenditures for the acquisition or disposition of real property shall be subject
to approval by a majority vote of the Board of Selectmen.
(18) To act as the lottery and monitoring agent for affordable housing and to accept
compensation for those services for deposit into the trust.
SECTION 3. (a) As a means of providing available assets for the trust, all moneys
received by the Town through the following means shall be paid directly into the
trust and need not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the trust:
(1) cash payments made by developers to the Town for purposes of creating or
preserving affordable housing, under any development agreements or
development approvals pursuant to the Hingham Zoning By-Law;
(2) gifts, grants, donations, contributions or other cash payments to the trust for
the purpose of providing low- or moderate-income housing;
(b) general revenues appropriated into the trust become trust property, and to be
expended these funds need not be further appropriated;
(c) all moneys remaining in the trust at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not
expended by the board of trustees within one year of the date they were
appropriated into the trust, shall remain trust property;
(d) the trust is exempt from Chapters 59 and 62 of the General Laws, and from any
other provisions concerning payment of taxes based upon or measured by
property or income imposed by the commonwealth or any political subdivision
thereof; and
(e) the books and records of the trust shall be reviewed annually by an independent
auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices.
SECTION 4. As used in this act, the term “low or moderate income housing” shall
mean “low income housing” or “moderate income housing” as defined in Section 2
of Chapter 44B of the General Laws.
SECTION 5. The Town Treasurer shall be the custodian of the fund. Any income
or proceeds received from the investment of funds shall be credited to and become
part of the fund.
SECTION 6. (a) The trust is a governmental body for purposes of Sections 23A,
23B and 23C of Chapter 39 of the General Laws.
(b) The trust is a board of the city or town for purposes of G.L. Chapter 30B and
Section 15A of Chapter 40; but agreements and conveyances between the trust
and agencies, boards, commissions, authorities, department and public
instrumentalities of the Town shall be exempt from G.L. Chapter 30B.
(c) The trust is a public employer and the members of the board are public
employees for purposes of G.L. Chapter 258.
(d) The trust shall be deemed a municipal agency and trustees as special
municipal employees for purposes of G.L. Chapter 268A.”
ARTICLE 40
THE NAMING OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC LANDS
SECTION 1. Purpose:
This by-law is enacted to establish the process by which, in naming, renaming or
otherwise designating public buildings and public lands, the Town seeks to
recognize individuals, locations and/or events of significance in local history and
local affairs.
SECTION 2. Definitions:
1. “Designate” - the act of calling by a distinctive title, term, or expression any
public buildings or public lands as defined in this by-law.
2. “Name” – a word or phrase that constitutes the distinctive designation of any
public building or public lands as defined in this by-law.
3. “Rename” – the act of redesignating any public buildings or public lands as
defined in this by-law
4. “Public Building” – any structure, edifice or other facility owned or maintained
by the Town of Hingham, or any department or agency thereof.
5. “Public Lands” – any real property owned or maintained by the Town of
Hingham, or any department or agency thereof, including, but not limited to,
playgrounds, parks, courts, athletic fields, intersections and medians, and private
ways on public lands, but not including public ways regulated by Article 10 of the
General By-laws.
6. “Features” – benches, bricks, flagpoles, plaques, parking spaces, trees,
scoreboards, and signs or other markers located on public lands or within public
buildings.
SECTION 3. Procedure:
1. The naming, renaming or other designation of any public building or public
lands shall be by majority vote at an Annual Town Meeting. Once a public
building or public lands have been named, they shall not be renamed unless
there are exceptional circumstances.
2. Any proposed name or designation of any public building or public lands shall
be submitted to the Board of Selectmen for its review and recommendation as to
the appropriateness thereof. Following a duly-advertised public hearing, and with
the advice of the Hingham Historical Commission, the Board shall forward its
recommendation to the Annual Town Meeting.
3. No public building or public lands shall be named for any living person or shall
bear the name of a commercial enterprise.
4. The naming, renaming or other designation of individual rooms, areas or subareas
within a public building, or areas or sub-areas associated with any public
lands, shall be by the department or agency having jurisdiction over the same,
and paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this section shall not apply, provided that:
(a) such rooms, areas, or sub-areas constitute less than 25% of the public
building or public lands at or in which the same may be located;
(b) the same shall not be named for any living person;
(c) no such room, area or sub-area shall bear the name of a commercial
enterprise; and
(d) a duly-advertised public hearing is held at which such naming, renaming or
designation is considered and acted upon by said department or agency. Any
person objecting to such naming, renaming or designation by the department or
agency may, within 10 days thereafter, appeal the action in writing to the Board
of Selectmen, which shall, after a duly advertised public hearing, approve or
reject the action.
5. The installation and naming, renaming or other designation of features shall
be by the department or agency having jurisdiction over the same. The Board of
Selectmen may, after a duly-advertised public hearing, establish standards and
specifications for signs, plaques, markers or other features to be erected on
public property within the Town.
ARTICLE 41
FALSE ALARMS
FALSE ALARMS
A. Definitions. For purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings:
ALARM SYSTEM
Any assembly of equipment and/or devices that is designed to be activated,
manually or automatically, for the purpose of drawing attention to the presence of
a hazard, emergency, or dangerous situation, whether caused criminally or
otherwise, to which the police are expected to respond.
ALARM USER
Any person or business entity on whose premises an alarm system is installed
and maintained in the Town of Hingham, except for alarms that are installed in or
on motor vehicles.
FALSE ALARM
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation, or negligence of the user of the alarm system or his/her
agent or employees that causes any signal or communication to be transmitted to
the Emergency Dispatch Center requesting, requiring, or resulting in a response
from the Police Department when, in fact, there has been no unauthorized entry
or intrusion into the premises or attempted robbery or burglary at the premises.
False alarms include alarm activation caused by non-criminal behavior that could
have been prevented by simple preventative measures. Excluded from this
definition shall be the activation of an alarm system by power outages, utility
companies, or other external factors beyond the alarm user’s control, including
hurricanes, severe storms, or other unusual weather conditions.
B. False Alarm Fines. The following schedule of fines for false alarms shall
apply, subject only to adjustment from time to time by the Board of Selectmen,
after public hearing, as circumstances warrant:
(1) After the Emergency Dispatch Center has recorded three (3) separate false
alarms within any 12-month period, commencing on the date of alarm
registration, the alarm user shall be assessed the following fines:
(a) Residential Alarm Users
$50 for the 4th, 5th, and 6th false alarms
$100 for the 7th, 8th, and 9th false alarms
$150 for the 10th and any subsequent false alarm, and a mandatory meeting
with the Chief of Police or his/her designee to resolve the problem of repeated
false alarms.
(b) Commercial Alarm Users
$100 for the 4th, 5th, and 6th false alarms
$200 for the 7th, 8th, and 9th false alarms
$300 for the 10th and any subsequent false alarm, and a mandatory meeting
with the Chief of Police or his/her designee to resolve the problem of repeated
false alarms.
(2) Failure to pay the assessed fine within thirty (30) days shall subject the alarm
user to court action for violation of a Town By-Law
C. Audible Alarm. All alarm systems that emit an audible signal shall be
equipped with a device that limits the length of the audible signal to no more than
ten (10) minutes.
Any user of an alarm system that does not have such a device, or that has a
malfunction that allows the audible signal to continue for more than ten (10)
minutes, shall be assessed a fine of $50. Failure to pay such fine within thirty
(30) days shall subject the alarm user to court action for violation of a Town By-
Law or the placement of a municipal charge lien on the real property pursuant to
M.G.L. c. 40, section 58, in the Plymouth County Registry of Deeds until the fine
is paid.
D. Registration. All alarm systems shall be registered with the Police
Department annually. Failure to register annually shall subject the alarm user to
a fine of $50, payable and enforceable as stated above.
E. Unauthorized Alarm Activation. Any alarm system activated intentionally
without prior notification of the Police Department shall subject the alarm user to
a fine of $150 for the first and each subsequent such alarm, payable and
enforceable as stated above.
F. Exemptions.
(1) All Federal, state, and municipal buildings and properties shall be exempt
from the provisions of this By-Law.
(2) No provision of this By-Law shall be construed to place an obligation on the
Police Department to respond to an alarm.
ARTICLE 42
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION 1: SHORT TITLE
This By-law may be cited as the Hingham Noise Control By-law.
SECTION 2: DECLARATIONS OF FINDINGS AND POLICY
WHEREAS excessive sound poses a serious
hazard to the public health, welfare, safety and quality of life, and WHEREAS the
residents of the Town of Hingham have a right to, and should be ensured, an
environment free of excessive Sound that may jeopardize their health, welfare or safety,
or degrade their quality of life; NOW THEREFORE, it is the policy of the Town of
Hingham to prevent excessive Sound which may jeopardize the health, welfare or
safety of its residents, or adversely impact their quality of life. This By-law shall apply to
the control of all Sound originating within the geographical limits of the Town of
Hingham.
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
(a) All terminology used in this By-law, but not defined below, shall be used with the
meanings ascribed to such terms in the applicable standards of the American National
Standards Institute (“ANSI”) or its successor bodies.
(b) “Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding Demolition for, or of, public or private rights-ofway,
structures, utilities, or similar property.
(c) “Demolition” means any dismantling, intentional destruction of, or removal of,
structures, utilities, public or private rights-of-way surfaces or similar property.
(d) “Emergency Work” means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical harm to Persons or property, which requires immediate action.
(e) “Enforcement Official” means a Town official having authority to enforce this By-law
as provided in Section 4 below.
(f) “Legal Holiday” means any day designated as a legal holiday under federal or
Massachusetts state law.
(g) “Noise Disturbance” means any Sound which: (a) may disturb or annoy reasonable
Persons of normal sensitivities; (b) causes, or tends to cause, an adverse effect on the
public health and welfare; (c) endangers or injures Persons; or (d) endangers or injures
real or personal property.
(h) “Person” means any individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or
other form of legal entity.
(i) “Plainly Audible Sound” means any Sound as to which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener including, without limitation,
understandable speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal,
repetitive bass Sounds, or comprehension of musical rhythms, without the aid of any
listening device.
(j) “Power Tool” means any device powered mechanically, by electricity, by gasoline,
by diesel or any other fuel, which is intended to be used, or is actually used, for
functions including, without limitation, cutting, nailing, stapling, sawing, vacuuming or
drilling.
(k) “Public Right-of-Way” means any highway, boulevard, street, avenue, lane,
sidewalk, alley or similar place, which is owned or controlled by a government entity.
(l) “Public Property” means any real property, including structures thereon, which are
owned or controlled by a government entity.
(m)“Residential District” means any area designated as a Residential District in the
Town of Hingham Zoning By-law.
(n) “Sound” means a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium resulting in compression and rarefaction of that medium, and
which propagates at finite speed to distant locations.
(o) “Weekday” means any day from Monday through Friday that is not a Legal Holiday.
SECTION 4: ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCE
(a) Enforcement Officials. This By-law shall be enforced by the Chief of Police, the
Executive Health Officer, the Building Commissioner and their authorized designees.
For all purposes other than the granting of permits under this By-law, designees of the
Chief of Police shall include any Hingham Police Officer.
(b) Penalties for Violation. Violations of this By-law shall be punishable by fine in
accordance with the following schedule:
Offense Fine
First $100
Second $200
Third and Subsequent $300
Violations resulting from Sound emanating from a particular parcel of property will be
assessed against the Person controlling said property at the time of the violation,
regardless of said Person’s legal status as owner, lessor, tenant-at-will, licensee or
otherwise. Nothing contained in this subjection shall prohibit an Enforcement Official
from giving a warning in lieu of a fine if, in the Official’s discretion, a warning is
appropriate under the circumstances.
(c) Non-Criminal Disposition. In assessing fines for violations of this By-law, the
Enforcement Official shall follow the procedure set forth in M.G.L. c. 40, § 21D.
SECTION 5: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF TOWN BOARDS AND
OFFICIALS
(a) Town Programs and Activities. All Town departments, boards and officials shall
carry out their programs and activities in a manner reasonably consistent with this Bylaw.
(b) Cooperation of Town Boards and Officials. All Town departments, boards and
officials shall cooperate with the Enforcement Officials in enforcing the provisions of this
By-law.
(c) Project Review and Approval. All Town departments, boards and officials having
responsibility for the review and approval of new projects or activites, or changes to
existing projects, that result, or may result, in the production of Sound shall, to the
extent reasonably feasible under the circumstances, require compliance with the
provisions of this By-law as a condition of approval. This By-law is not intended to
require any Town department, board or official to apply a more restrictive standard for
the approval of any project or activity, or change to any existing projects, than has been
applied prior to the By-law’s adoption.
SECTION 6: NOISE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED
(a) No Person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any Noise
Disturbance. Unamplified, non-commercial public speaking and public assembly
activities conducted at conversational voice levels on any Public Property or Public
Right-of-Way shall be exempt from the operation of this Section if such Sound is not
Plainly Audible beyond 100 feet or does not infringe the legitimate rights of others.
(b) The facts required to establish a Noise
Disturbance shall be identical to those required to establish a disturbance of peace
under the common law (and punishable under M.G.L. c. 272, § 53). Violations of this
By-law need only be proven by a preponderance of the evidence.
SECTION 7: SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES
(a) Specific Activities Prohibited. Notwithstanding any other provision of this By-law, a
Person engaging in any of the activities specified in subsections (b) through (d) of this
Section 7 at any time other than that permitted for such activity in the applicable
subsection shall be in violation of this By-law.
(b) Construction, Demolition and Commercial Landscaping Activity. No Person shall
operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment used in Construction,
Demolition or commercial landscaping work in a Residential District between the hours
of 7:00 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. the following day on Weekdays or between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:59 a.m. the following day on any other day.
(c) Domestic Power Tools. No Person shall operate, or permit the operation of, any
Power Tool or any garden tool, leaf blower or similar device powered mechanically, by
electricity, by gasoline, by diesel or other fuel, outdoors in a Residential District between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. the following day.
(d) Dumpsters and Trash Receptacles. No Person shall empty dumpsters or similar
trash receptacles between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. the following day on
Weekdays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:59 a.m. the following day on any
other day.
(e) Engine Braking Devices. No Person shall operate any motor vehicle with an engine
braking device engaged within the Town limits unless required for safety. This provision
shall not apply to motor vehicles traveling on Route 3.
SECTION 8: EXEMPTIONS AND PERMITS
(a) Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions of
this By-law:
(1) Any law enforcement motor vehicle in the performance of law enforcement duties.
(2) Any fire apparatus, ambulance, rescue, public works or emergency response vehicle
creating Sound in the performance of public safety responsibilities.
(3) Any vehicle in the performance of Emergency Work.
(4) Public address systems used at public events in a manner approved by any Town
board, department or official having authority over said use.
(5) Safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves and similar
devices during and in relation to public emergencies.
(6) Any activity (i) for which a permit under subsection (b) of this section exempting said
activity from the provisions of this By-law has been granted by an Enforcement Official,
(ii) which is the subject of a decision of any Town Board having authority over said
activity including, without limitation, decisions of the Planning Board permitting certain
activity at the Hingham Shipyard development and the Derby Street Shoppes or (iii) that
is allowed by a Town board, department or official having authority over said activity
including, without limitation, activity permitted subject to noise and/or use restrictions.
(7) Parades, music festivals, public gatherings, and events for which the Chief of Police
has granted a permit.
(8) Bells, chimes or carillons, or their amplified, recorded, or other electronic substitution
while being used in conjunction with religious services or to denote time intervals
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(9) Snow removal from public or private parking lots, roads, driveways, sidewalks and
other surfaces traveled by vehicles or pedestrians.
(10) Activities of temporary duration during a time of emergency conducted by a public
utility company to repair or maintain public utility infrastructure.
(11) Construction activity under a valid permit issued by the Chief of Police under
section 7 or 15 of Chapter 136 of the Massachusetts General Laws, or by any Town
board, department or official having regulatory authority over
Construction activity.
(12) Any vehicle utilizing an amplified communications system operated by a highway
maintenance, water department, or public utilities worker acting in the performance of
his or her responsibilities.
(13) The operation of modes of public transportation including, without limitation, buses,
trains and commuter boats.
(14) Any activity to the extent the regulation thereof has been preempted by state or
federal laws or regulations.
(b) Permits. Any Enforcement Official, for good cause shown, and with appropriate
conditions so as to reasonably minimize the any adverse impact on the public, may
grant a permit allowing activity that would otherwise violate this By-law.
SECTION 9: APPEAL
Appeal of any citation for a violation of this By-law shall be made to the District Court or
other court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40, §
21D.
SECTION 10: SEVERABILITY
If any of the provisions of this By-law are held to be invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 43
MARIJUANA NOT MEDICALLY PRESCRIBED
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws chapter 94G, section 3(a)(2), all types
of marijuana establishments, as defined in Massachusetts General Laws chapter 94G,
section 1, and as may otherwise be defined by Massachusetts law or regulation,
including, without limitation, all marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities,
marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers, on-site consumption of marijuana,
and any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, as well as businesses
dealing in marijuana accessories, and the conducting of any such activity for commercial
purposes by whatever name used, shall be prohibited within the Town of Hingham. This
prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit Registered Marijuana Dispensaries to the
extent permitted under the Town of Hingham Zoning By-Laws.
ARTICLE 44
PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION AND ENCOURAGE REUSABLE BAGS
SECTION 1 - PURPOSE AND INTENT
Single-use plastic checkout bags have significant detrimental impacts on the environment
and to public health including but not limited to: causing the death of marine animals and
birds through ingestion and entanglement, contributing to pollution of the land
environment and waterways, creating physical and financial burdens to solid waste
collection and recycling facilities, clogging storm drainage and sewer systems,
necessitating the expenditure of millions of barrels of crude oil nationally for their
manufacture, and increasingly risking the public health from non-biodegradable
microplastics, which wildlife ingest and enter the food chain that humans consume.
The goal of this by-law is to reduce the common use of plastic checkout bags and to
promote the use of reusable bags by consumers, thereby reducing local land and marine
pollution, reducing waste, protecting the town’s unique natural beauty and irreplaceable
natural resources, and improving the quality of life for the citizens of Hingham.
SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS
The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the
following meanings:
“ASTM D6400” means the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
International Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics.
“Checkout Bag” means a bag with or without handles provided by a Store to a customer
at the point of sale that is intended for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise
out of the Store. Plastic bags without handles used to cover clothing such as a dry
cleaning bag are not included in this definition.
“Compostable Plastic Bag” means a plastic bag that conforms to the current ASTM D6400
standard specifications.
“Paper Bag” means a paper bag that can be readily recycled.
“Product Bag” means (1) a bag in which loose produce, bulk items, unwrapped baked
goods or prepared food, or other products are placed by the consumer to deliver such
items to the point of sale or check out area of the Store, or (2) a bag that contains or
wraps foods to retain moisture or to segregate foods (like meat or ice cream) or other
items to prevent contamination or damage when the items are placed together in a
Recyclable Bag or Reusable Bag. Plastic bags without handles used to cover clothing
such as a dry cleaning bag are not included in this definition.
“Recycled Paper Bag” means a paper bag that is 100% recyclable and contains at least
40% post- consumer recycled content, and displays in a visible manner on the outside of
the bag (1) the word “recyclable” or a symbol identifying the bag as recyclable and (2) a
label identifying the bag as being made from post- consumer recycled content and the
percentage of post-consumer recycled content in the bag.
“Reusable Bag” means a bag that is either (1) made of cloth or other machine washable
fabric, or (2) made of plastic other than polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride that is durable,
non-toxic, and generally considered a food grade material, and is more than 4 mils in
thickness.
“Single-use Plastic Checkout Bag” means a plastic Checkout Bag that is less than 4 mils
thick or a Compostable Plastic Bag.
“Store” means any commercial enterprise selling goods, food or services directly to the
public, whether for or not for profit, including, but not limited to: convenience and grocery
stores, markets, restaurants, pharmacies, liquor stores, take-out food purveyors, and
merchandise retailers.
SECTION 3 - USE REGULATIONS
(a) No Store in Hingham shall provide to any customer a Single Use Plastic Checkout
Bag after November 1, 2019, except that existing stock may be provided to customers for
a period of six months after that date.
(b) If a Store provides Checkout Bags to customers, it may only provide Reusable
Bags, Paper Bags or Recycled Paper Bags.
If a Store provides Product Bags to customers, it may only provide Reusable Bags, Paper
Bags, Recycled Paper Bags, or Compostable Plastic Bags.
SECTION 4 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(a) The administration and enforcement of this by-law is the responsibility of the
Hingham Board of Health.
(b) A person, individually or by his servant or agent, who violates any provision of this
by-law may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40,
Section 21D and the Town of Hingham non-criminal disposition by-law.
(c) The following penalties shall apply:
(1) First violation: Written warning
(2) Second violation: $100 fine
(3) Third violation: $200 fine
(4) Fourth and subsequent violations: $300 fine
Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate violation. A violator shall not be
penalized for more than one violation per day.
(d) The Board of Health may extend the time for compliance with this by-law for good
cause shown for a period of time not to exceed one year from the effective date of the bylaw.
Any such extension shall be in accordance with regulations to be adopted by the
Board of Health governing the criteria upon which such an extension may be granted.
SECTION 5 - RIGHT TO A HEARING
Any person or persons aggrieved by an order that has been served pursuant to this bylaw
may request a hearing before the Hingham Board of Health by filing a written petition
to the Hingham Executive Health Officer within seven (7) days of receipt of said order.
SECTION 6 - EFFECTIVE DATE:
This by-law shall take effect on November 1, 2019.
ZONING BY-LAW
HINGHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
REVISED THROUGH APRIL 2019
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I Administration and Procedure 1 1
I-A Authority and Purpose 1 1
I-B Basic Requirements 1 1
I-C Enforcement 2 2
I-D Board of Appeals 3 4
I-E Zoning Administrator 5 6
I-F Special Permits A1 and A2 5 6
I-G Special Permits with Site Plan Review 6 7
I-H Building Permits with Site Plan Review 6 7
I-I Site Plan Review 6 7
I-J Planning Board - Special Permit A3 10 12
I-K Amendment 11 13
I-L Validity 11 13
I-M Effective Date 11 14
SECTION II Districts 12 15
II-A Zoning Districts 12 15
II-B Overlay Districts 12 15
II-C Zoning Maps 12 15
II-D District Boundary Lines 13 16
SECTION III Use Regulations 14 17
III-A Schedule of Uses 14 17
III-B Special Conditions to Schedule of Uses 14 17
III-C Floodplain Protection Overlay District 23 27
III-D Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District 25 29
III-E South Hingham Development Overlay District 29 33
III-F Personal Wireless Services Overlay District 32 36
III-G Downtown Hingham Overlay District 37
III-H Hingham Harbor Overlay District 44
III-I Nonconforming Conditions 42 48
III-J Accessory Uses 43 50
SECTION IV Intensity Regulations 44 51
IV-A Schedule of Dimensional Requirements 44 51
IV-B Special Requirements to Schedule of Dimensional Requirements 47 54
IV-C General Intensity Provisions 49 56
IV-D Flexible Residential Development (FRD)-Special Permit 51 58
IV-E Residential Multi-Unit Development 58 65
IV-F Residential Multi-Unit Development in Residence District D 61 69
IV-G Mixed-Use Special Permit in Industrial District 64 71
SECTION V Special Regulations 75 83
V-A Off-Street Parking Requirements 75 83
V-B Signs 79 88
V-C Earth Removal Regulations 86 95
V-D Noise 88 97
V-E Personal Wireless Service 89 98
V-F Adult Uses 95 104
V-G Bed & Breakfast Establishment 97 106
V-H Registered Marijuana Dispensaries 108
V-I Common Driveways 110
V-J Regulation of the Sale and Consumption of Marijuana Not Medically
Prescribed
112
V-K Accessory Dwelling Units 1 1 2
SECTION VI Definitions 99 116
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
Appendix “A”, Building Height Diagram 1 2 5
Appendix “B”, Zoning Map Parts A and C 1 2 6
Appendix “C”, Zoning Map Part B 1 2 7
Index 128
1
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
SECTION I
Administration and Procedure
I-A Authority and Purpose
1. This By-Law shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning By-Law of the Town of
Hingham and is adopted by virtue of and pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40A as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975, as amended.
2. The purposes of the By-Law include, but are not limited to, the following: to lessen
congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic, and
other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to
avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage housing for persons of all income
levels; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water supply,
drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space, and other public requirements; to
conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources
and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the Town, including consideration of the
recommendations of the Master Plan, if any, adopted by the Planning Board and the
comprehensive plan, if any, of the regional planning agency; and, to preserve and
increase amenities. Regulations may be promulgated in accordance with the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, as amended, in order to fulfill the purposes of
this By-Law.
3. Regulations adopted pursuant to these purposes may include, but are not limited to,
restricting, prohibiting, permitting, or regulating the use, alteration, size, bulk height,
area, and location of buildings and structures and the use of premises in the Town of
Hingham.
I-B Basic Requirements
All buildings or structures hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged or moved,
or use of premises in the Town of Hingham, shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this By-Law. Any building, structure, or land shall not be used for any purpose or in any
manner other than is permitted in the district in which such building, structure or land is
located.
Any use not specifically provided for in a district herein shall be deemed to be prohibited.
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, and notwithstanding any
provisions to the contrary, this By-Law shall not prohibit, regulate, or restrict the use of
land or structures for religious purposes or for educational purposes on land owned or
leased (1) by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any of its agencies, subdivisions,
or bodies politic or (2) by a religious sect or denomination, or (3) by a nonprofit
educational corporation, provided however, that such land or structures may be subject
to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining
yard sizes, lot areas, setbacks, open space, parking, and building coverage requirements
in accordance with the provisions of this By-Law. Such uses shall not be exempt from the
general or specific regulations of this By-Law other than use regulations.
No use will be permitted which will produce a nuisance or hazard from fire or explosion,
toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust or vapor, harmful
2
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
radioactivity, offensive noise or vibration, flashes, objectionable effluent, electrical
interference or substantial erosion or flooding which may affect or impair the normal use
and peaceful enjoyment of any property, structure, or dwelling in the neighborhood.
No land within any use district in the Town of Hingham may be used for the collection,
treatment, storage, burial incineration of radioactive waste, including but not limited to,
wastes classified as low-level radioactive waste.
I-C Enforcement
Except as otherwise provided, this By-Law shall be enforced by the Building
Commissioner. No application of any kind of plans or specifications or intended uses shall
be approved by the Commissioner unless they are in all respects in conformity with this
By-Law.
1. No building shall be constructed, altered or moved and no use of land or building shall be
begun or changed without a permit having been issued by the Building Commissioner. No
such permit shall be issued until such construction, alteration or use, as proposed, shall
comply in all respects with this By-Law or with a decision of the Board of Appeals. Any
application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a plan, accurately drawn, showing
the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location and size
of all buildings or structures already on the lot, the locations of new buildings to be
constructed, together with the lines within which all buildings and structures are to be
erected, the existing and proposed use of each building or structure and such other
information as may be necessary to provide for the execution and enforcement of this
By-Law. A record of all applications, plans, and permits shall be kept on file by the
Building Commissioner. Construction or operations under a Building or Special Permit
shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this By-Law unless the use or
construction authorized by this permit is made or commenced within a period of not
more than twelve (12) months after the issuance of the permit and, in cases involving
construction, unless such construction is carried through to completion as continuously
and expeditiously as is reasonable.
2. No premises and no building erected, altered, or in any way changed as to construction
or use, under a permit or otherwise, shall be occupied or used without a certificate of
occupancy signed by the Building Commissioner. Such certificate of occupancy shall not
be issued until the premises or building and their uses comply with this By-Law. A record
of all applications and certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file by the Building
Commissioner.
In town house, garden apartment and apartment house developments, and/or any other
multi-unit residential developments (exclusive of subdivisions) (herein a “development”),
certificates of occupancy shall not be issued by the Building Commissioner for more than
85% of the dwelling units within the development of within an approved phase of the
development until:
a) all “site work improvements”, as hereinafter defined, shown on the approved
development plans for the entire development, or for an approved phase of the
development, and required by the applicable permits or approvals for the
development, shall have been fully completed. Site work improvements shall not be
considered fully completed until a project engineer has submitted to the Building
Commissioner as-built plans (for the entire development or applicable phase of the
development) and a certification that such site work improvements have been
3
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
completed in accordance with the approved development plans or approved phase
thereof and the applicable permits or approvals; or
b) the developer has applied for and obtained a Special Permit A1 from the Board of
Appeals requesting relief from the 85% limitation on certificates of occupancy. Each
application for a Special Permit A1 pursuant to this section shall include, in addition
to all other application requirements, a certification of a project engineer as to the
status of site work improvements remaining to be completed, the number and
percentage of dwelling units remaining to be completed in the development of phase
thereof, and such additional information related thereto as may be requested by the
Board of Appeals. Upon making a finding that:
(i) a delay in the completion of the remaining site work improvements will not
adversely impact the occupants of the completed dwelling units;
(ii) is not required for the safe occupancy of additional dwelling units; and
(iii) the granting of relief from said limitation will not jeopardize the likelihood of
full completion of the site work improvements;
said finding to be used in lieu of the special permit approval criteria contained in
Section l-F, 2., the Board of Appeals may partially waive the 85% limitation and allow
the Building Commissioner to issue certificates of occupancy in a manner consistent
with the first paragraph of this Section l-C, 2.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board of Appeals shall not allow, and the
Building Commissioner shall not issue, certificates of occupancy for more than 95%
of the dwelling units within the development or approved phase of the development
until the project engineer has submitted to the Building Commissioner as-built plans
and a certification that the site work improvements have been completed in
accordance with the approved development plan or approved phase of the
development plan and the applicable permits and approvals.
“Site work improvements” as used herein shall include all improvements to be made
or constructed in connection with the development (exclusive of dwelling structures),
including, but not limited to, roadways, parking lots, sidewalks and walkways,
grading, landscaping, utilities, wastewater treatment, drainage and other required
infrastructure. For the purpose of this section, the “developer” shall be deemed to
include the original applicant and all successors or assigns of the applicant, including
any and all parties seeking building permits or certificates of occupancy for the initial
construction or initial occupancy of one or more dwelling units within the
development or applicable phase thereof. The “project engineer” shall be a licensed
engineer working on behalf of the developer and shall include the original project
engineer at the time of application to the permit granting authority and all successors
to the original project engineer.
3. The provisions of this By-Law may be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer by
non-criminal disposition pursuant to the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D.
Any person who violates the provisions of this By-Law may be subject to a penalty of
$100 for the first offense; $200 for the second offense; and $300 for the third and each
subsequent offense if, after receiving written notice of the violation(s) from the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the person fails to correct the violation(s) within seven (7) days of
receipt of such notice, or within such longer time as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may
4
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
grant in appropriate circumstances. Each day that a violation exists shall be deemed to
be a separate offense from and after delivery of such notice from the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
In the alternative, any person who violates the provisions of this By-Law, or who refuses
or neglects to comply with a stop work order or notice of violation by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer issued under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A or the provisions
of this By-Law, shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
including a fine of $100 for the first offense; $200 for the second offense; and $300 for
the third and each subsequent offense. Each day that a violation exists shall be deemed
to be a separate offense. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Zoning Enforcement
Officer from seeking injunctive relief as a remedy in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
Section 7.
I-D Board of Appeals
1. Establishment
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, a
Board of Appeals consisting of three (3) citizens of the Town who shall be qualified by
education or experience to pass upon matters which may be brought before them shall
be appointed by the Selectmen for a term of three years, the term of one member
expiring each year. At least two associates shall be appointed in a like manner. No
member of the Board of Appeals shall act on any matter in which the member may have
a personal or financial interest, and in such event, an associate member shall be
designated to serve on the Board and to act upon the matter.
2. Powers
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers which shall in no way conflict with
the regulations as contained in this By-Law.
a. Appeals - To hear and decide an Appeal taken
1. by any person aggrieved by reason of his/her inability to obtain a permit or
enforcement action from the Building Commissioner under the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, or of this By-law,
2. by the regional planning agency in which area the Town is situated, or
3. by any person, including an officer or board of the Town of Hingham or of any
abutting municipality, aggrieved by an order or decision of the Building
Commissioner, in violation of any Provision of Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40A, or of this By-Law.
b. Special Permits - To hear and decide an application for a Special Permit as provided
in this By-Law, only for uses in specified districts which are in harmony with the
general purposes and intent of this By-Law and which shall be subject to any general
or specific rules prescribed herein and to any appropriate conditions, safeguards, and
limitations on time and use. A Special Permit shall lapse within a three (3) year
period or a shorter period if so specified by the Board, which shall not include any
time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal pursuant to
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 17, and if a substantial use
thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause, or in the case of a permit
5
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
for construction, if construction has not begun within the period except for good
cause.
c. Variances - To hear and decide a petition with respect to particular land or structures
for a Variance from the terms of this By-Law, including a Variance authorizing a use
or activity not otherwise permitted in a particular zoning district, where the Board
specifically finds that owing to circumstances relating to soil conditions, shape, or
topography of such land or structures, and especially affecting such land or
structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal
enforcement of this provision of this By-Law would involve substantial hardship,
financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant, and that desirable relief may be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good, and without nullifying or
substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this By-Law. The Board of
Appeals may impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations, both of time and of use,
including the continued existence of any particular structure but excluding any
condition, safeguard, or limitations based upon the continued ownership of the land
or structure to which the Variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner, or any
owner. If the rights authorized by a Variance are not exercised within the one (1)
year of the date of the authorization, they shall lapse and may be re-established only
after a new notice and hearing.
3. Procedure
In the case of every Appeal made to the Board of Appeals, every petition for a Variance,
and every application for a Special Permit to said Board under the provisions of this By-
Law, the Board shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than fourteen (14) days before the
day of the hearing, and by posting said notice in the Town Hall for a period of not less
than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing. Notice shall be sent by mail,
postage prepaid, to parties in interest including the petitioner, abutters, owners of land
directly opposite on any public street or way, abutters of abutters within three hundred
(300) feet of the property line of the petitioner, as they appear on the most recent
applicable tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any such owner is located in another
city or town, the Planning Board and the Planning Boards of every abutting municipality.
The Assessors shall certify to the Board the name and addresses of the parties in
interest. In the case of an Appeal from a decision of the Building Commissioner and in
the case of a Variance, a petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall forthwith
transmit it to the Board of Appeals. The Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five
(65) days of the receipt of the petition from the Town Clerk and shall render a decision
within one hundred (100) days from the date of filing. Failure by the Board to take final
action upon a petition within the said one hundred (100) day period shall be deemed to
be a grant of the Appeal or Variance applied for.
In the case of a Special Permit, an application shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who
shall forthwith transmit it to the Board of Appeals. The Board shall hold a public hearing
within sixty-five (65) days of the filing and shall render a decision within ninety (90) days
from the close of the public hearing. Failure to take action within the said ninety (90) day
period shall be deemed to be a grant of the permit applied for.
4. Repetitive Petitions
Board of Appeals Decisions - No appeal, application, or petition which has been
6
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
unfavorably and finally acted upon by the Board of Appeals shall be acted favorably upon
within two (2) years after the date of final unfavorable action unless (1) all but one of
the members of the Planning Board consent to a re-petition after notice is given to
parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings to consider consent and (2)
the Board of Appeals by unanimous vote finds specific and material changes in the
conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action was based, describes such
changes in its records, and similarly consents.
I-E Zoning Administrator
In accordance with such qualifications as may be established by the Board of Selectmen,
the Board of Appeals shall appoint, from time to time, a Zoning Administrator, to serve at
its pleasure, which appointment shall be subject to confirmation by the Board of
Selectmen. Said Administrator shall be empowered to carry out such duties and powers
as may be delegated by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 40A, Section 13, which statute shall govern the rights of aggrieved
persons.
I-F Special Permits A1 and A2
1. Procedures for Application, Hearing and Decision
Each application to the Board of Appeals for a Special Permit A1 or A2 shall be filed with
the Town Clerk, with duplicate copies submitted in accordance with the regulations of the
Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the application, as
provided in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, within 65 days of the filing of a
complete application.
The Board of Appeals may grant, grant with conditions, deny, or grant leave to withdraw
an application for a Special Permit. A copy of the decision shall be filed with the Town
Clerk and the Planning Board, and shall be furnished the applicant and property owner,
in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A.
The applicant shall be responsible for filing a certified copy of the decision in the Registry
of Deeds or, where applicable, in the Land Court. Prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit, the applicant shall present to the Building Commissioner evidence of such
recording.
2. Approval Criteria
An applicant is not entitled to a Special Permit or a Special Permit with site plan review.
The Board of Appeals may approve such application for a Special Permit A1 or A2 if it
finds that, in its judgment:
a. use of the site is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this By-Law;
b. the proposed use complies with the purposes and standards of the relevant specific
sections of this By-Law;
c. the specific site is an appropriate location for such use, structure, or condition,
compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding area;
d. the use as developed and operated will create positive impacts or potential adverse
impacts will be mitigated;
e. there will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians;
7
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
f. adequate and appropriate facilities exist or will be provided for the proper operation
of the proposed use; and
g. the proposal meets accepted design standards and criteria for the functional design
of facilities, structures, stormwater management, and site construction.
3. Costs
The costs of professional consultants, experts or assistance incurred by the Board of
Appeals or Planning Board shall be borne by the applicant. However, the costs to be
paid by the applicant shall not exceed the reasonable and usual charges of said
consultants or other experts for such services. The applicant shall deposit with his
application an appropriate portion of the anticipated review costs as determined by the
Boards’ administrators as security for payment on such costs. No occupancy permit may
be issued in accordance with Section I-C of this By-Law until the applicant has paid or
reimbursed the Town for all such costs.
I-G Special Permits with Site Plan Review
Site plan review is required for all Special Permits designated A2 and A3 in this By-Law or
any modifications of a Special Permit A-2 or A-3. Such site plan review is conducted by
the Planning Board in accordance with Section I-I. Joint hearings of the Board of Appeals
and the Planning Board may be held at the discretion of the Boards.
I-H Building Permits with Site Plan Review
All building permit applications for work subject to Special Requirement 6 of Section IV-B
shall first be submitted to the Planning Board and shall be subject to site plan review.
The Planning Board shall review and investigate each such application in accordance with
the criteria and standards for site plan review listed in Section I-I. The provisions of
Section I-D, 4 and I-F, 3 of this By-Law shall apply to all applications for Site Plan Review
under this Section I-H.
I-I Site Plan Review
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide a comprehensive procedure for development
projects to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Zoning By-Law, to minimize
adverse impacts of such development, and to promote development which is harmonious
with surrounding areas.
2. Procedures
Applicants for site plan approval shall submit seven (7) hard copies and an electronic file
of the site plan and submittal materials to the Planning Board for review, except that only
two hardcopies of the drainage report are required. The Applicant shall at the same time
also submit a copy of the of the application and request for advisory review and
comments to each of the following: Board of Health, Building Commissioner,
Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works, Hingham Municipal Light Plant,
Water Company, Sewer Department, Fire Department, and Police Department. Notice of
a site plan review hearing in connection with any application also requiring a Special
Permit A2 from the Board of Appeals shall be given in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40A,
Section 11.
The Planning Board shall review and act upon the site plan, with such conditions as may
8
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
be deemed appropriate, and notify the applicant of its decision. The decision of the
Planning Board shall require an affirmative vote of three members and shall be in writing.
If public notice is required, the Planning Board shall act within seventy-five (75) days of
its receipt of the Site Plan Review application, provided that, if the Planning Board or its
review consultants have requested (no later than forty (40) days after receipt of the
application) additional information or submittals from the applicant, such supplemental
information shall be delivered no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of the
application. If such additional information is not received by such sixtieth day, the
Planning Board may extend its period of review until the date that is fifteen (15) days
after receipt of all such supplemental information from the applicant. If public notice is
not required, the Planning Board shall act within forty-five (45) days of its receipt of the
Site Plan Review application, provided that, if supplemental information requested by the
Planning Board or its review consultants (no later than twenty days after receipt of the
application) is not delivered to the Planning Board by the thirtieth day after receipt of the
application, the Planning Board may extend its period of review until the date that is
fifteen (15) days after receipt of all such supplemental information from the applicant.
The foregoing timeframes do not preclude the Planning Board from requiring (after such
fortieth or twentieth date, as applicable) submission of supplemental information not
previously requested.
a. Application for Building Permit. An application for a building permit to perform work
as set forth in Special Requirement 6 of Section IV-B shall be accompanied by an
approved site plan unless the Planning Board’s review (including any extensions thereto)
has expired without any action by the Planning Board.
b. Application for Special Permit A2. Applications for a Special Permit A2, or any
modification of a Special Permit A2, and for site plan review shall be filed simultaneously.
The Board of Appeals shall not make a decision on a Special Permit A2 application until it
has received the Planning Board’s site plan review decision, or until the Planning Board’s
review period (including any extensions thereto) has expired without any action by the
Planning Board.
c. The conditions imposed by the Planning Board shall be incorporated in any Special
Permit A2 issued by the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may add additional
conditions to the issuance of a special permit, but may not remove any conditions
imposed by the Planning Board or modify any condition except as follows. The Board of
Appeals may propose to the Planning Board the modification or removal of a site plan
condition imposed by the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to issue a
revision to the site plan conditions within twenty-one (21) days shall be deemed a denial
of that proposal.
d. Application for Special Permit A3. Where the Planning Board serves as the special
permit granting authority for proposed work, it shall consolidate its site plan review and
special permit procedures.
e. The applicant may request, and the Planning Board may grant by majority vote, an
extension of the time limits set forth herein.
f. A final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the applicant has complied
with or satisfied all conditions to the Special Permit A2 or, in the case of building permits
with site plan review, all conditions of the site plan review decision, except for those
conditions which by their terms are intended to be satisfied after occupancy of the
structures for which the certificate of occupancy is sought.
9
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
3. Pre-Application Submittal
Applicants are invited to submit a pre-application sketch of the proposed project to the
Planning Board and to schedule a comment period at a regular meeting of the Planning
Board.
4. Submittal Requirements
Each application for a Building Permit or Special Permit with site plan review shall include
the following information prepared by qualified registered professionals, either shown on
wet-stamped and signed plans or other supporting documentation:
a. locus plan; diagram and statement of the ownership, area, dimensions, boundaries
and principal elevations of the subject property; location of structures within 100 feet of
property line;
b. scaled and dimensioned plan of the location and footprint of existing and proposed
buildings and structures; if applicable, building elevations and floor layouts;
c. if applicable, plan showing proposed circulation of traffic within the development and
in all adjacent public ways; dimensioned plan of loading and parking areas, aisles and
driveways; plan with detail sheets if appropriate, profile and representative cross sections
of proposed driveways and parking areas;
d. analysis of compliance with all relevant dimensional provisions of this By-Law;
e. detailed information on utilities, landscaping, refuse storage and removal;
f. grading plan, estimated net import/export of material, drainage analysis, and traffic
analysis, as applicable;
g. analysis of the capacity of Town soils, water supply, ways and services to absorb the
impact of the proposed development;
h. analysis of compliance of the construction activities and the proposed project,
including the extent the project incorporates low impact design and green infrastructure
solutions, with the most current versions of the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Policy and Standards including (i) the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, (ii) Massachusetts Erosion Sediment and Control
Guidelines, and (iii) if applicable, additional requirements under the Town of Hingham
MS4 Permit for projects that disturb more than one acre and discharge to the Town’s
municipal stormwater system;
i. Site Lighting Plan showing the location, height, photometric, orientation, and
specifications for all outdoor site lighting, including information on the intensity and
range of illumination for each source of light proposed.
j. an erosion control plan and an Operations and Management Plan for both the
construction activities and ongoing post-construction maintenance and reporting
requirements; and
k. such other materials necessary to enable Town boards to make a positive
determination on the proposed development.
5. Waiver; Minor Site Plans; Administrative Review;
10
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
a. Upon written request of the applicant, the Planning Board may waive any of the
submittal requirements set forth in Section I-I.6 deemed by the Planning Board to be not
necessary for its review of the application. In addition, the Planning Board may waive
other such requirements of this Section I-I, including the requirement for a public
hearing, where the Planning Board determines that the project constitutes a minor site
plan.
b. in order to constitute a minor site plan, the proposed work must be limited to (i)
interior renovations to a building or structure that do not include a change of use or
parking demand for which a Special Permit A2 or A3 is required and/or (ii) modifications
to the site which, in the Planning Board’s determination, do not materially or adversely
affect conditions governed by the site plan review standards set forth in Section I-I.6
below.
c. The Planning Board may, by a majority vote of the Board, establish an administrative
process for site plan review of certain site plan review applications. Pursuant to
administrative review, the Planning Board may delegate to the town planner and/or to a
designated Board member the authority to determine whether a project constitutes a
minor site plan pursuant to subsection 5.b(i) above and, if so, to waive site plan review
therefor. The Planning Board designee may refer any minor site plan review application
to the Planning Board for its review in lieu of administrative review if, in such designee’s
discretion, the scope of the project merits review by the Board. In addition, any
applicant may request site plan review by the Planning Board in lieu of administrative
review at the time of application, or any applicant aggrieved by a minor site plan review
decision of the designee may reapply for site plan review by the Planning Board and such
review shall be considered a new application for site plan review, except that a separate
fee shall not be required.
6. Review Standards and Approval
Site Plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the
plan meets the objectives of this subsection 6. In reviewing each such application the
Planning Board shall study the site plan with reference to the health, safety and welfare
of the prospective occupants, the occupants of neighboring properties, and users of the
adjoining streets or highways, and the welfare of the Town generally, including its
amenities. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the
applicant, including performance guarantees, to promote these objectives.
The Planning Board shall limit the proposed development so that its impact on each of
the municipal services, ways, utilities and other resources does not exceed its existing
design capacity. This limitation shall be imposed upon the proposed development
regardless of the intensity of development otherwise permitted by this Zoning By-Law.
In conducting a site plan review, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a. protection of abutting properties against detrimental uses by provision for surface
water drainage, fire hydrant locations, sound and site buffers, and preservation of views,
light and air, and protection of abutting properties from negative impacts from artificial
outdoor site lighting.
b. convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and on
adjacent streets; the location of driveway openings in relation to traffic or to adjacent
streets, taking account of grades, sight distances and distances between such driveway
entrances, exits and the nearest existing street or highway intersections; sufficiency of
access for service, utility and emergency vehicles;
11
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
c. adequacy of the arrangement of parking, loading spaces and traffic patterns in
relation to the proposed uses of the premises; compliance with the off-street parking
requirements of this By-Law;
d. adequacy of open space and setbacks, including adequacy of landscaping of such
areas;
e. adequacy of the methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes during construction
and resulting from the uses permitted on the site including, but not limited to, discarded
building materials, concrete truck wash out, chemicals, litter and sanitary wastes;
provided, that discharge of refuse or other wastes into the municipal stormwater system
shall be expressly prohibited;
f. prevention or mitigation of adverse impacts on the Town’s resources, including,
without limitation, water supply, wastewater facilities, energy and public works and
public safety resources;
g. assurance of positive stormwater drainage and snow-melt run-off from buildings,
driveways and from all parking and loading areas on the site, and prevention of erosion,
sedimentation and stormwater pollution and management problems through site design
and erosion controls in accordance with the most current versions of the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection’s Stormwater Management Policy and Standards
including the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook, the Massachusetts Erosion and
Sediment Control Guidelines and, if applicable, additional requirements under the Town
of Hingham MS4 Permit for projects that disturb more than one acre and discharge to the
Town’s municipal stormwater system;
h. assurance that appropriate Best Management Practices have been incorporated to
minimize the amount of disturbed areas and protect natural resources, stabilize sites
when projects are complete or operations have temporarily ceased, protect slopes on the
construction site, protect storm drain inlets and armor all newly constructed outlets,
install perimeter controls at the site, stabilize construction site entrances and exits to
prevent off-site tracking of material, and to provide for regular inspection of stormwater
controls at consistent intervals;
i. protection of natural and historic features including minimizing: the volume of cut
and fill, the number of removed trees of 6 inches caliper or larger, the removal of stone
walls, and the obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations: and
j. minimizing unreasonable departure from the character and scale of buildings in the
vicinity or as previously existing on or approved for the site.
7. Lapse
Site plan approval shall lapse after two years from the grant thereof if a substantial
construction or use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause. Such
approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the Planning Board upon the
written request of the applicant.
8. Conditions of Approval
In addition to such other conditions as may be imposed by the Planning Board under this
Section I-I, all site plan approvals shall be subject to the following conditions:
12
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
a. Pre-Construction Meeting
A pre-construction review meeting with inspection of the erosion control installation and
marked limits of clearing shall be required as a condition of approval for all projects.
Projects that disturb one or more acres individually, or cumulatively if phased
development is proposed, shall be required as a condition of any approval to provide a
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan for review by the Planning Board or their designee
not less than three weeks prior to the start of any work.
b. Inspections
Inspections shall be required during construction, and prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, of all elements of the project related to or affecting erosion control during
construction and the approved drainage and stormwater system installed for the project.
The Planning Board may require, at the applicant’s expense, the establishment of a
consultant fee account pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44 Section 53G,
to fund the cost of such inspections.
c. As-Built Plan Requirement
Upon project completion an as-built plan must be submitted to the Building
Commissioner prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and in no event later
than two years after the completion of construction. In addition to such other
requirements as are imposed by the Building Commissioner, the as-built plan must
demonstrate substantial conformance with the stormwater system design and
performance standards of the approved project plans.
9. Regulations
The Planning Board may adopt and from time to time amend reasonable regulations for
the administration of this Section I-I.
I-J Planning Board - Special Permit A3
1. Powers
The Planning Board shall have the power to hear and decide an application for a Special
Permit A3 for uses in specified districts that are in harmony with the general purposes
and intent of this By-Law. A Special Permit A3 shall be subject to any general or specific
rules prescribed herein and to any appropriate conditions, safeguards, and limitations on
time and use. One associate member of the Planning Board shall be appointed in the
manner herein provided for a term of one (1) year to act on Special Permit A3
applications if necessary. The associate member of the Planning Board shall be
appointed by the following procedure: (a) the Planning Board shall appoint a then
current associate member of the Board of Appeals; or (b) if no then current associate
member of the Board of Appeals is appointed by the Planning Board, the Planning Board
and the Board of Selectmen shall jointly appoint an associate member to the Planning
Board, provided that preference shall be given to former Planning Board members and
former regular or associate members of the Board of Appeals. No member of the
Planning Board shall act on any matter in which the member may have a personal or
financial interest, and in such event, the associate member shall be designated to serve
on the Planning Board and to act upon the matter.
2. Peer Review and Consulting Fees:
The provisions of Section I-F, 3 shall apply to all applications for a Special Permit A3.
3. Repetitive Petitions
The provisions of Section I-D, 4 of this By-Law shall apply to all applications for a Special
13
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
Permit A3, provided, however, that in connection with an application for a Special Permit
A3, all references to the Board of Appeals in such Section shall be deemed to refer to the
Planning Board.
4. Procedures for Application, Hearing and Decision
Each application to the Planning Board for a Special Permit A3 shall be filed with the
Town Clerk, with duplicate copies submitted in accordance with the regulations of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application, as
provided in the Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, within 65 days of the filing of
a complete application.
The Planning Board may grant, grant with conditions, deny, or grant leave to withdraw,
an application for a Special Permit A3. A copy of the decision may be filed with the Town
Clerk and the Planning Board, and shall be furnished the applicant and property owner,
in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A.
The applicant shall be responsible for filing a certified copy of the decision in the Registry
of Deeds or, where applicable, in the Land Court. Prior to the issuance of a Building
Permit, the applicant shall present to the Building Commissioner evidence of such
recording.
5. Approval Criteria
An applicant is not entitled to a Special Permit A3. The Planning Board may approve such
application for a Special Permit A3 if it finds that, in its judgment, the proposed use is
consistent with the criteria set forth in Section I-F, 2 (a) through (g) of this By-Law, with
the exception of Special Permit A3 Parking Determinations. The approval criteria for
Special Permit A3’s related to off-street parking are described in Section V-A 6.
6. Lapse
Except for good cause, a Special Permit A3 shall lapse in two (2) years after the date of
issue, or such shorter period as may be specified by the Planning Board, which shall not
include any time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal pursuant to
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17.
I-K Amendment
This By-Law may be amended from time to time at an annual or special Town Meeting.
An amendment may be initiated by the submission to the Board of Selectmen of a
proposed change by the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Appeals, an individual owning
land in the Town to be affected by the amendment, registered voters of the Town
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 39, Section 10, the Planning Board, or
the regional planning agency. Within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of a proposed
change, the Board of Selectmen shall submit it to the Planning Board for review and a
report. A public hearing is held by the Board within sixty-five (65) days after the
proposed change is submitted to the Board.
1. Repetitive Amendments
No proposed change in this By-Law which has been unfavorably acted upon at the Town
Meeting shall be considered by the Town Meeting within two years after the date of such
unfavorable action unless adoption of the proposed change is recommended in the final
report of the Planning Board to the Town Meeting.
I-L Validity
14
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019
The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other
section or provision thereof.
I-M Effective Date
The effective date of an amendment to this By-Law shall be the date on which such
amendment was adopted by a favorable two-thirds (2/3) vote of Town Meeting subject
to its publication in a Town bulletin or pamphlet and posting or publication in a
newspaper as provided in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40, Section 32.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 15
SECTION II
Districts
II-A Zoning Districts
For the purposes of the By-Law, zoning districts are established and designated as
follows:
1. Residence District A
2. Residence District B
3. Residence District C
4. Business District A
5. Business District B
6. Industrial District
7. Industrial Park District
8. Limited Industrial Park District
9. Waterfront Business District
10. Office Park District
11. Residence District D
12. Residence District E
13. Waterfront Recreation District
14. Business Recreation District
15. Official and Open Space District
II-B Overlay Districts
For the purposes of this By-Law, overlay districts are established and designated as
follows:
1. Floodplain Protection Overlay District
2. Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District
3. South Hingham Development Overlay District
4. Personal Wireless Services Overlay District
5. Downtown Hingham Overlay District
6. Hingham Harbor Overlay District
All requirements of the underlying zoning districts remain in full force and effect, except
as superseded by the specific overlay district regulations. The Overlay Districts are
shown on the Zoning Maps.
II-C Zoning Maps
1. Zoning Districts and Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District
The Zoning Map of the Town of Hingham Massachusetts, Parts A and C, filed in the office
of the Town Clerk, is made a part of this Zoning By-Law, and locations and boundaries of
the several districts shall be as indicated, respectively, on said Zoning Map.
2. Floodplain Protection Overlay District
The Zoning Map Part B Floodplain Protection Overlay District, filed in the office of the
Town Clerk, is made a part of this Zoning By-Law, and locations and boundaries of the
district shall be as indicated on said Zoning Map.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 16
II-D District Boundary Lines
Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map, the boundaries between districts are to be
determined according to the following criteria:
1. where a boundary is shown following a street, railroad, or utility, the boundary shall be
the center line thereof unless otherwise indicated;
2. where a boundary is shown outside a street, railroad, or utility and approximately parallel
thereto, the boundary shall be deemed parallel to the nearest line thereof, and the figure
placed on the zoning map between the boundary and such line shall be the distance in
feet between them, as measured at a right angle from such line unless otherwise
indicated;
3. where a boundary is shown following a water course, the boundary shall coincide with
the center line thereof as said line existed at the date of the zoning map;
4. where the location of a district boundary is otherwise uncertain, the Building
Commissioner shall determine its position in accordance with the distance in feet from
other lines as given or as measured from the scale of the map;
5. where a district boundary line divides any parcel existing at the time such line is adopted,
the regulation for the less restricted portion of such parcel shall extend not more than
thirty (30) feet into the more restricted portion, provided the parcel has frontage on a
street in the less restricted district;
6. where a boundary is shown as the shoreline, the boundary shall coincide with the
shoreline as that shoreline existed at the time of the zoning map; and
7. where a boundary is shown as a contour line including a numerical figure in feet, the
boundary shall be at that number of feet above mean sea level at every point throughout
its entire length. The basic source for determining such a line shall be the U.S. Geodetic
Survey quadrangle sheets or refinements by subsequent detailed field surveys.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 17
SECTION III
Use Regulations
III-A Schedule of Uses
1. No building, structure, or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as set
forth in the Schedule of Uses, Section III-A of this By-Law. The symbols “P”, “A”, and “O” as therein
used having the following application:
P - Use permitted
A1 - Use allowed under a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section I-F
A2 - Use allowed under a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals as provided in Section I-G and
subject to a site plan review as provided in Section I-I
O - Use prohibited
2. Permitted uses and uses allowed by the Board of Appeals shall be in conformity with all dimensional
requirements, off-street parking requirements, and all other applicable requirements of this By-Law.
Allowed uses for projects authorized by a Mixed Use Special Permit under Section IV-G are set forth
in Section IV-G.
3. In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 3(a)(2), all types of
marijuana establishments, as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 1 and as
may otherwise be defined by Massachusetts law or regulation, including, without limitation, all
marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana
retailers, on-site consumption of marijuana, and any other types of licensed marijuana-related
businesses, as well as businesses dealing in marijuana accessories, and the conducting of any such
activity for commercial purposes by whatever name used, shall be prohibited within the Town of
Hingham. This prohibition shall not be construed to prohibit Registered Marijuana Dispensaries to
the extent permitted under this Zoning By-Law.
III-B Special Conditions to Schedule of Uses
Special conditions shall apply as shown in Section III-A to such uses as are designated therein as being
subject to one or more of the following special conditions:
1. The minimum lot size on which such use will be permitted shall be 2 acres. All buildings not used for
residence shall be placed a minimum of 40 feet from the front, side and rear lot lines.
2. No part of such use shall be located within 1,000 feet of any residence district.
3. All setback requirements of the district in which the use subject to this special condition is located
shall prevail and, in addition, no filling pump or any structure may be located within 25 feet of a
property line or public way. A minimum of 1,000 square feet of paved area shall be provided for
each filling pump. No more than two driveways of 26 foot width each shall be permitted per street.
Curbing shall be installed along each line except at driveways.
4. Intentionally left blank.
5. For properties zoned Industrial Park or Office Park that are included in the South Hingham
Development Overlay District, refer to Section III-E, South Hingham Development Overlay District,
for additional information regarding uses and dimensional criteria.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 18
6. Subject to issuance of a temporary permit by the Building Commissioner pursuant to published
regulations establishing hours of operation, size of lot, number and location of parking spaces,
lighting, access and signage.
7. For parcels zoned Business A included in the Downtown Hingham Overlay District, refer to Section
III-G, Downtown Hingham Overlay District, for additional information regarding permitted and
prohibited uses and Design Review. Leased parking for Commercial/Residential Buildings is
permitted only in conjunction with a Special Permit A2 for a Commercial/Residential Building and
subject to the requirements of Section III-G, 7(a).
8. The following uses shall be allowed as of right to the extent required by M.G.L. c.40A, §3 but shall
be subject to Site Plan Review in accordance with Section I-I of this By-Law, provided that the
requirements of Section I-I may only be applied to such uses in a manner consistent with the
provisions of M.G.L. c.40A, §3.
i. The uses set forth in Section III-A, subsections 2.1, 2.3, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7.
ii. To the extent included within the uses listed in Section III-A, subsections 3.1 through
3.4, inclusive of the use of land or structures for religious purposes or for educational
purposes on land owned or leased by the commonwealth or any of its agencies,
subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit
educational corporation, and the use of land or structures, or the expansion of existing
structures, for the primary, accessory or incidental purpose of operating a child care
facility, all as set forth in M.G.L. c.40A, §3. Site Plan Review of these uses shall be
limited to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures, and
determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage
requirements, or such other matters which may be subject to regulation under M.G.L.
c.40A, §3 as the same may be amended from time to time.
9. Registered Marijuana Dispensaries shall be allowed by Special Permit A2, subject to Section V-H, only
for properties zoned Industrial Park or Office Park which are located in the South Hingham
Development Overlay District.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 19
III-A SCHEDULE OF USES
DISTRICTS
LEGEND
R=Residence B=Business OP= Office Park WB=Waterfront Business WR=Waterfront Recreation
I=Industrial IP=Industrial Park LIP=Limited Industrial Park BR=Business Recreation
OO=Official and Open Space
READ DOWN USING HEADINGS AT THE TOP OF THE PAGE
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
1. RESIDENTIAL
1.1 Single-Family Dwelling, together with such accessory buildings and structures as are customarily incidental thereto.
P P P O P O O O O O O O O O O
1.2 Alteration and conversion of a Single-Family Dwelling containing at least 6 rooms exclusive of hall and bathroom existing prior to March 10, 1941, to
accommodate not more than two families, provided that the exterior design of the structure is not changed from the character of a Single-Family Dwelling.
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 O O O O O O O O
1.3 House trailer or mobile home, if approved by the Board of Health. The required authorization by the Board of Appeals may be granted for a period of not more
than six months and shall be subject to renewal for only one additional six-month period.
A1 A1 A1 A1 O O O O O O O O O O O
1.4 Apartment House, subject to the provisions of IV-E, Multi-Unit Development.
O O O O O A2 A2 O O O O O O O O
1.5 Buildings containing multiple dwelling units, and community and other buildings accessory thereto, constructed and operated pursuant to the provisions of
Section 38, 39, 40, and 41 of Chapter 121B of the Massachusetts General Laws, providing housing for elderly persons of low income, or constructed and
operated pursuant to the provisions of Sections 25-32 of Chapter 121B of the Massachusetts General Laws, providing housing for persons of low and moderate
income, subject to the provisions of IV-E, Multi-Unit Development. This use shall be exempt from paragraph 4 of Section IV-C.
A2 O O A2 A2 A2 A2 O O O O O O O O
1.6 Town House – Not less than four nor more than ten connected dwelling units, subject to the provisions of IV-E, Multi-Unit Development.
O O O A2 A2 O O O O O O O O O O
1.7 Garden Apartments not less than four nor more than 10 connected dwellings, subject to the provisions of IV-E, Multi-Unit Development.
O O O O A2 O O O O O O O O O O
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 20
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
1.8 Accessory Uses when in conjunction with Single-Family Dwelling and Two-Family Dwelling (subject to Section III-J):
1.8.1 Garaging of not more than 3 private-passenger vehicles provided that the total number of garage bays permitted per property under 1.8.1, 1.8.2 and 1.8.3 does
not, in combination, exceed three (3).
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
1.8.2 Garaging or parking of one non-private passenger vehicle with a maximum gross weight of 10,000 lbs. provided that the total number of garage bays permitted
per property under 1.8.1, 1.8.2 and 1.8.3 does not, in combination, exceed three (3).
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
1.8.3 Garaging or parking of a non-private passenger vehicle in excess of 10,000 lbs. or more than one non-private passenger vehicle, provided that the total number
of garage bays permitted per property under 1.8.1, 1.8.2 and 1.8.3 does not, in combination, exceed three (3).
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1
1.8.4 Professional office or studio of a resident physician, dentist, attorney, architect, artist, musician, engineer, real-estate or insurance broker, or member of another
recognized profession, provided that no more than three persons, including the resident professional(s), or business owner(s), shall be employed on the
premises at any one time, and further provided that any display or advertising shall be in accordance with provisions of Section V-B.
P P P P A1 P P O O O O O O O O
1.8.5 The office or studio of a resident art dealer, interior decorator, or appraiser, provided that said office or studio is open to clients by appointment only, that no
more than three persons, including the resident professional(s), or business owner(s), shall be employed on the premises at any one time, and that there shall
be no display or advertising visible from the street and no exterior signs.
P P P P A1 P P O O O O O O O O
1.8.6 Customary home occupation such as dressmaking and millinery conducted by a resident on the premises, provided that no more than one other person is
regularly employed therein in connection with such use, and that there is no exterior storage of material or equipment, and that no display of products is visible
from the street, and that any display or advertising is in accordance with Section V-B.
P P P P A1 P P O O O O O O O O
1.8.7 In accessory buildings incidental to a Single-Family Dwelling or a Two-Family Dwelling, the following uses are permitted: (a) the accessory uses listed in
subsections 1.8.1 through 1.8.6 above; and/or (b) such other uses as are customarily incidental to a residential use, including, but not limited to, barns,
garages, workshops, artist studios and the like, living rooms, eating areas, cooking facilities and sanitary facilities (excluding bathing facilities) , as long as,
in combination, these uses do not create a detached dwelling unit with complete living facilities for one or more households. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
bathing facilities shall be permitted within a pool house located directly adjacent to and serving an in-ground swimming pool.
P P P P P P P O O O O O O O O
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 21
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
1.8.8 Bed and Breakfast Establishment in conjunction with a single-family dwelling only (subject to Section V-G) permitted with a Special Permit A2
A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 O O O O O O O O
1.8.9 Accessory Dwelling Units within a single-family dwelling, subject to Section V-K
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 O O O O O O O O
2. AGRICULTURE
2.1 Agricultural Use protected under M.G.L. c. 40A §3 (including, without limitation, single-family dwelling for resident proprietor), subject to Special Condition 8 of
Section III-B.
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2.2 Agricultural Use not protected under M.G.L. c. 40A §3 (except uses governed by subsections 2.3, 4.5, 4.6, and 4.7), subject to Special Condition 1 of Section III-B.
A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 O O A2 O O A2 A2 A2 A2 A2
2.2.1 Single-family dwelling for resident proprietor of use governed by subsection 2.2
P P P A2 A2 O O A2 O O A2 A2 A2 A2 A2
2.3 Seasonal sale of cut Christmas trees (unless governed by subsection 2.1), subject to Special Permit Condition 6 of Section III-B.
O O O O O P P P O O P P P O P
3. INSTITUTIONAL, EDUCATIONAL, AND RECREATIONAL USES
3.1 Church or other place of worship, parish house, rectory, convent, and other religious institutions, subject to Special Condition 8 of Section III-B.
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
3.2 Schools or Playgrounds - Public, religious, sectarian, or denominational, subject to Special Condition 8 of Section III-B.
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
3.3 Schools - Private, including dormitories accessory thereto, subject to Special Condition 8 of Section III-B.
A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O A1
3.4 Nursery school or other use for the day care of children, other than as exempted under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3, or a privately
organized camp, providing any outdoor play area is at such a distance and so screened from any residential structure on an adjoining lot as to avoid a noise
nuisance, subject to Special Condition 8 of Section III-B.
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 A2 A2 A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O A1
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 22
3.5 Public buildings and premises for government use, including public libraries, museums and parks
P P P P P P P P A2 A2 P P P A2 A2
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
3.6 Private non-profit library, museum, or community center.
A2 A2 A2 A2 P P P A2 A2 O A2 A2 A2 A1 A1
3.7 Country, golf, swimming, skating, yacht, or tennis club, or other social, civic, or recreational lodge or club-- not conducted as a business
A2 A2 A2 A2 P A2 A2 A2 A2 O A2 A2 A2 P A1
3.8 Hospital
O O O O O O A2 A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
3.8A Clinic
O O O O O A2 A2 A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
3.8B Nursing home, rest home, convalescent home, congregate living facility, charitable institution or other non-correctional institutional use.
A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
3.9 Cemetery
A1 A1 A1 A1 O O O O O O O O O O A1
3.10 Public-utility buildings and structures
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 P P P A2 O P P P O A1
3.11 Outdoor Concession as an accessory use when supporting outdoor athletic field uses permitted or allowed under Sections 3.2, 3.3, 3.5
and 3.7 (subject to Section III-J).
O O O O O O O O O O O O O A1 A1
4. COMMERCIAL
4.1 Retail store (other than those specified elsewhere on this Schedule) distributing merchandise to the general public.
O O O O O P P O A2 O O O O O O
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 23
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
4.2 Craft, consumer, or commercial service establishments dealing directly with the general public
O O O O O P P O A2 O O O O O O
4.3 Undertaking establishment or funeral home.
O O O O O A2 A2 O O O O O O O O
4.4 Animal or veterinary hospital, subject to special condition 1 of Section III-B, except in the Industrial Park District.
A2 A2 A2 A2 O A2 A2 A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
4.5 Commercial breeding, sale, or boarding of dogs, cats, or fur-bearing animals (unless governed by subsection 2.1), subject to special condition 1 of Section III-B,
except in the Industrial Park District.
A1 A1 A1 A1 O A1 A1 O O O A2 A2 A2 O O
4.6 Commercial greenhouses (unless governed by subsection 2.1).
O O O O O P P P O O P P P O O
4.7 Riding stable (unless governed by subsection 2.1), subject to special condition 1 of Section III-B.
A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 O O O O O O O O A1 O
4.8 Newspaper or job printing.
O O O O O P P O O O P P O O O
4.9A Sit-down restaurant
O O O O O A2 A2 A2 A2 O A2 A2 O A2 O
4.9B Fast-food/Take-out restaurant
O O O O O A2 A2 A2 A2 O A2 A2 O A2 O
4.10 Business or professional offices or agencies.
O O O O O P P P A2 O P P P O O
4.11 Bank or other financial institution.
O O O O O P P P A2 O P P P O O
4.11A A drive-up bank teller or automated teller machine (ATM) operated by a bank or financial institution for the convenience of its customers.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 24
O O O O O A2 A2 A2 A2 O A2 A2 A2 O O
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
4.12 Commercial indoor amusement or recreation place or place of assembly.
O O O A2 O P P O O O O O O A1 O
4.12A Health Club
O O O A2 O P P A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
4.13 Commercial outdoor amusement or recreation place not including an outdoor movie theater.
O O O O O O A1 O O O O O O A1 O
4.14 Freight terminal or storage warehouse.
O O O O O O P O O O P P O O O
4.14A Storage trailers/containers (except for (i) dumpsters or other trash receptacles, and (ii) construction trailers approved under site plan review) subject to
the renewal of the Special Permit on an annual basis. All storage trailers/containers must otherwise comply with dimensional, parking and other
provisions of the Zoning By-Law.
O O O O O O A2 O O O A2 A2 A2 O O
4.15 Heliport, subject to special condition 2 of Section III-B.
O O O O O O O A1 O A1 A1 A2 A2 O O
4.16 Hotel or Motel
O O O O O O O A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
4.17 Shopping Center consisting of three or more businesses described in Sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.9A, 4.9B (subject to Special Permit A2), 4.10, 4.11, 4.12,
4.12A, 4.16, 4.18, and 5.1 of this Schedule.
O O O O O O O O O O A2 A2 O O O
4.18 Retail Sale of Alcoholic Beverages.
O O O O O P P O A2 O O O O O O
4.19 Marine-oriented retail stores and consumer service establishments dealing directly with the general public.
O O O O O P P O A2 A2 O O O O O
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 25
4.20 Adult uses, subject to Section V-F
O O O O O O O O O O O A2 O O O
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
4.21 Body Art Establishment as defined by the Hingham Board of Health.
O O O O O O O O O O A2 O A2 O O
4.22 Commercial/Residential Building (Subject to Section III-B, 7)
O O O O O A2 A2 O O O O O O O O
4.23 Leased Parking for Commercial/Residential Buildings (Subject to Section III-B, 7)
O O O O O P O O O O O O O O O
4.24 Farmers’ Market
O O O O O A2 A2 O O O O O O A2 A2
4.25 Retail Store, Retail Sale of Alcoholic Beverages, or Consumer Service or Commercial Service Establishment permitted as an accessory use for up to 15% GFA
within any single building.
O O O O O O O A2 O O A2 A2 A2 O O
4.26 Registered Marijuana Dispensary, subject to Special Condition 9 of Section III-B (except for agricultural uses governed by Section 2.1).
O O O O O O O A2 O O O A2 O O O
4.27 Media Broadcasting or Production Studio
O O O O O P P P O O P P P A2 A2
5. AUTOMOTIVE AND MARINE SALES AND SERVICE
5.1 Automotive “filling” or service station, subject to special condition 3 of Section III-B.
O O O O O A1 A1 O O O O O O O O
5.2 Repair or storage garage for motor vehicles or trailers, which may include body, repair, welding, or soldering shop for motor vehicles or trailers, provided such
operation shall be sufficiently insulated so that any noise, flashing, fumes, gases, smoke, or vapor shall be confined to the premises.
O O O O O A2 A2 O O O P A2 A2 O O
5.3 Salesroom for franchised dealer or recognized agent of motor vehicle manufacturer whose principal business is the sale of new motor vehicles (the purchase and
sale of second-hand motor vehicles being incidental thereto), together with indoor storage and service facilities reasonably incidental to such salesroom,
provided that the principal display visible from the street shall not be second-hand motor vehicles; subject to site plan review in accordance with Section I-I.
O O O O O P P O O O P P O O O
5.4 Marina; boat livery; sales, storage, and repair of boats, boat trailers, and marine accessories.
O O O O O P P O P P P P A2 O O
6. WHOLESALE AND INDUSTRIAL USES
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 26
6.1 Wholesale warehouse, including office or showroom facilities.
O O O O O P P A2 O O P P A2 O O
Residence Business Office Waterfront Waterfront Industrial Industrial Limited Business Official and
A B C D E A** B Park* Business Recreation Park* Industrial
Park
Recreation Open Space
6.2 Light industrial uses, including manufacturing, storage, processing, fabrication, packaging, and assembly.
O O O O O O O A2 O O P P A2 O O
*(Subject to special condition 5 of Section III-B)
**(Subject to special condition 7 of Section III-B)
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 27
III-C Floodplain Protection Overlay District
1. The Floodplain Protection Overlay District shall be shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map
Part B Floodplain Protection Overlay District.” The district includes all special flood hazard
areas within the Town of Hingham at or below 10 feet above Mean Sea Level (MSL) as well
as all special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A, AE or VE on the Plymouth County
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The map
panels of the Plymouth County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of
Hingham are panel numbers 25023C0018J, 25023C0019J, 25023C0038J, 25023C0081J,
25023C0082J, 25023C0083J, 25023C0084J, 25023C0091J, 25023C0092J, 25023C0101J,
25023C0102J, 25023C0103J, 25023C0104J and 25023C0111J, dated July 17, 2012, and
revised by Letters of Map Revision effective August 14, 2015, September 8, 2017 and
December 13, 2017. The FIRM and Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report are incorporated
herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Building Department, and
Conservation Commission. The Letters of Map Revision are on file with the Conservation
Commission.
The Floodplain Protection Overlay District is established as an overlay district to all other
districts for the following purposes:
a. to protect public health, safety and general welfare;
b. to protect human life and property from hazards of periodic flooding;
c. to prevent the occurrence of public health emergencies resulting from water
quality contamination and pollution due to flooding;
d. to preserve natural flood control characteristics and the flood storage capacity of
the floodplain; and
e. to regulate development in floodplains in a manner that, at a minimum, meets
the requirements of FEMA for participation in the NFIP.
All regulations in the Hingham Zoning By-Law applicable to such underlying districts shall
remain in effect; except that, where the provisions of this Section III-C impose additional
regulations, those additional regulations shall govern.
2. Except as provided herein and in paragraphs 4 and 5 of this Section III-C:
a. No building, wall dam, or other structure shall be created, constructed, altered,
enlarged or otherwise created or moved for any living or other purposes provided
that fences, wildlife management shelters, footpaths, bicycle paths, horse paths and
footbridges are permitted if they do not affect the natural flow patterns of any water
course.
b. Dumping, filling, excavating or transferring of any material which will reduce the
natural flood-water storage capacity or interfere with the natural flow patterns of any
water course within this District is prohibited.
3. The following uses are permitted as a matter of right, subject to the provisions of
paragraph 2 of this Section III-C and provided that said uses comply with the standards
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 28
and requirements of Sections 60.3(d) and (e) of the National Flood Insurance Program
(Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations):
a. Conservation of soil water, plants and wildlife;
b. Outdoor recreation including play and sporting areas, nature study, boating,
fishing and hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
c. Proper operation and maintenance of dams and other water control devices,
including temporary alteration of water level for emergency or maintenance
purposes;
d. Forestry, grazing, farming, nurseries, truck gardening and harvesting of crops;
and
e. Accessory uses, such as flower or vegetable gardens, lawns, pasture or forestry
areas.
4. Upon the issuance of a Special Permit A1 for an exception by the Board of Appeals, and
subject to such special conditions and safeguards as the Board of Appeals deems necessary
to fulfill the purposes of this Section, the following uses as permitted in single residence
districts are permitted:
a. Duck walks and boat landings;
b. Appropriate municipal use, such as water-works pumping stations and parks;
c. Temporary storage of materials or equipment;
d. Dams, excavations, or changes in watercourses to create ponds or pools for
swimming or other recreation or agriculture use, scenic features or for drainage
improvements consistent with the purpose of this Section; and
e. Driveways and roads where alternative means of access are impractical.
5. The following are specifically exempt from the provisions of this Section III-C:
a. All residential dwellings, and those portions only of the lots therefore needed for
such repair, rebuilding, modification or enlargement of buildings as is permitted
under this paragraph 5, existing in the Floodplain Protection Overlay District on
January 1, 1969.
b. All industrial, commercial and business buildings, and those portions only of the
lots therefor needed for such repair, rebuilding, modification or enlargement of
buildings as is permitted under this paragraph 5, existing in the Flood Plain and
Watershed Protection District on January 1, 1969.
c. All residential, commercial, industrial and business buildings, and those portions
only of the lots therefor needed for such repair, rebuilding, modification or
enlargements of buildings as is permitted under this paragraph 5, the Building
Permits for which were issued prior to January 1, 1969.
All dwellings and buildings referred to in this paragraph may be repaired, rebuilt, modified,
or enlarged including but not limited to the addition of garages, additional living space, and
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 29
construction of appurtenant outbuildings, together with such filling, diking, and/or draining
as may be necessary therefor or for the protection of said structures from flood water
inundation, consistent with the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and
compliance with all other zoning requirements, and provided such construction does not
affect the natural flow patterns of any water course.
6. The portion of any lot in the Floodplain Protection Overlay District may be used to meet the
area and yard regulations for the district in which the remainder of the lot is situated,
unless otherwise restricted in this By-Law.
7. All salt water areas within the limits of the Town including Hingham Harbor, Hingham Bay,
Weir River and Back River and all other water bodies encircled by the Floodplain Protection
Overlay District are hereby included within said District.
8. If any land in the Floodplain Protection Overlay District is proven to the satisfaction of the
Board of Appeals as being in fact not subject to the flooding or not unsuitable because of
drainage conditions for a use or structure which would otherwise be prohibited by the
provisions of this Section and the Board of Appeals determines that the use of such land
for such use will not interfere with the general purposes for which the Floodplain Protection
Overlay District has been established and will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and/or welfare, the Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit A1 for such use or
structure which will comply in all respects with the provisions of this By-Law, provided that
any and all necessary permits, orders or approvals required by local or state law, except for
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 131, Section 40, or federal law have first been
obtained. The Board of Appeals shall refer each question to the Planning Board,
Conservation Commission and Board of Health and shall not act until these agencies have
reported their recommendations or 45 days have elapsed after such referral and no report
has been received.
9. All those lands along the following named streams and their tributaries: Weir River, Accord
Brook, Back River, Eel River, Plymouth River, Crooked Meadow River, Fresh River, Tower
Brook, Fulling Mill Brook and by other brooks and streams that lie within a horizontal
distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the mean high water line along each bank thereof
except as otherwise defined on said Part B of the Zoning Map are hereby included within
the Floodplain Protection Overlay District.
10. Whenever an application is made for a Building Permit on a lot of land which the Building
Commissioner believes may contain a Floodplain Protection Overlay District boundary, said
Commissioner shall require the applicant for such permit to provide as part of such
application a plan, certified by a registered land surveyor, of the lot showing the exact
location of the Floodplain Protection Overlay District boundary.
III-D Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District
1. This By-Law is adopted by the Town under its home rule powers, its police powers to
protect public health and welfare, and its authorization under Chapter 40, Section 21 of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
2. The locations and boundaries of the Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer
Protection District shall be as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map Parts A and C”, filed in
the office of the Town Clerk, which map by this reference is incorporated herein and made
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 30
a part of this Zoning By-Law.
The Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District is an overlay district
established to protect the water quality of Accord Pond and the Town’s aquifer area, by
regulating and controlling toxic or hazardous substances within this District. Restrictions
imposed hereunder shall be in addition to and not in substitution for restrictions contained
in other portions of this By-Law. All land in the District is subject to the regulations set
forth in this Section III-D.
3. Definitions
Approved Container Storage
The storage of toxic or hazardous substances in a container, which container is designed
and constructed to be product-tight and to resist corrosion, accidental damage or
deterioration for the period of time in which the toxic or hazardous substance is intended
to be stored within the District.
Approved Tank Storage
The storage of toxic or hazardous substances in a tank which provides a level of safety
from discharge over the expected life of the tank at least equal to a tank constructed of
corrosion-protected steel encased in a liquid-tight concrete vault and which complies with
the testing and inspection procedures enumerated in subsection 10 below.
Container
Any receptacle now or hereafter used or designed for the storage of a toxic or hazardous
substance which is not a tank.
Discharge
The disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any toxic or
hazardous substance into or on any land or water so that such substance may enter into
the District.
Store or Storage
Keeping or stocking of substances for later consumption or sale.
Tank
Any receptacle now or hereafter used or designed for storage of a toxic or hazardous
substance any portion of which receptacle is buried in the ground.
Toxic and Hazardous Substances
Any substance, solution or mixture thereof which because of its quality, concentration,
physical chemical or infectious characteristics would present a potential hazard to human
health if discharged into a drinking water supply. This includes, but is not limited to the list
of hazardous substances found in Parts 116 and 261 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, the list of toxic substances found in Section 307 of the Federal Clean Water
Act of 1977, chemical constituents specified in Tables C and E of the Drinking Water
Regulations of Massachusetts in concentrations greater than drinking water limits, all as
from time to time hereafter amended, acids and alkalis beyond the pH range of 5.5-8.5,
heavy metal wastes and solutions petroleum products including fuels and waste oils,
organic solvents and any solid material which, if exposed to water, will partially dissolve
forming a toxic or hazardous liquid, any substance which can act or react with another
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 31
substance likely to be located in its proximity and which upon such action or reaction would
produce a toxic or hazardous substance, or any substance determined by the Board of
Health to pose the hazard to health referred to above.
Use or Usage
The possession, manufacture, processing, or transporting upon the property, incorporation
into the land or any structure thereon.
Accord Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District (“the District”)
The area defined in subsection 2 of this By-Law as the Accord Pond Watershed and
Hingham Aquifer Protection District.
4. Except for uses in existence on April 25, 1983, or in the case of the Accord Pond
Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District added by this amendment April 28,
1987, no person or entity shall use any toxic or hazardous substance in the District except
by Special Permit obtained in accordance with subsection 12 below.
5. No person or entity shall discharge any toxic or hazardous substance in the District.
6. Except for storage in tanks in existence on April 25, 1983, or in the case of the Accord
Pond Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District added by this amendment April
28, 1987, no person or entity shall store in the District any toxic or hazardous substance in
a tank except that gasoline, diesel, heating or lubricating oil may be stored by Special
Permit granted in accordance with subsection 12 below. The Board shall not grant a Special
Permit for storage in tanks incident to residential uses.
7. Except for storage existing on April 25, 1983, or in the case of the Accord Pond Watershed
and Hingham Aquifer Protection District added by this amendment April 28, 1987, no
person or entity shall store toxic or hazardous substances in the District unless a Special
Permit shall have been granted for such storage pursuant to subsection 12 below except
that storage in tanks shall be governed by the provisions of subsection 6 above.
8. There shall be exempted from the provisions of this Section III-D: (i) the disposal of
sanitary wastewater generated on-site which does not contain toxic or hazardous
substances; and (ii) the use or storage and discharge incidental to residential uses of
household products generally available in retail stores and in quantities normally used by a
single family even if such products contain toxic or hazardous substances; and (iii)
approved container storage of heating oil for use in heating buildings in which such
containers are located and for which all necessary licenses or permits pursuant to Chapter
148 of the Massachusetts General Laws have been obtained and remain in force and effect.
9. Any tank located in the District, whether or not in active use, shall be presumed to contain
toxic or hazardous substances, and the owner of record of the land on which the tank is
located shall be required to comply with the provisions of this By-Law until the tank is
removed from the District.
10. All tanks within the District shall be tested for structural integrity and freedom from
discharge utilizing such generally recognized and commercially feasible standard tests as
the Building Commissioner may from time to time reasonably designate, at the following
times:
a. incident to installation as part of the Special Permit application process, and
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 32
b. on the fifteenth anniversary of the installation of a tank and on each anniversary
thereafter (tanks for which evidence of installation date is not available will be
presumed to be at least fifteen years old), and
c. at any time the Building Commissioner or the Board of Health determines that
toxic or hazardous substances of the type stored in the tank are being discharged
into the District.
The costs of all tests shall be borne by the owner of the tank. The owner may select the
individual or firm to perform the test provided the proposed individual or firm possesses
credentials satisfactory to the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall
witness all anniversary tests of tanks. Any tank failing inspection shall be removed from the
District by the owner at the owner’s cost and expense under the direction of the Building
Commissioner.
11. In addition to materials otherwise required to be submitted to the Board of Appeals as part
of a Special Permit application, a person or entity seeking a Special Permit hereunder shall
submit to the Board of Appeals the following:
a. the name, composition, and quantity of each substance proposed to be used or
stored;
b. the size, type, age, location (including sketch map), dates of purchase and/or
installation, including Fire Department permit number if any, of any tank or container
proposed to be used for storage;
c. the method of handling, the length of time of the use or storage, the types of
tank or container to be used and the estimated life thereof a description of the
nature of any manufacturing processes which involve these substances, complete
description of the proposed safeguards to be used (including a spill prevention plan
to maintain leakage from a tank or container), a proposed inventory system designed
to detect any shortage in substance being inventoried to be maintained and made
available for inspection during regular business hours, and a report detailing the
experience and ability of the person or entity seeking the permit, showing
management and financial strength sufficient to deal with the responsibility of using
or storing toxic or hazardous substances within the District; and
d. certified copies of all tests performed on any tanks shall accompany the
application form.
The Board of Appeals shall at the applicant’s expense, notify the Board of Health, Water
Supply Committee, and the Fire Chief of any application to use or store toxic or hazardous
substances in the District.
The Board of Appeals may require the applicant, at the applicant’s expense, to furnish at its
request, such additional scientific, engineering, or hydrological reports or studies, bearing
on the Special Permit application, prepared or performed by professionals whose expertise
is deemed satisfactory to the Board.
12. The Board of Appeals, upon application of a person or entity who furnishes the materials
outlined in subsection 11 above may grant, subject to the limitations contained in
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 33
subsection 6 above, a Special Permit for the use or storage of toxic or hazardous
substances if it finds that:
a. storage will be either approved tank storage or approved container storage and
any use will be in accordance with sound practices and in a manner designed to
safeguard the District, and
b. the person or entity applying for the Special Permit has the experience and
ability to deal with the responsibility of the use or storage of toxic or hazardous
substances in the District, and
c. such person or entity has the financial strength or has provided such other
financial assurances as the Board deems appropriate to assure that financial
resources sufficient to discharge the applicant’s responsibilities will be available, and
d. that the proposed use or storage does not constitute an unwarranted risk to the
District.
13. Any Special Permit granted pursuant to this Section III-D shall:
a. be issued to a specific person or entity and shall not be assignable or
transferable either voluntarily or by operation of law;
b. be for a specific term of years and in the case of approved tank or approved
container storage be for a term not in excess of the estimated life of the approved
tank or approved container; and
c. contain such other conditions as the Board deems appropriate or useful.
14. In the case of an application for approved container storage, where the storage period is in
excess of three years, the Board in appropriate circumstances may require the container to
pass an inspection as a condition of granting the Special Permit.
15. The Building Commissioner shall compile and maintain complete records concerning the
use and storage of all toxic and hazardous substances in the District and shall assure that
all tanks and containers used in approved tank or approved container storage are tested
and inspected as required hereunder and that any conditions contained in Special Permits
issued hereunder are complied with.
III-E South Hingham Development Overlay District
1. Purpose
To assist the Town of Hingham in providing safe and efficient public infrastructure
consistent with future growth potential in a designated South Hingham Development
Overlay District (Overlay District).
2. Objectives
a. Encourage planning and development which will maintain the economic viability
of businesses within the Overlay District.
b. Encourage future development that links major non-residential roadways in the
Overlay District.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 34
c. Minimize commercial and industrial related traffic impacts on surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
d. Support future development that balances the needs of abutting neighborhoods
and environmental protection with the long-term fiscal needs of the community.
3. Applicability
Only Industrial Park and Office Park zoned land in Hingham south of Whiting Street (Route
53) shall be subject to the requirements of this Section.
4. Special Permit Authority
For those projects within the South Hingham Development Overlay District requiring a
Special Permit the Board of Appeals (Board) may grant a Special Permit consistent with the
requirements of this Section, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 9, and any
regulations which the Board may adopt for carrying out its requirements.
5. Permitted Uses
The provisions set forth in Section III-A for the underlying Industrial Park and Office Park
Districts shall apply, with the following exceptions:
a. When the underlying zoning district is Office Park
i. Accessory Uses such as cafeterias, education and training facilities, and
similar facilities designed for the use of on-site employees shall be allowed
as part of any use permitted as-of-right or by Special Permit;
ii. Automotive sales and service, as described at III-A (5.3), shall be
permitted with a Special Permit A2.
6. Sign and Parking Criteria
The provisions set forth in Sections V-A and V-B shall apply throughout the South Hingham
Development Overlay District.
7. Intensity
The provisions of IV-A (Schedule of Dimensional Requirements) shall apply, with the
following exceptions:
a. When the underlying zoning district is Office Park
i. A Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of .15 is permitted as-of-right; up to .25 may be
permitted with a Special Permit A2.
ii. Building Height is limited to forty-eight (48) feet, but not more than four
(4) stories; Building Height up to sixty (60) feet, but not more than five (5)
stories is permitted with a Special Permit A2.
b. When the underlying zoning district is Industrial Park
i. For office use (as described in Section III-A 4.10) an FAR of 0.25 is
permitted as-of-right, and up to 0.45 by Special Permit A2.
ii. Building Height is limited to forty-eight (48) feet, but not more than four
(4) stories.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 35
8. Traffic, Safety, and Infrastructure Improvement Fund
a. Applicability
Most of the key intersections within the South Hingham Development Overlay District
are presently at level of service D or below during peak hours creating severe traffic
congestion problems and use of residential streets for through and business-related
traffic. Therefore, applications for a Special Permit for an increase in the intensity of
use in the underlying Industrial Park and/or Office Park District shall be subject to
the procedures and regulations of the Traffic, Safety, and Infrastructure
Improvement Fund (Fund), and any monies collected and deposited into said Fund
shall only be used to ameliorate development-related impacts within the Overlay
District, and all parts of all intersections abutting the District.
b. South Hingham Development Overlay District Assessment
i. Industrial Park District: The rate of contribution for properties whose
underlying zoning is Industrial Park shall be as follows:
For every square foot of gross floor area to be constructed above the gross
floor area allowed (a) as if the property were governed by the regulatory,
environmental and zoning restrictions then in effect and applicable to the
Industrial Park District, but not this South Hingham Development Overlay
District, or, (b) in the case of office use, in excess of an FAR of 0.25, and
in the case of any other as-of-right or Special Permit use, in excess of an
FAR of 0.35, whichever is less, a payment amounting to five percent (5%)
of the building construction costs pertaining to that portion of the
building(s) beyond what is allowed by-right shall be paid into a Traffic,
Safety, and Infrastructure Improvement Fund. For the purposes of this
Section, building construction costs shall be calculated using the upper
quartile of square foot unit costs for “Factories” as noted in an appropriate
annual edition of Building and Construction Cost Data published by the
R.S. Means Company, Inc. of Norwell, Massachusetts.
ii. Office Park District: The rate of contribution for properties whose
underlying zoning is Office Park shall be as follows:
For every square foot of gross floor area to be constructed above the gross
floor area allowed by right, a payment amounting to five percent (5%) of
the building construction costs pertaining to that portion of the building(s)
beyond what is allowed by fight shall be paid into a Traffic, Safety, and
Infrastructure Improvement Fund. For the purposes of this Section,
building construction costs shall be calculated using the upper quartile of
square foot unit costs for “Offices, low-rise” as noted in an appropriate
annual edition of Building and Construction Cost Data published by the
R.S. Means Company, Inc. of Norwell, Massachusetts.
c. Use of Assessments
Monies paid by the applicant shall be expended on public services within the South
Hingham Development Overlay District; said services shall include, but are not
limited to, engineering and traffic-related studies, land takings for public right-of-way
improvements, road widenings, reconfigurations of intersections, access lanes,
signalization, associated drainage and sewer improvements, lighting, sidewalks,
traffic islands, and similar improvements.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 36
d. Schedule of Assessment Payments
Payments into the Fund shall be made in accordance with a schedule approved by
the Board of Appeals. The amount of the initial payment shall be determined by the
Board of Appeals at the time of the granting of the Special Permit, but shall not
exceed one-third of the total payment. Further, at the time of the granting of the
Special Permit the applicant shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit or a financial
instrument approved by the Board for the balance. If the applicant fails to make any
subsequent payments in accordance with the Special Permit conditions, the Board of
Appeals may draw down the balance of the letter of credit or the approved alternate
financial instrument. The balance of the funds, if any, shall be paid immediately at
the time of the issuance of a temporary or permanent occupancy permit; in no
instance shall any temporary or permanent occupancy permit be granted unless the
balance of the assessment due has been paid in full. The applicant may, at any time,
make a lump sum payment of the entire required assessment.
e. Refund of Assessment
If for whatever reason a Special Permit lapses and no construction has occurred on
the site, the applicant, upon written request to the Board of Appeals, shall be
granted a public hearing. If the Board of Appeals finds that the Permit has lapsed
and no construction has occurred, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of all
assessment payments.
9. Screening
For all properties subject to the regulations of the South Hingham Development Overlay
District a screening plan shall be required as part of the site plan review process, Section II.
At a minimum if the development’s at-grade parking areas are visible at normal eye level
from a public way or from any point abutting a residential district that is less than five
hundred (500) feet away, they shall be screened by an ornamental lattice, planted berm,
opaque fence, or sight-obscuring planting or screenings which are comprised of at least
seventy-five percent (75%) evergreen shrubs or trees. Plantings shall be maintained in
healthy growing condition, and fencing shall be maintained in good repair by the land
owner.
III-F Personal Wireless Services Overlay District
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to establish a district in which adequate Personal Wireless
Services (as defined in Section V-E) may be provided with minimal harm to the public
health, safety and general welfare. Specifically, the District is created to protect the
character and appearance of the Town, to assure public safety, to reduce adverse visual
effects and to maintain the Town’s scenic, historic and environmental resources.
2. Location
The Personal Wireless Services Overlay District shall include the following parcels: the
Hingham Landfill (Assessors Map 106-3, 4, and 7), the Hingham Town Hall (Assessors Map
80-95), South Shore Country Club (Assessors Map 70-14), and Town Forest (Assessors
Maps 148-11 and 170-9).
3. Submittal Requirements
A Special Permit A2 is required to erect Personal Wireless Services Facilities (as defined in
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 37
section V-E), and service providers must comply with all requirements of Section I-I and
section V-E of this By-Law.
III-G Downtown Hingham Overlay District
1. Purpose
To protect and promote the viability and value of business and residential properties
located in the Downtown Hingham Overlay District (“Downtown”) in a manner consistent
with Hingham’s historic character.
2. Objectives
a. Encourage planning and development which will maintain and improve the
economic viability of Downtown businesses by encouraging a mix of uses that will
maintain, provide for or encourage regular interaction with the general public on a
walk-in basis on the ground floor and office and residential uses on the upper floors.
b. Encourage planning and development of the Downtown as a visitor destination
for historic sightseeing, shopping and dining.
c. Encourage creation of mixed use buildings incorporating business and residential
uses to create more diverse housing options in Hingham.
d. Encourage planning for and more efficient use of, off-street parking to better
facilitate resident and visitor access to and parking in the Downtown.
e. Encourage maintenance, restoration or replacement of existing structures to
bring them into compliance with current building, plumbing and electric codes, as
well as the latest fire and handicap access regulations, in a manner consistent with
Hingham’s historic character.
f. Preserve and/or complement the visual context of the streetscape.
3. Applicability
The Downtown Hingham Overlay District consists of parcels in Business District A extending
from the intersection of South Street and Bates Way to the west and the intersection of
Summer Street, Green Street and Chief Justice Cushing Highway to the east, as shown on
the map “Zoning Map Parts A and C”.
Parcels within the Downtown Hingham Overlay District shall be subject to the requirements
of this section. In addition, for any parcel located partially in the Downtown Hingham
Overlay District, such portion located in the Overlay District shall be subject to the
requirements of this Section, provided, however, that if any structure or use on such parcel
lies partially in the Overlay District and partially in another zoning district, such structure or
use shall comply with the requirements of this Section.
4. Permitted and Prohibited Uses
The permitted uses and uses allowed by Special Permit A2 in Business District A, as set
forth in Section III-A, Schedule of Uses, shall be permitted or allowed, as applicable, in the
Overlay District, with the following exceptions:
a. the following uses are prohibited in the Overlay District:
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 38
Section III-A 4.3 Funeral Home
Section III-A 4.4 Animal or veterinary hospital
Section III-A 4.5 Commercial breeding
Section III-A 5.1 Automotive filling or service station
Section III-A 5.2 Auto repair
Section III-A 5.3 Car dealership & service facilities
Section III-A 5.4 Marina; boat livery; sales, storage & repair of boats
Section III-A 6.1 Wholesale warehouse
b. the following uses are permitted on the upper floors of any building and may be
allowed by Special Permit A2 on the ground floor:
Section III-A 4.10 Business or professional offices or agencies
Section III-A 4.11 Bank or other financial institution
i. The Board of Appeals may approve such application for a Special Permit A2
if, in addition to the criteria set forth in Section I-F, 2, it finds that, in its
judgment, the use is consistent with the purpose and objectives of this
Section III-G as set forth above. If such use cannot meet such objectives
in the proposed location, it may be granted a Special Permit A2 if at least
one of the following apply and the Board of Appeals finds that the
proposed use is not detrimental to the objectives of this Section, including
objective 2(a):
(A) The site of the use is outside the primary pedestrian area of the
Downtown, such primary pedestrian area being those portions of Main
Street, North Street and South Street within the Overlay District.
(B) The use will be located in a building existing as of January 1, 2009
which is significantly set back from the (or all of the) street(s) which such
building abuts.
(C) The physical characteristics of the existing building (as of January 1,
2009) in which the use shall be located (such as a pre-existing residential
structure within the Overlay District) are such that other permitted or
allowed uses in the Overlay District are not practicable.
ii. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 4(B)(i) above, if, as of
January 1, 2009, the ground floor of any building included a “business or
professional office or agency” or a “bank or other financial institution”
(each a “Grandfathered Use”), and such Grandfathered Use is
subsequently changed to another permitted or allowed use in the
Overlay District, such ground floor may, within six (6) years of change of
use, revert back to a Grandfathered Use and such Grandfathered Use shall
be permitted subject to Site Plan Review pursuant to subsection 4(b)(iii)
below prior to issuance of a building permit (or a certificate of occupancy if
no building permit is requested), but shall not require a Special Permit A2.
iii. The Planning Board, when conducting Site Plan Review under this
subsection 4(b), shall consider, in addition to the items set forth in Section
I-I,6 whether the appearance and treatment of the windows and doors of
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 39
the building will maintain, provide for or encourage regular interaction with
the general public.
c. A Roof Deck may be allowed by a Special Permit A2, subject to the following criteria.
If proposed in combination with another use that requires a Special Permit A2, the
special permit process shall be combined.
i. Access:
(A) If the proposed Roof Deck is above the third story, access shall be
limited to an internalized staircase and roof hatch. In no event shall any
enclosed habitable space, nor Roof Deck access structures, other than a
roof hatch, be permitted above the third story.
(B) For buildings with a height of 2.5 stories or less, the Roof Deck may be
accessed either by roof hatch or from enclosed habitable space within the
roof form on the ½ story level or lower story level.
ii. The Roof Deck and any guardrail or fence required by the state building
code that is not a design element of the building shall not be visible from
the opposite side of the public way(s) that abuts the structure. Proposed
roof decks on existing structures shall demonstrate compliance with this
standard by installing mock-ups/story poles with yellow tape strung
between the poles at a height of 36” from the decking or at the proposed
elevation of the guardrail or fence if greater than 36”. Roof Decks on
proposed buildings will be required to demonstrate how this criterion will
be satisfied during the approval process with the submittal of perspective
views and/or any other submissions deemed necessary by the Planning
Board.
iii. No vertical structures in excess of the minimum height of guardrail or
fence required by the state building code shall be permitted on the Roof
Deck, including without limitation, trellises, privacy screens or the like,
provided that this provision shall not prohibit natural plantings for
screening approved pursuant to site plan or design review. Temporary,
seasonal umbrellas shall be permitted provided the same are anchored in
weighted stands to prevent umbrellas from become flying projectiles in
windy weather.
iv. Lighting of the Roof Deck shall be dark sky compliant and foot candles
shall not exceed zero at the building edges. No light fixtures shall be
placed at a height greater than the minimum height of guardrail or fence
required by the state building code.
v. No amplified live music shall be permitted, nor amplified sound fixtures
installed, on a Roof Deck.
5. Design Review Criteria
a. Applicability. Any project located within the Overlay District, but not within a
Local Historic District, and 1) subject to Special Permit or site plan review or 2) which
requires a building permit and affects the exterior architectural features of a building
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 40
or structure, shall also be subject to Design Review. The following alterations, unless
subject to the requirements of Section IV-B, 6 shall be exempt from the
requirements of this subsection:
i. normal maintenance and repair of the building or structure; and/or
ii. replacement of exterior materials, including roofing materials, shingles or
clapboard, provided such materials are replaced with the same type of
materials.
b. Submittal Requirements. The building permit, site plan review and or special
permit applications shall include photographs of the existing condition of the exterior
of existing structure(s), and a narrative description of the proposed work affecting
the exterior of the building or structure, including a description of the materials to be
used. Building elevations shall include detail regarding treatment of the roof,
including placement and type of mechanicals, projections and any proposed Roof
Deck. The Planning Board may also require additional submittals, including plans
prepared by qualified registered professionals showing the total square footage and
dimensions of all buildings, the building elevations and perspective renderings, and
detailing the exterior architectural features of the buildings and the exterior materials
to be used.
c. In connection with its review of such work, the Planning Board shall request
advisory design review comments on the proposal from the Hingham Historic
Districts Commission, and may engage other professional consultants, experts or
assistance consistent with the provision of Section I-F,3 of this By-Law to ensure the
proposal is architecturally and aesthetically consistent with the historic character of
the Overlay District. Simultaneously with the submission of an application subject to
this Section 5, the applicant shall submit a copy of the application and plans to the
Historic District Commission. The Planning Board shall not act until the Commission
or its designated staff has reported its recommendations or 21 days have passed
from the filing of the application and no report has been received.
d. Criteria. The Planning Board shall consider the architectural and aesthetic
consistency of the proposed project with the historic character of the Overlay District,
taking into account appropriate scale, massing, location of buildings on lot, roof
slopes, street façade, fenestration, exterior building materials, and similar factors.
6. Commercial/Residential Building Special Permit
a. Application and Review Requirements
i. An application for a Commercial/Residential Special Permit A2 shall comply
with all of the requirements of this Section and with Sections I-F, I-G and
I-I of this By-Law. In addition, the Board of Appeals may grant a Special
Permit A2 under this Section only if it finds that the applicant has
demonstrated that the Commercial/Residential Building will not have an
adverse impact on abutting residential or commercial neighborhoods and
can be constructed with due consideration for health and safety.
b. Eligibility Requirements
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 41
i. Buildings which meet the following criteria are eligible to apply for a
Commercial/Residential Building Special Permit:
ii. Buildings containing a permitted commercial use at the street level story. A
permitted commercial use shall be those uses permitted under Section IIIG,
4 above, but excluding Parking Areas under Section III-A, 4.18, except
as specifically provided in subsection 7(a) below; and
iii. Sufficient off-street parking to meet the requirements of subsection 7(a) of
this Section III-G.
c. Additional Requirements
i. A commercial use shall be located at ground floor facing the street(s) on
which the parcel has frontage. Dwelling units shall be located above
ground floor. No dwelling units shall be permitted below the ground floor.
ii. Dwelling units shall not be smaller than 575 square feet for a studio or one
bedroom dwelling unit and 750 square feet for a two bedroom dwelling
unit. A dwelling unit may not contain more than two bedrooms.
iii. Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of household trash.
7. Off-Street Parking Requirements in the Downtown Hingham Overlay District
Except as otherwise provided in this section (7), the requirements set forth in Section
V-A, Off Street Parking Requirements, shall apply to the Overlay District.
a. Parking Requirements for Commercial/Residential Buildings
The purpose of this subsection (a) is to ensure that sufficient off-street parking is
provided for all dwelling units created under Section III-G,6.
i. Provision for off-street parking shall be as follows:
Studio or one-bedroom dwelling unit 1 space
Two-bedroom dwelling unit 2 spaces
ii. When off-street parking exists or may be constructed on the parcel where
the use is proposed, the Planning Board may make a finding in connection
with a Special Permit A3 application pursuant to Section V-A that the
commercial use(s) and the residential use within the
Commercial/Residential Building are complementary uses having different
peak demands times, in which event on-site parking may satisfy both the
residential and the commercial uses (subject to the requirements of
Section 7 below in the event of a change or increase in commercial uses).
iii. Parking for all dwelling units (including, without limitation, dwelling units
proposed in newly-constructed or reconstructed buildings or in newlyconstructed
stories to existing buildings) shall be located on the same
parcel or on a contiguous parcel under common ownership.
iv. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for dwelling units proposed in existing
stories of existing buildings which, as of December 1, 2003, (a) are at least
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 42
two stories in height and (b) which lack required on-site, off-street parking
to meet the requirements of this Section, the Planning Board may grant a
Special Permit A3 to permit the following;
(A) Leased Parking for Commercial/Residential Buildings, provided that a
copy of a written, fully executed and effective lease, with a term of at
least one (1) year, permitting use of sufficient parking spaces to comply
with this Section for a minimum of overnight parking shall be provided to
the Planning Board prior to the issuance of the Special Permit A3. For
purposes of this Section III-G, “Leased Parking for
Commercial/Residential Buildings” shall be the provision of parking for
dwelling units in a Commercial/Residential Building on land of a third
party located within 500 feet of the benefited parcel (but excluding
parcels with Single-Family Dwellings or Two-Family Dwellings outside of
the Overlay District). The granting of a Special Permit A3 shall require a
finding by the Planning Board that such lease of parking spaces does not
create a violation of the zoning of, parking requirements for existing
uses on, or any special permit or variance granted to, the burdened
parcel. In addition, the applicant (or its successor) shall be required, as
a condition of the issuance of a Special Permit, (i) to certify to the
Building Commissioner annually, on the anniversary of the date of the
issuance of a Special Permit, that such lease remains in full force and in
effect and (ii) no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration or
other termination of such lease, to apply to the Planning Board
for a modification of its Special Permit A3 which application shall provide
for the required parking in another manner consistent with the
requirements of this subsection 7(a).
(B) Off-site parking in designated resident parking areas of public parking
lots, provided that a resident parking permit program or the like is
adopted by the Town, and provided that, as a condition of the issuance
of the Special Permit A3, the applicant applies for and presents written
evidence to the Planning Board and the Building Commissioner of
approval by the Town of sufficient resident parking permits to comply
with the parking requirements of this Section.
Provision of off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of
this Subsection (iv) may be satisfied by any combination of on-site
parking and alternative parking options described herein, provided,
however, that where, prior to the application for a Special Permit under
this Section, sufficient off-street parking exists or may be reasonably
constructed on-site to satisfy, in whole or in part, the parking
requirements of this Section, the Planning Board shall consider the
availability of such parking when considering the eligibility of the site, such
parking shall be located on-site and shall not be eligible for relief
under this subsection to allow for alternate parking options.
v. No newly-constructed parking shall front on a public way, except along
Summer Street (Route 3A), Water Street, Station Street or the Station
Street parking areas.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 43
vi. For parcels which have opposite property lines along two streets or ways
and for parcels with frontage on Summer Street (Route 3A), fully enclosed
garage parking may be provided within the building at ground level if such
parking is accessed from the rear of the building, is not visible from the
front of the building, and such building has a permitted commercial use at
the front of the building. For purposes of this Section III-G, any portion of
a building facing Main Street, South Street, North Street, or Summer Street
shall be considered the front of a building.
vii. Notwithstanding any provision of Section V-A to the contrary, and except
as specifically provided in this Section III-G, 7(a), off-street parking
requirements for residential uses in a Commercial/Residential Building shall
not be reduced nor waived by special permit or otherwise. In the event of
a conflict between the provisions of Section V and this Section, the
provisions of this Section shall control.
b. Off-Street Parking Requirements for Certain Non-Residential Uses
The reduction in off-street parking requirements for Business A District set forth in
Section V-A, 2 shall not apply to uses under Section III-A, 4.10 and Section III-A,
4.11 on the ground floor; provided, however, that this subsection 7(b) shall not apply
to any Grandfathered Use under section III-G, 4 (b)(ii).
c. Special Permit A3 for Waivers from Off-Street Parking Requirements
The Planning Board may approve an application for a Special Permit A3 to waive
strict adherence to the requirements of this Section III-G,7 and applicable provisions
of Section V-A if it finds such application meets the following criteria:
i. Satisfactory demonstration of parking adequacy as evidenced by the
results of a parking study conducted pursuant to the standards of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) and the Urban Land Institute
(ULI) prepared by a Professional Engineer duly licensed in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts with demonstrated experience in the
Fields of Traffic Engineering and Transportation Planning, and concurrence
with said results by the Planning Board’s review consultant. The parking
study baseline shall be consistent with the methodology and format
implemented as a part of the Town’s “2008 Downtown Hingham Parking
Study” and associated shared parking model, as the same may be updated
or amended from time to time. Upon written request of the applicant, the
Planning Board may waive the above submittal requirement if deemed by
the Planning Board to be not necessary for its review of the application.
ii. Such relief will promote the goal of preserving and enhancing the
Downtown as a mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented local shopping and
business district and is consistent with the purpose and objectives of the
Overlay District;
iii. The maximum number of off-street parking spaces reasonably achievable
on the premises has been provided; and
iv. It is not practical to meet the applicable standards of this Section 7 and
Section V-A and a waiver of these regulations will not (A) result in or
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 44
worsen parking or traffic problems, or adversely affect pedestrian safety,
on-site or on the surrounding streets or (B) adversely affect the value of
abutting lands and buildings.
III-H Hingham Harbor Overlay District
1. Purpose
To promote access to and the use and enjoyment of the land and water along Hingham’s
inner harbor, while protecting and enhancing its cultural, scenic and natural character.
2. Objectives:
a. To provide for a variety of land and water based recreational uses, both passive
and active, including pedestrian access along the waterfront and access to water
uses such as swimming, pleasure boating and kayaking.
b. To provide appropriate public facilities including harbor master facilities, parking
and restrooms;
c. To promote cooperation and a harmony of uses between privately and publicly
owned parcels, including the dimensional and aesthetic design of structures on such
parcels;
d. To promote and enhance connections between Downtown Hingham and
Hingham’s inner harbor.
3. Applicability
The Hingham Harbor Overlay District will include those parcels of land located along the
portion of Hingham’s inner harbor that extend from the northwesterly boundary of the
parcel commonly known as Hingham Bathing Beach to the southeasterly boundary of the
parcel commonly known as Steamboat Wharf, more particularly described as the following:
Assessors Map 39, Lot 8; Map 50, Lots 49, 50 and 51; and Map 51, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 58
and 59.
4. Definitions
The following defined terms shall apply to this Section III-H. Other capitalized terms
used in this Section and not otherwise defined herein shall have the same meanings
ascribed to such terms in Section VI of this By-Law.
Marina – For the purposes of the underlying Official and Open Space parcels within this
Overlay District, a marina shall constitute a berthing area comprised of slips, piers or
attached floats.
Snack Stand – Within this Overlay District, a counter accessible from the outside of a
building for the sale of non-alcoholic beverages and food and providing no indoor
seating, which snack stand shall be accessory to the Water Dependent Use(s) of the lot
on which it is located and not intended as a primary use. When determining parking
required for the lot, the Snack Stand use may be considered under either a shared
parking analysis or as a complementary use which is not deemed to create a parking
demand separate from, or in addition to, the primary Water Dependent Use(s) on the lot.
Uses Accessory to a Water Dependent Use – The following uses are deemed to be
accessory to a primary Water Dependent Use:
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 45
a. offices primarily providing services to a Water Dependent Use (such as
harbormaster, other public safety, marina management or life guard offices), and
related indoor storage;
b. public restrooms, including bathhouses; and
c. Snack Stands
Water Dependent Use – Each of the following uses shall be deemed a water dependent use
for the purposes of this Section III-E:
a. marinas, whether privately or publicly owned or operated;
b. public boat basins (also referred to as the public mooring field);
c. other public or private commercial or recreational boating facilities, such as a
sailing club, rowing club and/or other organized boating facility. A designated
public launch area which allows the launching by an individual of a vessel from a
trailer or “car-top” for day-use shall not constitute an organized boating facility;
d. public facilities for fishing, swimming, and boat launching; and
e. parks, esplanades, boardwalks, and other pedestrian facilities that promote use
and enjoyment of the water by the general public and are located at or near the
water’s edge.
5. Permitted and Prohibited Uses
A. The permitted uses and uses allowed by Special Permit, as set forth in the Section
III-A, Schedule of Uses, where the underlying zoning district is Official and Open Space,
shall be permitted or allowed as applicable, in the Overlay District, except as set forth in
this subsection 5.A and in subsections 5.C and 5.D below:
1. The uses allowed under Section III-A, 3.5 (Public buildings and premises for
government use), shall only be permitted as herein provided:
a. Permitted – The uses described in subsections (a), (b), (d) and (e) of the above
definition of Water Dependent Uses, provided, however, that public buildings
supporting such Water Dependent Uses shall require a Special Permit A2 as provided
in subsection (b) below.
b. Special Permit A2 –
i. Uses described in subsection (c.) of the above definition of Water
Dependent Uses
ii. Buildings supporting a Water Dependent Use which house Uses
Accessory to a Water Dependent Use
B. The permitted uses and uses allowed by Special Permit, as set forth in the Section
III-A, Schedule of Uses, where the underlying zoning district is Waterfront Business, shall
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 46
be permitted or allowed, as applicable, in the Overlay District, except as set forth in this
subsection 5.B and in subsections 5.C and 5.D below:
1. Special Permit A2 – A Snack Stand as an accessory use.
C. The use allowed under Section III-A, 4.18 is modified as follows for all parcels within
the Overlay District:
1. Upon the joint application by the record owner of each affected lot, the Planning
Board may grant a Special Permit A3 to allow parking by employees, customers, or
guests of a use operating on one lot within the Overlay District on an abutting lot
within the Overlay District (“Abutting Lot”), provided that (1) service are not
performed at the parking area and (2) the Planning Board makes a finding that such
parking use will not result in or worsen parking problems on the Abutting Lot.
D. The winter storage of floats servicing uses within the Overlay District is permitted (a)
provided such storage does not reduce the required parking available for the uses on the
lot during the period of such storage, and (b) subject to any rules or regulations
promulgated by the Harbormaster related to float storage.
E. The following uses are prohibited in the Overlay District:
Personal wireless communications towers or antennae, except as may be required for
public safety or marina operations, provided that such public safety and marina
communications antennae shall be building mounted.
6. Dimensional Requirements
A. Where the underlying zoning district is Official and Open Space, the requirements of
Section IV-A shall apply, except as follows:
1. The maximum height of buildings shall be reduced from 35 feet to the height set
forth in Section 6.B.2 below; and
2. The minimum rear yard along the waterfront shall be 10 feet from the existing
sea wall or, if none, from the mean high water mark.
B. Special Permit A3 for Waivers from IV-A Schedule of Dimensional Requirements. The
Planning Board may grant a Special Permit A3 to waive strict adherence to the
requirements of Section IV-A where the underlying zoning is Waterfront Business District,
if it finds that such application will promote the purpose and objectives of the Hingham
Harbor Overlay District, subject to the following:
1. If the area or frontage of the lot existing as of January 1, 2010 does not meet the
“minimum lot size” requirements set forth in Section IV-A, the “minimum lot size”
requirement may be reduced to no smaller than the lot size or frontage, as
applicable, of the lot on that date.
2. The “maximum height” of a building may be modified as follows: Maximum
height shall not exceed two stories and 28 feet to the peak of the building,
subject to the following:
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 47
a. For the purposes of this Overlay District, the definition of Grade Plane in Section
VI shall be modified by replacing the term “Finished Grade” with the term “Pre-
Construction Grade”.
b. The maximum wall height of the building shall be 20 feet, inclusive of any
elevated floors for flood resistant construction, it being the intention that the
additional 8 feet of height shall be permitted only to the extent the design of the
building includes a peaked roof.
c. There shall be no occupiable space between the 20 foot maximum height
and the peak. Any gables, cupolas, towers or related architectural features
between the eave and the peak shall be for design purposes only.
3. The “minimum yard dimensions” may be modified as follows:
a. Front: May be reduced to 20 feet – measured horizontally at right angles to the
sideline of the public way.
b. Side: The side yard requirement may be modified to allow in the aggregate
a total of not less than 40 feet, provided that the side yard dimension on any
one side may be no less than 10 feet. A yard space of not less than 5 feet
wide on each side shall be maintained open and not parked upon, including
parking overhang, along the entire length of each side lot line. Where
adjacent property is below the mean high water line, the rear yard limitation
shall apply, even if the adjacent property is subsequently filled to raise it
above the mean high water line.
C. Public access commencing at the boundary of the lot and extending along the side
and rear yards of the lot to the next boundary of the lot, adjacent to the water’s edge,
shall be provided, in order to contribute to continuous public access along the waterfront.
7. Design Review Criteria
A. Applicability. Any building located within the Overlay District which (1) is subject to
site plan review or (2) requires a building permit and affects the exterior architectural
features of a building or structure, shall be subject to Design Review by the Planning
Board. The following alterations, unless subject to the requirements of Section IV-B, 6
shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection:
1. normal maintenance and repair of the building or structure; and/or
2. replacement of exterior materials, including roofing materials, shingles or
clapboard, provided such materials are replaced with the same type of materials.
B. Submittal Requirements. The site plan or building permit application shall include a
narrative description of the proposed work affecting the exterior of the building or
structure, including a description of the materials to be used and depictions of proposed
building elevations. For new or expanded buildings, the Planning Board may also require
plans depicting the total square footage and dimensions of all buildings, the building
elevations and perspective renderings, the exterior architectural features of the buildings,
and the exterior materials to be used.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 48
C. Peer Review. In connection with its review of such work, the Planning Board may
engage professional consultants, experts or assistance consistent with the provisions of
Section I-F (3) of the Zoning By-Law.
D. Criteria. The Planning Board shall consider the architectural and aesthetic
consistency of the proposed project with the historic character of the Town and the
objectives of the Overlay District, taking into account the scale, massing, location of
buildings on lot, roof slopes, street façade, fenestrations, exterior building materials, and
similar factors. Design criteria shall include: (1) the shielding of rooftop mechanical
equipment and (2) the preservation of vistas and view corridors to the extent practicable.
III-I Nonconforming Conditions
1. General – Any structure or any use of a structure or land, lawfully existing at the time of
the enactment or subsequent amendment of this By-Law, may be continued although such
use and/or structure does not conform with the provisions of this By-Law, subject to the
following conditions and exceptions:
A. Changes – Once changed to a conforming use or once the extent of a nonconforming
use is reduced, no structure or land shall be permitted to revert to the prior or a new
nonconforming use.
B. Restoration - A lawfully existing nonconforming building or structure may be repaired
or reconstructed if damaged or destroyed by a casualty, including explosion, fire,
storm or other natural disaster, but only if such repair or reconstruction is begun
within two (2) years of such damage or destruction and diligently pursed to
completion within two (2) years of commencement; provided however, that, except as
may be allowed by the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 6 or this Section IIII
governing alterations of nonconforming structures, the repaired or reconstructed
structure shall be no less conforming than the structure that was so damaged or
destroyed.
C. Extension of Nonconforming Use – Except as may be allowed under M.G.L.
Chapter 40A, Section 6, no increase in the extent of a nonconforming use of a
structure or land may be made.
D. Abandonment or Discontinuance
(i) A nonconforming use (other than Single-Family or Two-Family residential use)
that has been discontinued for a period of more than two (2) years, shall not be
reestablished, and any future use shall conform to this By-law.
(ii) The nonconforming use of a building or structure as a Single-Family Dwelling or
Two-Family Dwelling (and/or any Accessory Buildings related thereto) that has
been discontinued for a period of more than four (4) years shall not be
reestablished and any future use shall conform to this By-law, provided
however, that the lawful nonconforming use of more than one Dwelling Unit
within an existing Dwelling (that has not been discontinued or abandoned) shall
not terminate unless such Dwelling has been converted to a Single-Family
Dwelling with complete living facilities for only one household.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 49
(iii) A nonconforming structure that has been discontinued (not used or occupied)
for a period of more than two (2) years, or has been abandoned, may not be
used or occupied for any use, with the following exceptions:
a. This subsection (iii) does not apply to and shall not prohibit the conforming
use of a lawful nonconforming Single-Family Dwelling as a Single-Family
Dwelling (including Accessory Buildings) or conforming use of a lawful
nonconforming Two-Family Dwelling as a Two-Family Dwelling (including
Accessory Buildings).
b. Except as provided in the foregoing subsection (iii) “a”, the conforming use
of a building or structure that would be a lawful nonconforming building or
structure if it had not been deemed discontinued or abandoned hereunder,
may be permitted upon the issuance of a Special Permit A2.
E. Definitions - As used in this Section III-I:
(i) “Discontinuance” shall mean the actual cessation of any use or the non-use of
any structure.
(ii) A nonconforming use shall be deemed “abandoned” when it is discontinued for
a period of at least six consecutive months, and customary equipment, furniture
or supplies for the operation of such use have been removed, and at least one
of the following apply:
a. The building or structure in which such use was located is not actively
marketed for sale or lease.
b. Failure to provide for regular maintenance of the building or structure such
as failing to heat the building at a level necessary to prevent frozen pipes or
related damage, failing to provide snow removal, or failing to maintain
landscaping.
(iii) A nonconforming building or structure shall be deemed “abandoned” when it is
no longer occupied for a conforming or lawfully nonconforming use for at least
six consecutive months and one or more of the following apply:
a. It is not actively marketed for sale or lease.
b. Failure to provide for regular maintenance such as failing to heat the
building at a level necessary to prevent frozen pipes or related damage,
failing to provide snow removal, or failing to maintain landscaping.
c. Issuance of a written notice of an unsafe structure by the Building
Commissioner and failure of the owner to rectify the unsafe condition in the
manner and in the timeframe specified in such written notice.
2. For the purposes of this Section III-I, the alteration of, addition to, reconstruction of,
extension of, or structural change in an existing nonconforming Single or Two-Family
Dwelling shall not be considered the extension of a nonconforming use or structure
provided that:
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 50
A. the Single or Two-Family Dwelling conformed in all respects to the Zoning By-Law in
existence at the time of its initial construction; and,
B. the alteration of, addition to, reconstruction of, extension of, or structural change in
the nonconforming Single or Two-Family Dwelling does not further reduce the
minimum linear measurement of the existing nonconforming dimensions.
III-J Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses shall be those uses that are customarily incidental to and located on the
same lot with a principal use or on an adjoining lot under the same ownership and which
are uses otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which they are proposed, provided,
however, that:
a. Uses considered customarily incidental to residential uses shall be those
accessory uses permitted under Section III-A, 1.8. Such uses shall also be permitted
in buildings accessory to Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings located in nonresidential
districts.
b. Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of
right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are
necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related
production, may be permitted upon the issuance of a Special Permit A2, provided the
Board of Appeals finds that the proposed accessory use does not substantially
derogate from the public good.
2. Additional Requirements
a. Accessory uses may be located in any area contained within a non-conforming
residential building (whether primary or accessory) existing as of April 26, 2004.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section III-A, 1.8.4, 1.8.5 and 1.8.6, regarding
resident offices, studios, or customary home occupations, as described in those subsections,
no more than three persons, including the resident professional(s), or
business owner(s), shall be employed on the premises at any one time.
c. Such uses shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use.
d. Such uses shall not alter the character of the premises on which they are located
or impair the neighborhood.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 51
SECTION IV
Intensity Regulations
IV-A Schedule of Dimensional Requirements
minimum lot size maximum height
maximum lot coverage 
minimum yard
dimensions
special requirements
applicable to
each district
area frontage feet stories front side rear
RESIDENCE DISTRICT A
20,000 sq. ft. 125’ 35’ 2½ 25’ 15’ 15’ 6, 9, 10, 13, 16
RESIDENCE DISTRICT B
30,000 sq. ft. 150’ 35’ 2½ 35’ 20’ 20’ 6, 9, 13, 16
RESIDENCE DISTRICT C
40,000 sq. ft. 150’ 35’ 2½ 50’ 20’ 20’ 6, 9, 13, 16
TOWN HOUSE IN RESIDENCE DISTRICT D
5,000 sq. ft. 30’ per
dwelling unit
35’ 2½ 20% 50’ 20’ 20’ 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16
RESIDENCE DISTRICT E
30,000 sq. ft. 150’ 35’ 2½ 35’ 20’ 20’ 6, 9, 10, 16
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 52
IV-A Schedule of Dimensional Requirements (continued)
minimum lot size maximum height
maximum percentage
which may be covered by all
buildings
minimum yard
dimensions
special requirements
applicable to
each district
area frontage feet stories front side rear
BUSINESS DISTRICT A
20’ 3 10’ 6, 9, 10
BUSINESS DISTRICT B
100’ 3 25% 40’ 25’ 25’ 2, 3, 6, 10
BUSINESS RECREATION DISTRICT
10,000 sq. ft. 150’ 2½ 25% 40’ 25’ 25’ 6, 2
WATERFRONT BUSINESS DISTRICT *
10,000 sq. ft. 100’ 20’ 25% 40’ 25’ 10’ 6
*For
Waterfront
Business
District, yard
dimensions
are measured
as follows:
Front:
Side:
Rear:
40 feet – measured horizontally at right angles to the sideline of the public way.
25 feet – of which a yard space not less than 5 feet wide shall be maintained opened and not parked upon, including parking
overhang, along the entire length of each side lot line. Where adjacent property is below the mean high water line, the rear yard
limitation shall apply, even if the adjacent property is subsequently filled to raise it above the mean high waterline.
10 feet measured horizontally from the shoreline which shall be maintained open and not parked upon along the entire length of the
rear lot line.
WATERFRONT RECREATION DISTRICT
3 acres 150’ 35’ 3 20% 40’ 25’ 40’ 5, 6
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 53
IV-A Schedule of Dimensional Requirements (continued)
minimum lot size maximum height
maximum percentage
which may be covered by all
buildings
minimum yard
dimensions
special requirements
applicable to
each district
area frontage feet stories front side rear
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
80,000 sq. ft. 200’ 3 40% / floor area
ratio of 0.35 permitted;
0.50 allowed by Special Permit A2
40’ 25’ 25’ 1, 3, 6
MIXED USE PROJECT IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
All dimensional requirements for projects in the Industrial District authorized by a Mixed Use Special Permit under Section IV-G are set forth in Section IV-G.
RETAIL GROUP IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
5 acres 300’ 30’ 30% / floor area
ratio 0.60
40’ 30’ 30’ 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8
INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
2 acres 250’ 40’ 40% / floor area
ratio 0.35 permitted;
0.45 allowed by Special Permit A2
35’ 35’ 50’ 1, 2, 3, 6, 14
RETAIL GROUP IN INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
15 acres 500’ 30’ 20% 50’ 50’ 50’ 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 14
OFFICE PARK DISTRICT
5 acres 200’ 35’ Floor area
Ratio of 0.15
100’ 50’ 50’ 5, 6, 14
LIMITED INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT
2 acres 250’ 30’ not to
exceed 2
stories
30% / floor area
ratio of 0.35
35’ 35’ 50’ 1, 2, 3, 6
OFFICIAL AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
20’ 35’ 10% 40’ 40’ 40’ 1, 2, 5, 6, 15
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 54
IV-B Special Requirements to Schedule of Dimensional Requirements
1. No building, structure, parking area or septic system shall be constructed within 100' of a residence
district, except where the zoning district boundary is in a street, in which case the setback from said
boundary shall be 50'. A natural or landscaped vegetative barrier as approved under site plan review
shall be retained or created and maintained within this setback.
2. A minimum of 15% of the area of each lot shall not be built upon, paved or parked upon, and shall
be maintained either in its natural state or landscaped. Along the entire street frontage of each lot a
green or landscaped strip not less than 15' wide shall be maintained in its natural state or
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs, not paved except for driveways, not parked upon and not
built upon except for signs. The required 15% may include the 15' green strip.
3. Any yard space or area required to be kept open and unbuilt upon may, nevertheless, if otherwise
lawful, be used for off-street automobile parking, or for outdoor storage of packaged articles,
packaged supplies or packaged materials, provided any such outdoor storage space shall be
effectively screened from view by some substantial means such as an ornamental wall an
ornamental lattice or a dense planting. A green strip not less than thirty (30) feet wide on which to
grow grass, bushes, flowers or trees, shall be maintained open and green, unbuilt upon, unused and
unpaved and not parked upon, all along each side or rear property line of such a lot wherever it
abuts land residentially zoned.
4. Frontage specified shall be the minimum width to a depth of 200'.
5. A green yard space not less than twenty (20) feet wide shall be maintained open and green with
grass, bushes, flowers or trees or any combination of them, along the entire length of each side lot
line or rear lot line of such a lot and (except for entrance and exit driveways) along the entire street
frontage of such lot, and such yard space shall not be built on nor paved nor used for automobile
parking. Not less than 80% of the land area of such a lot shall remain open and unbuilt on, but such
open space may be used for automobile off-street parking, driveways, sidewalks and store service
yards, except that such use shall not be permitted in any part of the 20' wide green perimeter strip
above specified. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a green yard space not less than fifty (50) feet wide
shall be maintained open and green with grass, bushes, flowers, trees, or in an undisturbed natural
condition, or any combination of the foregoing, along the entire length of each side lot line and rear
lot line of such lot where such side lot line or rear lot line abuts a Residence A or Residence B or
Residence C District.
6. Site Plan Review, as defined in Section I-I, shall be conducted by the Planning Board or its designee
and may be subject to professional consultant review consistent with Section I-F.3, for all projects
which meet the following criteria:
a. all non-residential projects which are estimated to cost $20,000 or more;
b. all projects that 1) create a land disturbance or an alteration of drainage patterns over an
area greater than 20,000 square feet; or 2) create a land disturbance of more than 2500 square
feet in areas with slopes greater than 10%;
c. all projects that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that would disturb
more than one acre in the aggregate;
d. notwithstanding the foregoing, the following types of projects shall be exempt from site
plan review under subsection b:
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 55
i. normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the
Wetlands Protection Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 131, Regulation 310
CMR 10.04;
ii. routine maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas;
iii. the construction of fencing that will not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns;
iv. installation of utilities other than drainage (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) which
will not alter terrain, ground cover, or drainage patterns;
v. projects wholly within the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission and requiring
an Order of Conditions under the Wetlands Protects Act, Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 131, Section 40, the Town of Hingham Wetlands Protection By-Law, and/or
the Rivers Protection Act.; or
vi. road widening or improvement projects; provided that road projects that (i) increase
the amount of impervious area by greater than or equal to a single lane width, (ii)
disturb more than one acre, and (iii) discharge to the Town’s municipal stormwater
system, shall meet the applicable requirements of the Town of Hingham MS4 Permit.
7. Each free standing structure, regardless of use, shall be not less than 1500 sq. feet lot coverage
gross horizontal dimension. Each structure may be divided into street floor retail occupancy units
not smaller than 750 sq. feet each, or into business, professional or personal service occupancy
units not smaller than 350 sq. feet each.
8. No more than two driveways of 26' width each shall be permitted on the total street frontage of
each retail store group.
9. In all residence districts and Business District A, the front setback may be as near the street as the
average of the buildings or structures in the adjoining lots. For a vacant lot, the front setback line
shall be the minimum front setback required in the district.
10. In the case of land used for housing the elderly persons of low income, or persons of low and
moderate income, pursuant to the provisions of subsection 1.5 of Section III-A, the following
provisions shall apply:
a. There shall be no less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area per dwelling unit.
b. No more than forty percent (40%) of the lot area shall be occupied by the buildings.
c. A green yard space, no less than twenty (20) feet wide, shall be maintained open and green
with grass, bushes, flowers, or trees, or any combination thereof, along the entire length of
each side lot line and rear lot line and (except for driveways) along the entire street frontage,
and such green yard space shall not be built upon nor paved nor used for storage or for vehicle
parking, but signs and fences not otherwise prohibited by law may be erected and maintained
thereon.
d. There shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet between all buildings on such land.
e. There shall be reserved sufficient areas to provide parking spaces for vehicles at the rate of
one such space per dwelling unit. So much of said area or areas shall be paved as may be
deemed necessary by the Board of Appeals. In making such determination, the Board of
Appeals shall give due consideration to the location of the land, the probable number of vehicles
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 56
parking thereon, the probable age, economic resources, and parking requirements of the
occupants of such dwelling units, and such other factors as said Board may deem pertinent in
each case. From time to time the Board of Appeals may, upon the petition of the Board of
Selectmen, the Building Commissioner or the Planning Board, and after notice and hearing as
provided by subsection 3 of Section I-D, determine the necessity for additional paving of such
reserved area or areas and may order additional paving in accordance with such determination.
11. No side yard is required where a dwelling unit shares a party wall with a building constructed at the
same time.
12. Not over 20% of the required minimum lot area may be met by land in the Floodplain Protection
Overlay District.
13. No portion of the minimum lot area may be met by land that is:
a. Wetlands as defined by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 131, Section 40, the Wetlands
Protection Act;
b. Wetlands as defined by the Town of Hingham’s Wetlands Protection By-Law;
c. Land subject to flooding as defined by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 131, Section
40, the Wetlands Protection Act;
d. Land within the Floodplain Protection Overlay District as defined by Section III-C of the
Zoning By-Law of the Town of Hingham.
In addition, the required minimum lot area shall be contiguous.
14. Properties zoned Industrial Park or Office Park and contained within the South Hingham
Development Overlay District are subject to the intensity regulations set forth in Section III-E, South
Hingham Development Overlay District.
15. Contiguous parcels separately deeded to the Town shall be considered a single parcel in application
of minimum yard dimensions.
16. In no event shall the Height of any residential Building be higher than thirty-five (35) feet measured
from Grade Plane, and in no event shall the highest roof surface, peak or parapet be more than
forty (40) feet above Finished Grade where it intersects the perimeter wall at any point. See also
the Building Height Diagram in annex A.
IV-C General Intensity Provisions
1. Frontage
Lot frontage in all districts shall be measured at the street line, except that frontage shall be
measured at the front setback line if the street is an arc of a curve with a radius of two hundred
(200) feet or less. For this purpose, the setback line shall be the minimum front setback required in
that district.
2. Lot Shape
a. In addition to the required frontage and area, each lot shall be laid out so that a square
with each side equal to eighty (80) percent of the required frontage for the zoning district
in which it is located can be placed within the lot lines with at least one point on the front
lot line.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 57
b. In addition, at no point between the front lot line or primary front lot line and the front
wall of the principal structure shall the lot have a width of less than eighty (80) percent of
the required frontage. Lot width is the horizontal distance between side lot lines,
measured parallel to the lot frontage.
3. Location of Accessory Buildings
Accessory buildings shall not be located nearer the lot line than the minimum dimensions of the
front, side, or rear yards and shall be no more than two stories and not exceed 30 feet in height.
4. Appurtenant Open Space
No yard or other open space required for a building by this By-Law shall, during the existence of
such building, be occupied by or counted as open space for another building.
5. Density
Unless otherwise expressly permitted in this by-law, no more than one dwelling unit shall be located
on any single lot.
6. Exempted Lots
a. Residential
A lot or parcel of land in a residential district having an area or frontage less than that required
by this section may be developed for a single residential use provided that such lot or parcel
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 58
complies with the specific exemptions of Section 6 of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General
Laws.
b. All Other Districts
In non-residential districts, the lot area and lot frontage requirements shall not apply to any lot
of less area or frontage already existing in a particular ownership as shown by plan or deed
lawfully of record on or prior to the date of this By-Law.
7. Corner Lot and Clearance
A corner lot and any other lot abutting a street in more than one location shall maintain front yard
setback requirements for each and every street. Within the area formed by the line of intersecting
ways and a line joining points on such lines fifteen (15) feet distant from their point of intersection,
or in the case of rounded corners, the point of intersection of their tangents, no building structure,
fence, wall, planting, or other feature that would interfere with a clear and unobstructed view across
the corner shall be maintained between a height of two and a half (2 1/2) feet and a height of eight
(8) feet above the plane through their curb grades.
8. Projections
Nothing herein shall prevent the projection of steps, gutters, bay windows, terraces, outside
chimneys, stoops, piazzas or porches not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area, eaves, cornices,
window sills or belt courses of the main structure or accessory buildings into any front, side or rear
yard spaces; provided, however, that any device that supplies usable floor area to a structure shall
not constitute a projection for the purpose of this By-Law.
9. Height Exceptions
Chimney, ventilators, elevators, mechanized or motorized equipment which is used to ventilate, heat
or cool a building or structure, poles, spires, tanks, towers and skylights and other projections not
used for human occupancy may extend a reasonable height above the height limits herein fixed,
provided, however, that (a) no wireless communications tower or antenna shall be erected except in
compliance with Section V-E of this By-Law, and (b) with respect to dwellings in residential districts,
(i) the area of such projections where they intersect the height limit shall not exceed five percent of
the horizontal plane of the roof area in the aggregate, measured at the uppermost full floor of the
dwelling, and (ii) this provision shall not be construed to exempt a parapet, wall or railing from the
height requirements set forth in Section IV-B.16.
10. Fencing and Screening
In an Industrial or Business District, except as otherwise required by Special Requirement 3 of
Section IV-B, Special Requirements to Schedule of Dimensional Requirements, the outdoor storage
of goods, products, materials or equipment, if visible at normal eye level from a public way or from
any point in an abutting residential district less than 500 feet away, shall be screened from view by
an ornamental lattice, opaque fence, or sight-obscuring plantings or screenings (except retail goods
when being offered for sale during business hours, vehicles offered for sale or stored by a licensed
auto dealer and boats offered for sale, in storage, or under repair). Plantings shall be maintained in
healthy growing condition, and fencing shall be maintained in good repair by the land owner.
IV-D Flexible Residential Development (FRD) - Special Permit
1. Purposes
a. To encourage the permanent preservation of open space, water bodies and supplies,
wetlands and other natural resources, and historical and archeological resources;
b. To preserve and enhance community character by allowing for greater flexibility, creativity
and open space within residential developments;
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 59
c. To provide for a diversified housing stock, including Moderately-Sized Homes and Low or
Moderate Income Housing;
d. To facilitate the construction and maintenance of housing, streets, utilities and public
service facilities in an economical and efficient manner; and
e. To minimize the total amount of disturbance on the site.
2. Definitions
Capitalized terms used herein and not otherwise defined herein shall have the same meanings
ascribed to such terms in Section VI of this By-Law.
Additional Dwelling Units
As defined in Section IV-D, 7.
Conventional Yield
The number of Single-Family Dwellings that would be permitted under Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 41, Sections 81K - 81GG (The Subdivision Control Law) and which could reasonably be
expected to be developed in full conformance with applicable zoning, subdivision rules and
regulations, wetland by-laws, Board of Health rules and regulations and all applicable rules and
regulations of the Town of Hingham.
Existing Protected Open Space
Open space not located within the site which is protected in perpetuity by legal restriction or form of
ownership (e.g., land which is under the control of the Conservation Commission, owned by a nonprofit
organization the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space, or subject to a
conservation restriction).
Flexible Residential Development (or “FRD”)
An alternative development plan to a conventional subdivision which permits flexibility in the layout
and design of a subdivision and Additional Dwelling Units in exchange for the preservation of a
significant portion of the site as open space and the construction of diversified housing.
Low or Moderate Income Housing
Dwelling Units restricted for a period of not less than thirty (30) years to occupancy by persons or
families who qualify as low or moderate income, as those terms are defined for this area by the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) and which are
affordable to such persons in accordance with applicable regulations of DHCD or the Department of
Housing and Urban Development. For the purpose of this Section IV-D, any Dwelling Unit intended
to be considered as Low or Moderate Income Housing shall have the following minimum
specifications:
Single Family Dwelling Two-Family Dwelling
Gross Floor Area: 1,800 sq. feet 2,400 SF
# Bedrooms Two 4 (2 per dwelling unit)
Garage Spaces One 2 (one per dwelling unit)
Moderately-Sized Home
For the purpose of this Section IV-D, any Dwelling Unit intended to be considered as a Moderately-
Sized Home shall have the following maximum specifications:
Single Family Dwelling Two-Family Dwelling
Gross Floor Area: 2,200 sq. feet 3,000 SF
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 60
# Bedrooms Three 6 (3 per dwelling unit)
Garage Spaces Two 4 (two per dwelling unit)
Open Space
Land within the site that is prohibited from development (except as specifically provided herein),
and managed under the requirements set forth in Section IV-D, 8 hereof.
Unrestricted Dwelling Units
As defined in Section IV-D, 7.
3. Eligibility
Sites that meet the following criteria are eligible for a Special Permit A3:
a. Sites containing a minimum of three (3) acres and a Conventional Yield of not less than
three (3), provided, however, that no Additional Dwelling Units (as defined in Section IV-D, 7)
shall be permitted on sites containing less than five acres.
b. Sites located in Residential Districts A, B and C.
c. Sites with the proposed use permitted in the District in which the site is located, except that
if the proposed FRD includes Low or Moderate Income Housing, Two-Family Dwellings shall also
be permitted instead of, or in combination with, Single-Family Dwellings.
d. Sites consisting of a single parcel or two or more contiguous parcels. For the purposes of
this Section IV-D, parcels physically separated by a street or way (other than a Major Street as
defined in Section 4 of the Planning Board Rules and Regulations) may be considered
contiguous parcels, provided that (i) the parcels on each side of such street or way are each at
least three (3) acres and (ii) the frontage of the parcels on such street or way shall be parallel
for a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet.
e. The site may be a subdivision or a division of land pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 41, Section 81P, provided, however, that a FRD may also be permitted on a site
intended as a condominium and not so divided or subdivided.
4. Application and Review Procedure
The review procedure for a Flexible Residential Development (FRD) consists of two steps: 1)
Preliminary Flexible Residential Development Plan (“Preliminary FRD Plan”) review; and 2) Definitive
Flexible Residential Development Plan (“Definitive Plan”) review. In the first step, the applicant shall
file a Preliminary FRD Plan, as described below, which describes the overall development proposal
for the site. The Planning Board shall grant or deny a Special Permit A3 based on the information
contained in the Preliminary FRD Plan application.
If the Special Permit A3 is granted, the applicant shall submit a Definitive Plan, as described below,
based on the Preliminary FRD Plan. The Planning Board shall then review the Definitive Plan as a
definitive subdivision plan. Two separate public hearings shall be held, one for the Special Permit
and one for the Definitive Plan.
The applicant is encouraged to request a pre-application review at a regular business meeting of the
Planning Board. If one is requested, the Planning Board shall invite all relevant boards and
committees to attend, including but not limited to the Conservation Commission, Board of Health
and, if applicable, Sewer Commission, Historic Districts Commission and Housing Partnership
Committee. The purpose of the pre-application hearing is to minimize the applicant’s cost of
engineering and other technical experts, and to obtain the input and direction of the Planning Board
prior to filing the application. At the pre-application review the applicant shall outline the proposed
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 61
FRD and seek preliminary feedback from the Planning Board and/or its technical experts. The
applicant is also encouraged to request a site visit by the Planning Board and/or its agents in order
to facilitate pre-application review. If such a site visit is requested, all applicable boards and
committees will also be notified and invited to attend.
5. Preliminary Flexible Residential Development Plan Review
a. An application for Preliminary FRD Plan review shall include the following:
i. Site Context Map. A map illustrating the larger context in which the site is located,
including associated or adjacent neighborhoods, natural features, roads and zoning
districts.
ii. Existing Conditions/Site Analysis Map. Based on existing data sources and field
inspection, this map should contain all zoning classifications applicable to the site, all
physical and natural features including water bodies, streams, wetlands, areas of
greater than 40% slope, vistas, geological and topographical features, topography at
2' intervals, unique vegetation, historic features, large boulders or ledge outcroppings,
wooded and open areas, trees with a caliper of 6 inches or greater and stone walls.
iii. Preliminary Plan. The preliminary development plan, prepared by a professional
landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and/or a
professional civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which
complies with the requirements of Section 3, B (1) and (2) of the Planning Board
Rules and Regulations. The Planning Board may waive specific requirements relative
to the content of the Preliminary Plan as the Planning Board deems appropriate. The
Preliminary Plan shall also identify the proposed location and size of structures to be
built on the site.
iv. Conventional Yield Sketch Plan. A sketch plan showing the Conventional Yield.
b. The applicant shall file the Preliminary FRD Plan with the Town Clerk and Planning Board,
and submit copies of the Preliminary FRD Plan to the Board of Health, Conservation
Commission, Fire Department, and Department of Public Works. The applicant shall also submit
copies of the Preliminary FRD Plan to such other Town boards and agencies as the Planning
Board shall request. The applicant shall file with the Town Clerk and submit to the Planning
Board one or more transmittal letter(s), as required, certifying that it has forwarded such copies
to the Town boards and agencies as provided in this subparagraph and as may be requested by
the Planning Board.
c. The Town boards and agencies receiving copies of the Preliminary FRD Plan shall submit
written recommendations to the Planning Board within 35 days after filing of the Preliminary
FRD Plan. Failure to report to the Planning Board within 35 days shall be deemed a lack of
objection to the application. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Town boards and
agencies receiving copies of the Preliminary FRD Plan during the review period.
d. The Planning Board, within 60 days or such further time as may be agreed upon in writing
by the applicant, may grant a Special Permit A3 if it determines that the proposed FRD achieves
greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential development than a conventional
subdivision plan, promotes the preservation of Open Space and natural resources, reduces the
total amount of disturbance on the site, facilitates the efficient delivery of services and complies
with the requirements of this Section IV-D.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 62
e. All Open Space shall be dedicated at the time the Special Permit holder commences
construction under a Building Permit.
6. Definitive Flexible Residential Development Review
a. If the Special Permit A3 is granted by the Planning Board, the applicant shall file with the
Planning Board an application for a Definitive Plan in accordance with the Rules and Regulations
of the Planning Board relative to the submission of a Definitive Plan (Section 3, C). In addition,
the applicant shall submit a list of all waivers requested from the Planning Board Rules and
Regulations.
b. The Planning Board shall review the Definitive Plan to determine its compliance with the
Subdivision Control Law, and hold a public hearing as required by Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 41, Section 81T. The Special Permit A3 shall be reconsidered if there is a substantial
variation between the Definitive Plan and the Preliminary FRD Plan. A substantial variation shall
be defined as an increase in the number of Lots or Dwelling Units, a decrease in the amount of
Open Space and/or a change in the development pattern which adversely affects natural
landscape features and Open Space, or surrounding residential properties. If the Planning Board
finds that a substantial variation exists, it may reopen the Special Permit A3 public hearing to
review the modifications to the Preliminary FRD Plan and, based on its findings, may approve,
modify or revoke the Special Permit A3.
7. Density
The total number of Dwelling Units permitted on the site shall not exceed the Conventional Yield,
provided that, if the Planning Board makes a finding that the proposed development complies with
all of the provisions of this Section IV-D, the total number of Dwelling Units permitted on this site
shall be the greater of (i) one hundred thirty five percent (135%) of the Conventional Yield
(rounded to the nearest whole number) or (ii) the Conventional Yield plus two (2). The number of
Dwelling Units permitted in excess of the Conventional Yield are referred to herein as the “Additional
Dwelling Units”.
a. Subject to (d) through (f) below, at least one third (1/3) of the Additional Dwelling Units
shall be Low or Moderate Income Housing;
b. Subject to (d) through (f) below, at least one-third (1/3) of the Additional Dwelling Units
shall be Moderately-Sized Homes;
c. The remaining Additional Dwelling Units shall be referred to herein as “Unrestricted Dwelling
Units”;
d. If the total number of Additional Dwelling Units is less than three (3), the first Additional
Dwelling Unit shall be designated as Low or Moderate Income Housing and the second
Additional Dwelling Unit shall be designated as an Unrestricted Dwelling Unit;
e. If the total number of Additional Dwelling Units is a number which is not evenly divisible by
the number three (3), the number of Additional Dwelling Units represented by the remainder
shall be designated as follows: (i) if the remainder is one (1), such Additional Dwelling Unit shall
be designated a Moderately-Sized Home, and (ii) if the remainder is two (2), the first Additional
Dwelling Unit shall be designated as Low or Moderate Income Housing and the second
Additional Dwelling Unit shall be designated as either a Moderately-Sized Home or an
Unrestricted Dwelling Unit;
f. The Additional Dwelling Units shall be allocated such that the number of Additional Dwelling
Units designated as Unrestricted Dwelling Units shall not exceed the number designated as Low
or Moderate Income Housing;
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 63
g. Low or Moderate Income Housing and Moderately-Sized Homes shall not be segregated on
the site, and shall be designed in the same architectural style and constructed with building
materials comparable to any Unrestricted Dwelling Units constructed on the site;
h. If the proposed development consists of a mix of Single-Family Dwellings and Two-Family
Dwellings, the Low or Moderate Income Housing and the Moderately-Sized Homes (i) shall be
developed with a consistent mix of such Single-Family Dwellings and Two-Family Dwellings and
(ii) must be evenly distributed among the Single-Family Dwellings and the Two-Family Dwellings
constructed on the site. In addition, the number of bedrooms in any Two-Family Dwellings
which are designated as Low or Moderate Income Housing shall mirror the number of bedrooms
in the remaining Two-Family Dwellings (for example, if there are two market rate Two-Family
Dwellings, one with two bedrooms and one with three bedrooms, then the corresponding Two-
Family Dwellings designated as Low and Moderate Income Housing shall also contain two
bedrooms and three bedrooms, respectively); and
i. It shall be a condition of the approval of a Definitive Plan that, prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the site, the procedure for the sale or rental of the Low or Moderate Income Housing
Dwelling Units shall be in conformance with regulations promulgated by the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development for the inclusion of such units on Hingham’s
Subsidized Housing Inventory. To the extent permitted by applicable law, local preference shall be
given in the sale or rental of Low and Moderate Income Housing.
8. Open Space Requirements
The following Open Space requirements shall apply:
a. A minimum of forty percent (40%) of the site shall be Open Space.
b. The Open Space, or any portions thereof, shall be conveyed to (i) the Town, (ii) a nonprofit
organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space or (iii) a
corporation, trust or homeowners’ association (hereinafter, a “Trust”) owned or to be owned by
the owners of Dwelling Units within the site. In any case where Open Space is not conveyed to
the Town, a restriction enforceable by the Town shall be recorded providing that such land shall
perpetually be kept in an open or natural state consistent with this Section of the By-Law.
If a Trust is utilized to hold title to the Open Space, maintenance of such Open Space and any
accessory facilities shall be permanently guaranteed by such Trust, which shall provide for
mandatory assessments of maintenance expenses to each Dwelling Unit owner. The deed of
trust or articles of incorporation shall include provisions designed to effect these obligations and
to grant to the Town an easement to perform such maintenance obligations if the Trust fails to
do so, along with the right to record a lien against the Dwelling Units for the collection of all
costs associated with performing such maintenance obligations as well as the imposition of any
applicable fees. Each individual deed shall incorporate such provisions specifically or by
reference. The documents creating such Trust shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its
approval and, upon Definitive Plan approval, shall be recorded.
c. The percentage of Open Space that is wetlands (as defined under the Hingham Wetlands By-
Law) shall not exceed the percentage of the entire site that is wetlands. For the purposes of this
subsection 8(c), surface drainage systems, such as retention and detention ponds, shall be
considered wetlands and may be located in the Open Space subject to the limitation of this
subsection.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 64
d. The Open Space shall be contiguous and, when possible, should abut and give access to
adjacent Existing Protected Open Space so as to help to create a system of protected Open
Space. Open Space will be considered contiguous if connected by a street (other than a Major
Street), way, walking or bicycle path or non-exclusive easement. Upon a finding by the Planning
Board that the quality of the Open Space preserved within the FRD shall be significantly
increased by permitting noncontiguous areas of Open Space, such non-contiguous areas may be
included within the total required Open Space.
e. The Open Space shall be used for conservation, passive recreation, playground areas,
outdoor education, agriculture, forestry, or a combination of these uses, and shall be served by
suitable access for such purposes. The Planning Board may permit up to 5% of the Open Space
to be paved or built upon for facilities accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such Open
Space (such as pedestrian walks, bike paths and playground equipment). The Open Space shall
not include land set aside for roads and/or parking uses.
f. Subsurface wastewater and storm water management systems serving the FRD may be
located within the Open Space, provided that a sufficient Open Space buffer exists to
adequately screen the development from abutting properties in accordance with Section IV-D,9
(c) hereof.
9. Minimum Dimensional Requirements
a. Where two or more lots are created, the minimum lot size will be determined through the
Special Permit process.
b. The following minimum dimensional requirements shall apply:
? Maximum Height: 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet
? Minimum Frontage: 50 feet associated with each detached dwelling
? Minimum Front Yard Setback: 15 feet; provided that, for dwelling units without
individual lots the Front Yard Setback shall be measured from the edge of the sidewalk or,
if there is no sidewalk, from the edge of the paved roadway nearest the dwelling unit (the
“Implied Front Lot Line”).
? Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 15 feet
? Minimum Side Yard Setback: 15 feet (no side yard is required for a Two-Family
Dwelling which shares a party wall on both sides).
Minimum Distance between detached principal structures on the same lot: 30 feet
c. At least two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided in garages and/or
dedicated driveways. At least 23 feet of depth from the edge of the sidewalk or, if there is no
sidewalk, from the paved roadway nearest the dwelling unit shall be provided for parking in
driveways, and in no case shall driveway parking spaces extend beyond the actual lot line or
Implied Front Lot Line as determined in subsection 9.b, above. In addition to the two parking
spaces per dwelling unit required hereunder, dedicated guest parking spaces shall be required
where building layouts or street design do not provide adequate on-street or off-street guest
parking. The number of guest parking spaces required shall not exceed 10% of the total
number of parking spaces required for the dwelling units in the development.
d. There shall be an Open Space buffer along the perimeter of the site consisting of trees,
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 65
shrubs, vegetation, and topographic features sufficient to screen the development from abutting
properties and adjacent roadways. This buffer shall be not less than 100 feet in width along
abutting properties and not less than 50 feet in width along adjacent roadways, and shall count
towards the Open Space requirement. No buffer shall be required along roadways created as
part of the FRD. No portion of the Open Space buffer shall be within the boundaries of any Lot.
Upon a finding by the Planning Board that a buffer of lesser width would be sufficient to screen
and/or separate the FRD from the abutting properties or adjacent roadways, the buffer may be
reduced. Upon a finding of the Planning Board that the natural state of the buffer is insufficient
to adequately separate and/or screen the site from abutting properties, additional trees, shrubs
and/or plantings shall be required.
e. To the extent a specific provision of this Section IV-D is in conflict with any other provisions
of this By-Law, the provisions of this Section IV-D shall control. Otherwise, all other provisions
of this By-law and of Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Planning Board Rules and Regulations shall
apply to a Flexible Residential Development.
10. Additional Requirements
a. Roadways and Lots shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and
preserve existing tree cover, natural topography and significant natural and cultural resources,
to minimize cut and fill, and to preserve and enhance views to and from the site and the
Dwelling Units.
b. The removal or disruption of historic, traditional, or significant uses, structures, or
architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable, whether these exist on the site
or on adjacent properties.
c. When site conditions permit, the use of “soft” (non-structural) storm water management
techniques (such as swales) and other drainage techniques that reduce impervious surface and
enable infiltration where appropriate shall be required.
d. Walkways and bicycle paths shall be provided to link Dwelling Units with the Open Space
and with any parking areas, recreation facilities and Existing Protected Open Space and paths
and/or sidewalks on adjacent land where appropriate.
e. No lot shown on a plan for which a Special Permit is granted under this Section IV-D may be
further subdivided and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan.
f. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or modification of any Moderately-
Sized Home that would result in a violation of any of the maximum specifications set forth in the
definition of Moderately-Sized Home.
g. For Two-Family Dwellings, the exterior design of the structure shall maintain the
appearance and character of a Single-Family Dwelling.
IV-E Residential Multi-Unit Development
1. Town houses, garden apartments and apartment houses shall be subject to the following standards
and conditions.
a. There shall be a minimum of 5 acres of land within any parcel to be developed for town
houses, garden apartments or apartment houses.
b. The average number of dwelling units per acre in any development shall not exceed eight
(8).
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 66
c. The shortest distance between any two structures shall not be less than 35 feet. Courts
shall be completely open on one side. The Board of Appeals may waive the separation
requirements if the design of the proposed development is benefited by closer spacing.
d. There shall be set aside, not to be built upon, unpaved, landscaped and/or left natural, with
an acceptable balance of trees, shrubs and grass, site area equal to 2000 square feet per
dwelling unit. The buffer area described in subparagraph (f) below shall not be considered as
living space in computing the 2000 sq. ft. of living space per dwelling unit.
e. In addition to the 2000 square feet of living space required in (d) above, 1000 square feet
of open space per dwelling unit shall be provided, which may include open paved areas, and
one-half the area of covered parking or garage areas.
f. There shall be provided a landscaped side or rear yard buffer area of at least 50 feet in
width adjacent to each property line of the parcel to be developed. All buffer areas shall be
planted or preserved in a natural state in a mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees and
shrubs and shall be maintained in proper order so as to protect adjacent properties and present
a reasonably opaque, natural barrier to a height of ten feet.
g. There shall be set aside, suitably prepared, protected and equipped for organized
recreational activities, site areas equal to 300 square feet per dwelling unit, which are not to be
included in the buffer area.
h. Each dwelling unit shall consist of at least one room, exclusive of hall, kitchen and
bathroom, and there shall be at least 525 square feet of enclosed floor space for a one-room
unit. For each additional room an additional 125 square feet shall be required.
i. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such spaces shall be within
200 feet of the intended users. No parking shall be permitted within the buffer area. In addition
to the two parking spaces per dwelling unit required hereunder, dedicated guest parking spaces
shall be required where building layouts or street design do not provide adequate on-street or
off-street guest parking. The number of guest parking spaces required shall be determined
during the Site Plan Review process and shall not exceed 10% of the total number of parking
spaces required for the dwelling units in the development.
j. All dwelling units shall be connected to public sanitary sewer. The Board of Appeals may
waive this requirement with respect to land in the former Hingham Naval Ammunition Depot to
the extent that such land is not within the North Sewer District and the applicant makes a
satisfactory showing that its proposed sewage disposal system will not have adverse ecological
impact.
k. All utilities shall be underground.
l. No space below ground level shall be approved for dwelling purposes.
m. The placement, size, arrangement and use of access routes to public or private streets shall
be adequate to serve residents and provide no hindrance to the safety of existing or proposed
streets. Pedestrian walkways with all-weather surfacing may be required where the density of
population or school bus routes make such advisable for convenience and safety. Street and
parking lot grading, drainage and surfacing shall comply with the specifications of the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 67
2. Each application for a Special Permit A2 for the town house, garden apartment and/or apartment
house development shall be subject to the provisions of Section I-I, Site Plan Review, and to the
extent not already included therein, to the following additional provisions:
a. the site plan required in Section I-I shall be prepared by a registered engineer, landscape
architect, or architect and shall be accompanied by four (4) prints of a complete development
plan at a minimum scale 1" = 40' and by the plans and information required in subparagraphs
(b) through (h) below;
b. a sketch plan showing generally existing topography, existing vegetation and existing major
structures within the site and within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site;
c. a grading plan and, in a schematic manner, proposed utilities and drainage systems
including water for fire protection and public sanitary and storm sewers;
d. a plan containing schematic renderings and table to show the extent and location of the
proposed structures and, generally, the appearance of representative structures within the
development, the number and type of units and the number and size of rooms per unit with
proposed tolerances and the specific exterior material proposed to be used;
e. a sketch plan of all areas showing generally the location, types and sizes of trees and
shrubs; the exterior lighting pattern to include description and location of lighting fixtures, and
description, size and location of signs within the development;
f. a sketch plan illustrating the relationships on the site of the motor vehicle and pedestrian
traffic patterns;
g. copies of any covenants and/or restrictions to be recorded before the Building Permit is
issued to assure the development and maintenance of the property in substantial accordance
with the complete development plan; and
h. such other information as the Board of Appeals may reasonably request to carry out the
high standards of development contemplated by this Section.
3. Town houses, garden apartments and apartment houses shall be exempt from provisions of Section
IV-C, 4.
4. The issuance of a Special Permit A2 for a town house, garden apartment or apartment house
development shall be subject to the following provisions and procedures.
a. The Board of Appeals may approve a development plan to be completed in stages. The
Board of Appeals may grant approval limited to each such stage of development. Each stage
shall conform to the standards of this Section and each shall be capable of independent
existence without the completion of succeeding stages.
b. The development plan shall consist of those plans and other representations, tables,
covenants, restrictions and conditions as may be determined by the Board of Appeals. Such
development plan as approved by the Board of Appeals and bearing the signature of the
Chairman of the Board of Appeals shall be retained by the Board of Appeals, and copies of such
development plan bearing the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals shall forthwith,
upon approval, be filed by the Board with the Town Clerk, the Planning Board and the Building
Commissioner. The foregoing requirements are in addition to and not in substitution for any
applicable provision of statute. Upon the approval of a development plan, the Board of Appeals
shall issue to the landowner a notice, certified by the Chairman or Clerk, containing the name
and address of the landowner, identifying the land affected and stating that approval has been
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 68
granted which is set forth in the office of the Town Clerk. Such notice shall be recorded in the
Plymouth County Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date of the Board of Appeals’
decision. If such notice is not recorded within such ninety (90) days, such approval shall be
void.
c. No building or use permit shall be issued with respect to any building in any town house,
garden apartment or apartment house development except in specific compliance with the
approved filed development plan.
d. In order to insure compliance with the approved development plan, the developer shall
cause the author or authors of the plan (i.e., designer, architect, engineer, site planner, etc.) or
their successors to supervise and inspect the construction prior to inspections carried out by the
Town.
e. No change in content in the approved development plan shall be effective until such change
shall have been approved by the Board of Appeals and the change shall have been filed as
provided in subparagraph (b) above.
5. Affordable Units
a. All Residential Multi-Family Developments, as defined in this Section IV-E shall include Low
or Moderate Income Housing as defined in Section IV-D, provided that the minimum
specifications shall be as set forth herein. With projects with six or less dwelling units per acre,
at least ten percent (10%) of such units shall be Low and Moderate Income Housing. For
projects with more than six dwelling units per acre, at least fifteen (15%) of such units shall be
Low or Moderate Income Housing. In the event such percentage results in a fractional number,
such number shall be rounded up.
b. Any Town House dwelling unit intended as Low or Moderate Income Housing shall have a
minimum gross floor area of 1200 square feet. Any dwelling unit in a Garden Apartment or
Apartment House development intended as Low or Moderate Income Housing shall have the
minimum square footage set forth in subsection 1.h hereof.
c. The number of studio, one, two, or three bedroom Low and Moderate Income dwelling units
shall be in direct proportion to the such dwelling rate market units within the development (e.g.,
if 20% of the market rate dwelling units are two bedrooms, then 20% of the Low and Moderate
Income Housing dwelling units must be two bedrooms).
d. Low or Moderate income Housing
i. shall not be segregated on the site
ii. shall be designed in the same architectural style and constructed with building
materials comparable to any market dwelling units constructed on the site, and
iii. shall be constructed simultaneously and in the same proportion as the construction of
market rate dwelling units in the development; and
e. It shall be a condition of the approval of a Special Permit that, prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the site, the procedure for the sale or rental of the Low or Moderate Income
Housing Dwelling Units shall be in conformance with regulations promulgated by the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development for the inclusion of such
units on Hingham’s Subsidized Housing Inventory. Local preference shall be given in the sale or
rental of Low and Moderate Income Housing to the extent permitted by applicable law.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 69
The applicant shall cooperate in all respects, at applicant’s sole cost and expense, with any Local
Initiative Program application to be filed by the Town in connection with such development and such
cooperation shall be a condition to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit
within the development.
IV-F Residential Multi-Unit Development in Residence District D
1. A Special Permit A2 for town house exception shall be subject to the following conditions:
a. Prior to the submission of an application for a Special Permit A2 from the Board of Appeals,
the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board a development plan of the parcel of land which
is to be the subject matter of such application.
b. Said parcel of land shall contain a minimum of 20 acres and shall be located in Residence
District D.
c. Development of said parcel shall be subject to the provisions of Section I-I, Site Plan
Review.
d. Yard dimensions, area and height requirements shall be as required for town houses in
Section IV-A.
e. All utilities shall be underground.
f. Except as provided in subsection (j) below, the maximum number of dwelling units that may
be permitted on the parcel by grant of Special Permit shall be determined by the Board of
Appeals in accordance with the following formula:
D = (A - W) times 0.9;
D = The maximum number of dwelling units;
A = The number of acres in the parcel;
W = The number of acres of wet areas
(defined as water areas and other land in either of the following categories:
i. All lands within the Floodplain Protection Overlay District; and,
ii. All lands being wetlands as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act, Chapter 131,
Section 40, Massachusetts General Laws.)
g. Any development hereunder shall be subject to and must comply with the provision of
Section IV-E of this By-Law, except that the requirement of Section IV-E, 1 (j) may be waived
by the Board of Appeals if it makes the following determination:
i. that no part of the parcel abuts a sanitary sewer line of sufficient capacity to serve
the parcel; and,
ii. that the parcel’s subsurface characteristics are sufficient to absorb waste generated
by the proposed development on the parcel without material ecological degradation.
The Board of Appeals, as part of the application, may require the submission of such
studies and reports relating to this issue, bearing such certification by a professional
engineer, and in such form as may be satisfactory to it.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 70
h. No dwelling unit shall be erected or maintained, and except for reasonable common access
way or ways to the parcel, no land may be paved within a strip of land one hundred (100) feet
wide along then existing public ways, parks, streams or rivers upon which said parcel abuts nor
along the property line of said parcel.
i. No dwelling unit shall contain more than three bedrooms, and no more than 15% of the
maximum number of dwelling units permitted on said parcel shall contain three bedrooms.
j. The Board of Appeals, if so requested in the application may, but is not obligated to, permit
an increase of one or more additional dwelling units on said parcel to the maximum extent
stated below, for the reasons and in the manner hereinafter provided, and upon showing to the
Board’s satisfaction that the particular project, (including such additional units as requested in
accordance with this subsection (j), is of exceptional environmental economic, architectural and
aesthetic benefit to the Town, and permits the municipal services without imposing an increased
financial burden on its citizens, and so long as all of the following conditions, safeguards and
limitations are met and fulfilled.
i. Inclusive of the increase of one or more additional dwelling units, as provided in this
subsection (j), the total number of dwelling units on the parcel shall not exceed 1.2
times the number of acres in the parcel minus the number of acres of wet areas as
defined in Section IV-F, 1 (f) hereof. In the event that application of this formula
results in a figure which contains a fraction, then the maximum number of dwelling
units permitted shall be the closest whole number to the figure obtained.
ii. Any additional dwelling unit or units shall be under the same character as the units
permitted under subsection (f) above.
iii. Without limitation upon the power of the Board of Appeals provided under the
Massachusetts General Laws or elsewhere in this By-Law, the power to condition any
approval of an increase of one or more additional dwelling units up to the maximum
number allowed under subsection (j) (i) hereof may be conditioned upon any or all of
the following:
a. the submission of the reports, studies and other data referred to in subsection (j)
(iii) above, in the form and substance and with the certification and verification as
required by the Board;
b. completion of the project in accordance with the plans and specifications
submitted to and approved by the Board, except for any non-material deviation;
and
c. execution, delivery and recording of such covenants, agreements and instruments
running with the land and binding upon the owner of the parcel, its legal
representative, successors, heirs and assigns, and enforceable by the Town, as
the Board of Appeals may require, and in form and substance satisfactory to it, in
order to insure adherence to the development plan, to assure the continued
compliance with the terms and conditions of the Special Permit issued hereunder,
to insure maintenance of the project throughout its useful life, and, in the case of
a condominium project, the execution, delivery and recording of condominium
documents in form and substance satisfactory to the Board of Appeals.
k. To the extent that a specific provision of this Section IV-F, 1 is in conflict with a provision of
Section IV-E, this Section IV-F, 1 shall control.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 71
l. In addition to the requirements of Sections IV-F, 1 (a), IV-E and I-I, any application
pursuant to this Section IV-F shall include the following:
i. detailed plans for the project, including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, plans showing all structures and improvements on the parcel, all ways and
utilities serving the same (which plans shall comply with the procedural and
substantive Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board), all lot lines, easements and
rights of way of record, a model or models, building plans and specifications
illustrating preliminary landscaping and architectural design, showing types, location
and layout of buildings, typical elevations, as well as the general height, bulk and
appearance of structures, and such other and further documents, studies, reports or
data which the Board of Appeals deems desirable in order to assist it in making its
determination;
ii. data, satisfactory to the Board of Appeals, as to the applicant’s financial and
professional capacity to complete the project in accordance with the plans and
specifications, and the applicant’s capacity to maintain the project throughout its
useful life;
iii. in the event that the application seeks waiver of the requirement of Section IV-E, 1
(j), studies and reports relating to the capacity of the parcel to absorb waste
generated by the parcel without material ecological degradation, bearing such
certification by a registered professional engineer and in such form as may be
satisfactory to the Board of Appeals;
iv. traffic and/or utility reports or studies containing such professional certification and/or
verification as may be required by the Board of Appeals; and
v. any and all other information, documents, studies, reports and similar data with
respect to the project which the Board of Appeals may require, in form acceptable to
it, including such financial data and projections as the Board deems satisfactory, in
order that the Board may make the determinations required under this Section.
2. Open Land
All land shown on a plan for which a Special Permit A2 is granted under this Section IV-F which is
not included in building lots or rights-of-way shall be open land.
a. The total area of open land shall be not less than 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit and
shall be in one or more parcels of not less than 40,000 square feet each.
b. All open land shall have access from a public way.
c. The amount, ownership and use of open land shall be as required in Section IV-D, 8.
IV-G Mixed-Use Special Permit in Industrial District
1. General
In order to permit a mixture of retail, residential, open space, general commercial, limited industrial
and office uses, and a variety of building types, tracts of land within the Industrial District may be
developed under a Special Permit granted by the Board of Appeals as herein defined and limited.
2. Special Permit Authority
The Board of Appeals (Board) may grant a Special Permit for construction of a mixed-use project in
the Industrial District. The Special Permit shall conform to this By-Law and to Massachusetts General
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 72
Laws Chapter 40A, Section 9 and to regulations which the Board may adopt for carrying out its
requirements hereunder.
a. Review Board - The Planning Board shall function as a review board to review each
proposed mixed-use permit.
b. Purpose - The purpose of the mixed-use Special Permit is to provide for a mixture of
residential, open space, retail, general commercial and limited industrial uses within an
Industrial District in order to foster greater opportunity for the construction of quality
developments on large tracts of land by providing flexible guidelines which allow the integration
of a variety of land uses and densities in one development, provided that such land usage is
shown to be for the public good and:
i. will improve the physical and aesthetic qualities of the Industrial District and
improve and/or reinforce the livability and aesthetic qualities of the surrounding
neighborhood and/or environment, and
ii. is consistent with the objectives of the Zoning By-Law.
3. Review Procedure for Mixed Use Special Permit Applications
The review procedure for a mixed use Special Permit consists of three steps:
1. a pre-application conference,
2. submission by the applicant and review by the Planning Board of a Preliminary Plan for
the proposed mixed-use development, and
3. submission by the applicant and review by both the Planning Board and the Board of
Appeals of an application and final plan for a mixed-use Special Permit.
a. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the submission of an application for a mixed-use Special
Permit, the applicant must confer with the Planning Board to obtain information and guidance
before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of
plans, surveys, and other data.
b. Procedure for Preliminary Plan
i. The applicant shall file with the Town Clerk, at least seven (7) days before a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Board, the original and one (1) copy of the
preliminary plan accompanied by the form entitled “Submission of Preliminary Plan
Mixed-Uses”. The applicant shall at the same time submit to the Planning Board eight
(8) copies of the preliminary plan.
ii. A fee of $100.00 (certified check) made out to the “Town of Hingham” shall
accompany the submission of the preliminary plan to the Town Clerk.
iii. The applicant shall also, at the time the preliminary plan is filed, submit copies of the
preliminary plan to the Hingham Highway Department, Board of Health, Fire
Department, Conservation Commission, Harbor Development Committee, Tree and
Park Department, Sewer Commission, Industrial and Development Commission, Light
Board, Water Company and to the consulting engineer of the Planning Board. The
applicant shall also submit copies of the preliminary plan to such other Town boards
and agencies as the Planning Board deems appropriate, at such time and to such
Town boards and agencies as the Planning Board shall in writing state to the
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 73
applicant. The applicant shall file with the Town Clerk and submit to the Planning
Board one or more transmittal letter(s), as required, certifying that it has forwarded
copies of the preliminary plan to the Town boards and agencies as provided in this
subparagraph and in any written request by the Planning Board that copies be
submitted to other Town boards and agencies.
iv. The applicant shall meet with the Planning Board to discuss the preliminary plan.
v. The Town boards and agencies receiving copies of the preliminary plan shall submit to
the Planning Board written recommendations on the preliminary plan within 35 days
after filing of the preliminary plan. Failure to report to the Planning Board within 35
days shall be deemed lack of objection to the application.
vi. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Town boards and agencies receiving
copies of the preliminary plan during the review period.
vii. The Planning Board within 45 days from filing of the preliminary plan shall review and
determine whether the proposed project is consistent with the development of the
Town and this By-Law. The Planning Board may suggest modifications and changes to
the development described in the preliminary plan and shall make a written report of
its recommendations to guide the applicant in the preparation of the final plan. The
written report of the Planning Board shall be filed in the Town Clerk’s office; after
such filing the applicant may proceed to file its final plan.
viii. If the Planning Board fails to file its written report within 45 days after filing of the
preliminary plan, the applicant may proceed to file its final plan.
4. Contents of Preliminary Plan
A preliminary plan shall comprise the graphic and narrative materials described below.
a. Graphic materials shall include plans of sufficient number, character and clarity to show the
proposed development and the existing conditions on the site. Such graphic materials shall
show at least:
i. boundaries of the proposed mixed-use parcel, north arrow, date, scale, legend, and
title “Preliminary Plan: Mixed Use”, the name or names of applicants and engineer or
designer;
ii. names of all abutters as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section
11, existing site conditions, proposed land uses and improvements, and approximate
location and width of all adjacent streets;
iii. existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, utility and all easements, and any public
areas within or next to the parcel;
iv. the approximate boundary lines of existing and proposed lots with appropriate areas
and dimensions;
v. the proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing natural waterways;
vi. the existing and proposed topography of the site at five foot or smaller contour
intervals;
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 74
vii. existing and proposed buildings, significant structures and proposed open space and
proposed site amenities, and proposed circulation patterns; and,
viii. an analysis of the natural features of the site, including wetlands, flood plain, slopes
over 10%, soil conditions and other features requested by the Planning Board or
required by any regulation of the Board.
b. Written materials shall include the following:
i. a description of the proposed mixed-use development, showing the planning
objectives and the character of the development to be achieved through the mixeduse
Special Permit;
ii. a description of the neighborhood in which the parcel lies, including utilities and other
public facilities and the general impact of the proposed mixed use upon them; and,
iii. a summary of environmental concerns.
5. Submission of Final Plan
a. The applicant shall file the original application for a mixed use Special Permit and the
original of the final plan (which plan shall comply with the substantive Rules and Regulations of
the Planning Board), together with one (1) copy of those materials, with the Town Clerk. The
applicant shall also submit to the Planning Board and to those boards and agencies set forth in
subparagraph 3 (b) (iii) of this Section at the time the application is filed with the Town Clerk, a
copy of the application and the final plan. The applicant shall also submit an application for site
plan review under Section I-I of this By-Law.
b. The applicant shall file with the Town Clerk and submit to the Planning Board a transmittal
letter certifying that it has forwarded copies of the final plan to the boards and agencies as
provided.
c. The Town boards and agencies receiving copies of the final plan shall submit to the
Planning Board written recommendations on the application and final plan within 30 days of the
filing of the transmittal letter certifying that copies of the final plan have been forwarded. Failure
to report to the Planning Board within such 30 days shall be deemed lack of objection to the
application.
d. The applicant is encouraged to meet with the Town boards and agencies receiving copies of
the final plan during the review period.
e. Within 50 days of the filing of the final plan with the Town Clerk, the Planning Board shall
submit to the Board, accompanied by the written recommendations of the other Town boards
and agencies described in subparagraph 3 (b) (iii), a written report discussing the consistency of
the proposed development with paragraph 2 (b) and the Rules and Regulations of the Planning
Board. Copies of such written report shall also be mailed to the applicant and filed with the
Town Clerk at the time it is submitted to the Board. Failure by the Planning Board to file such
written report with the Town Clerk within 50 days shall be deemed a finding that the final plans
are consistent with the By-Law.
f. The Board upon receipt of the report of the Planning Board, but, in any case, within 65 days
of the filing of the final plan with the Town Clerk, shall hold a public hearing, notice of which
shall be given in the manner and to the parties provided in Section I-D (3) of this By-Law and
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 75
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 11, and to any other property owners
deemed by the Planning Board to be affected thereby.
g. The Board shall, within 90 days following the public hearing, issue a written decision setting
forth the reason or reasons for its decision or actions. Such written decision may provide that
the application is approved as submitted, is approved subject to modifications or conditions, or
is denied. A copy of the Board’s decision shall be filed within fourteen days with the Town Clerk
and shall be mailed forthwith to the applicant. Failure by the Board to issue a written decision
taking final action on the application within 90 days following the public hearing shall be
deemed to be a grant of the application and the Town Clerk shall issue forthwith, upon request,
a certificate of such failure to act.
h. Approval of a Special Permit for a mixed-use shall require a unanimous vote of the Board.
i. The final plan, as approved by the Board, shall be filed with the Town Clerk and recorded
with the Plymouth Registry of Deeds or the Plymouth Registry District of the Land Court, as
appropriate.
j. If the application is denied, the developer shall not submit an application for substantially
the same project for two years, except as provided under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40A, Section 16.
k. Special Permits granted under this Section shall lapse in two years, excluding time required
to pursue or await the determination of an appeal from the grant thereof, if a substantial use
has not sooner commenced or if construction has not been begun. The Board may grant an
extension for good cause after a hearing, as provided in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40A, Section 11, and shall grant an extension if the delay has been caused by the need to seek
other permits related to the development.
l. No construction or reconstruction except as shown on the recorded final plan, or as
provided in Section 12 hereof Amendments, shall occur without a further submission of plans to
the Board; and a notation to this effect shall appear upon the recorded final plan and upon
deeds to any property within the mixed-use parcel.
Following filing with the Hingham Town Clerk and recording with the Plymouth Registry District,
a final plan which has been approved pursuant to the provisions of this By-Law shall be deemed
to run with the land, as provided in this Section of the By-Law.
6. Contents of Final Plan
An application for a mixed-use Special Permit and a final plan (hereafter a final plan application)
shall include an application for a mixed-use Special Permit under Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40A and this By-Law, a site plan as specified in Section I-G of this By-Law, a final plan as
specified in paragraph (a) below, and narrative materials as provided in paragraph (b) below. Plans
submitted to the Board pursuant to Section I-I of this By-Law, where applicable, as part of the site
plan review shall be sufficient for submission under this subsection 6.
a. Final plans shall include the following:
i. a scale of one inch equals forty feet unless another scale is requested and found
suitable by the Planning Board;
ii. preparation by and bearing the seals of an appropriate registered professional
engineer, registered architect, registered land surveyor, and registered landscape
architect;
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 76
iii. the registered land surveyor indicated on the final plan shall certify the accuracy of
the location of the buildings, setback and all other required dimensions, elevations
and measurements;
iv. a utilities and drainage plan prepared and stamped by a registered professional
engineer;
v. the scale, date, and north arrow;
vi. lot numbers, dimensions of lots in feet, size of lots in square feet, and width of
abutting streets and ways;
vii. all easements within the lot and abutting thereon;
viii. the location of buildings existing or proposed for the development, which shall be
prepared by and bear the seal of a registered architect as provided in subparagraph
(ii), including the total square footage and dimensions of all buildings, all building
elevations and floor plans, and perspective renderings. Further, the depiction of
materials and colors to be used shall be required;
ix. the location of existing wetlands, water bodies, wells, 100-year flood plain elevation,
and other natural features requested by the Planning Board in their written report on
the preliminary plan;
x. the distance of existing and proposed buildings from the lot lines and the distance
between buildings on the same lot;
xi. percent of the building lot coverage;
xii. average finished grade of each building at the base of the building;
xiii. the elevation above average finished grade of the floor and ceiling of the lowest floor
of each building;
xiv. existing and proposed contour lines at two-foot intervals;
xv. the uses proposed for the mixed-use development by building or part thereof,
including proposed open space, recreation areas, or other amenities;
xvi. proposed provisions for parking;
xvii. height of all buildings, above average finished grade of abutting streets;
xviii. a landscape plan to include the total square feet of all landscape and recreation areas,
and depiction of materials to be used, and the quantity, size and species of plantings;
and,
xix. a model or models illustrating preliminary landscaping and architectural design,
showing types, location and layout of buildings, typical elevation as well as the
general height, bulk and appearance of structures.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 77
b. Narrative information concerning the development’s impact on the community shall be
provided to include, at a minimum, the following:
i. a description of the proposed mixed-use development, showing the planning
objectives and the character of the development to be achieved through the mixeduse
Special Permit;
ii. a parking and traffic plan to be prepared by a traffic engineer. The traffic plan shall
include information on the type and number of vehicles generated on average and
peak periods of uses, the impact on traffic intersections, and major roads servicing
the project area. The parking plan shall comply with Section V-A of the By-Law;
iii. a description of the neighborhood in which the tract lies and the impact of the
development on the neighborhood and the community. Such description shall include
information concerning the impact to local schools and school districts, the local tax
base, housing supply, sewer, water, and other utility systems, and other public
facilities. When so requested by the Board’s written report, other impact information
shall be provided; and,
iv. evidence of ownership or interest in the land for which the Special Permit is sought.
7. Minimum Requirements
The mixed-use Special Permit shall be subject to the following conditions, and the Board of Appeals
shall make a determination that the project meets the requirements of Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40A, Section 9 and this mixed-use By-Law as to all the following conditions:
a. the mixed use is consistent with the purpose set out in paragraph 2 (b) of this Section of
the By-Law;
b. the mixed use has received site plan approval as described in Section I-G of the By-Law;
c. execution, delivery and recording of such covenants, agreements and instruments running
with the land and binding on the owner of the parcel, its legal representative, successors, heirs
and assigns, and enforceable by the Town, as the Board may require, and in form and
substance satisfactory to it, in order to insure adherence to the terms of the Special Permit
issued hereunder;
d. the prior approval of detailed plans for the project including, without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, plans showing all structures and improvements on the parcel, all ways and
utilities serving the same (which plans shall comply with the procedural and substantive Rules
and Regulations of the Planning Board), all lot lines, easements and rights of way of record, a
model or models, building plans and specifications illustrating preliminary landscaping and
architectural design, showing types, location and layout of buildings, typical elevations, as well
as the general height, bulk and appearance of structures, and such other and further
documents, studies, reports or data which the Board deems desirable in order to assist it in
making its determination;
e. the Board may, in appropriate cases, impose dimensional and setback requirements in
addition to those required by this By-Law; and
f. the Board may, in appropriate cases, impose a requirement that a motor vehicular and
pedestrian easement for access and egress be provided from a street, road or other way over
which the public has access, to the navigable waters bordering the tract of land.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 78
8. Permitted Uses and Intensity of Use
a. Residential - Commercial Option
i. Retail uses as allowed by paragraph 8 (c) shall not exceed 6% of the total allowable
project square footage.
ii. Residential use as allowed by paragraph 8 (c) shall not exceed 15% of the total
allowable project square footage. Further, the number of three-bedroom units shall
not exceed 15% of the total number of units constructed. No residential units with
over three bedrooms will be allowed in a mixed-use project.
iii. General commercial as allowed by paragraph 8 (c) shall comprise 79% or less of the
total allowable project square footage.
iv. Limited industrial use as allowed by paragraph 8 (c) shall not exceed 20% of the total
allowable project square footage. Further, for each square foot of limited industrial
space developed, there shall be a reduction of one square foot of allowable general
commercial activities.
b. Commercial Option
i. Retail uses as allowed by paragraph 8 (c) shall not exceed 6% of the total allowable
project square footage.
ii. General commercial and limited industrial uses as allowed by paragraph 8 (c) may
comprise up to 100% of total allowable project square footage. The specific mixture
of general commercial and limited industrial uses and square footages shall be the
prerogative of the developer, subject to design and site plan review powers accorded
to the Board of Appeals.
c. Permitted Uses
i. Residential:
Residential units, free standing or attached, are a permitted use; further, residential
units may be allowed as part of mixed-use buildings.
ii. Retail:
Building materials and hardware
General merchandise
Food stores and bakeries
Liquor stores
Automotive, marine craft and aircraft accessories
Apparel and accessories
Furniture, home furnishings and home appliances
Eating and drinking establishments
Books and stationery
Drug stores
iii. General Commercial:
Dry goods and apparel (wholesale)
Electrical goods (wholesale)
Hardware, plumbing, heating and equipment supplies (wholesale)
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 79
Professional equipment and supplies (wholesale)
Service establishments, equipment and supplies (wholesale)
Drugs and allied products (wholesale)
Tobacco and tobacco products (wholesale)
Beer, wine, and distilled alcoholic beverages (wholesale)
Paper and paper products (wholesale)
Furniture and home furnishings (wholesale)
Commercial fishing
General business office space
Laundering establishments
Personal services establishments
Research, development and testing services
Equipment rental services
Medical and dental health services, excluding those uses enumerated in paragraph
3.8of Section III-A, Schedule of Uses
Hotels, botels, and motels: are permitted as part of an originally approved final plan.
A change in use from any other allowed use to a hotel, botel or motel requires a
Special Permit from the Board. At a minimum, the applicant must show that the
proposed new use meets all parking requirements and is consistent with the
remaining land uses in the mixed-use.
Museums
Theaters and public assembly
Sales of marine craft and aircraft
Marinas including storage, sales and service of marine craft
Sports facilities, clubs, and similar activities
iv. Limited Industrial:
Assembly and production
General warehousing (non-food items)
Apparel manufacture
Furniture manufacture
Professional, scientific and research facilities
d. Other Uses:
i. Accessory uses as defined in Section III-I of the By-Law shall be permitted.
ii. Uses not listed in paragraph 8 (c), subparagraphs (i)-(iv) may be permitted as part of
the originally approved final plan if, in the judgment of the Board, the proposed use
does not create health, traffic or safety problems for the remainder of the
development area and abutter areas and is consistent with the remaining land uses in
the mixed-use area.
iii. Uses not listed in paragraph 8 (c), subparagraphs (i)-(iv), if requested after approval
of the final plan, may be permitted as an amendment to the original mixed-use
Special Permit as provided in subsection 12.
iv. Open space as provided in paragraph 9 (c) below.
9. Dimensional Requirements
a. Site Area Requirements - A minimum of 100 acres is required, and a maximum of 140 acres
is permitted, within the Industrial District. The parcel shall be contiguous; however, a public
transportation, utility, parking area or public ways shall not constitute a boundary or property
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 80
line in computing the size of the contiguous parcel. The public transport, utility, parking area or
public way, however, shall not be used in the calculation of the total project area.
b. Floor Area Ratio - Maximum floor to area ratio shall be 1 to 1.
c. Usable Open Space - The part or parts of land or structure within a mixed use which are
reserved for permanent active or passive recreation use. This space shall exclude parking areas,
streets, alleys, required setbacks, waterways, and sidewalks; and shall be open and
unobstructed. Trees, plantings, arbors, flagpoles, sculpture, fountains, covered walkways, and
similar objects shall not be considered obstructions.
In all mixed-use developments that are new construction, at least 15% of the land shall be set
aside as permanent usable open space, available to the project’s users or the community. The
required open space shall be subject to reasonable restrictions, covenants, and maintenance
arrangements, imposed by and legally enforceable by the town to assure access and
maintenance as provided in this section.
d. Height - No building within the mixed-use development shall exceed 40 feet in height above
the average finished grade of abutting properties, except that a 55-foot height may be allowed
not closer than 200 feet from major highways such as Route 3A and any residential district.
Parking facilities within the building shall not be calculated as part of the allowable height. The
maximum additional height allowed for parking facilities shall be nine feet, provided that this
shall not apply to free standing parking garages.
10. Parking Requirements
a. In all mixed-use developments adequate off-street parking shall be provided. The Board and
the applicant shall have as a goal, for the purposes of defining adequate off-street parking for
the development, making the most efficient use of the parking facilities to be provided and
minimizing the area of land to be paved for this purpose. In implementing this goal the Board
shall make provision for complementary or shared use of parking areas by activities having
different peak demand times, and the applicant shall locate adjacent uses in such a manner as
will facilitate the complementary use of such parking areas. Implementation of such
complementary use of parking areas may result in reductions in the parking requirements set
out in this subsection of the By-Law. The parking may be at ground level, underground or in a
parking garage. Parking garages can be free standing (in which case 55 feet is the allowed
maximum height) or as part of buildings with commercial or residential purposes. If a free
standing parking structure is proposed, the spaces must be assigned to specific uses at the time
of the submission of the final plan.
b. Parking requirements for the mixed-use development shall be in accordance with Section VA
of this By-Law.
11. Signs
Signs in mixed use development are permitted subject to the following requirements and standards.
a. The proposed location and size of all signs must be indicated at the time of submission of
the final plan.
b. Dimensional controls for signs in mixed-use development are as follows:
i. Development and Directory Signs
One free standing permanent development sign per entrance to the development
shall be permitted not to exceed 50 square feet in area and 20 feet above ground
level for the purpose of identifying the name of the development; provided, however,
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 81
that not more than two such signs shall be permitted per total completed mixed-use
development. As an alternative to one of the foregoing development signs, a
directory-type sign not exceeding 80 square feet in area and 16 feet above ground
level identifying the name of the development and any nonresidential use therein shall
be permitted at the entrance which is the primary entrance for the nonresidential uses
of the mixed-use district; provided, that any identification of an individual nonresidential
use shall not exceed 10% of the total area of such directory-type sign. Any
such sign shall be within the mixed-use development and, where adjacent to any
contiguous residential classification or use, shall be located at least 100 feet from the
interior boundary between the mixed-use development and such residential
classification or use.
ii. Retail, General Commercial and Industrial Buildings
a. Parallel signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall not exceed 10% of the
square footage of the facade, and in no instance shall they exceed 100 square
feet in total sign space.
b. Parallel signs shall not extend more than one foot from the wall to which they
are attached.
c. Perpendicular signs shall not exceed six square feet in total size and the area of
the perpendicular sign shall be deducted from the total parallel sign space
allowed, thus reducing the total square footage allowed for a parallel sign.
d. Perpendicular signs shall be affixed to the building wall by hardware that
extends no more than eight inches from the building wall.
iii. Residential Buildings
a. Parallel signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall not exceed 30 square
feet. Further, the location of said sign is limited to the first floor of the building.
Awnings at entrances shall not be considered signs; however, the area used to
denote the name of the building on the awning shall not exceed 30 square feet.
b. Perpendicular signs are not allowed on residential buildings.
c. Free standing signs, located in an area clearly associated with the residential
structure, are allowed. In no instance will the sign be more than 30 square feet
or 6 feet in height or within 20 feet of a roadway.
iv. Buildings Including Residential As Well As Retail, General Commercial or Industrial
Uses (mixed use buildings)
a. Parallel signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall not exceed 10% of the
square footage of the facade. In no instance shall the sign area exceed 50 square
feet. In calculating the 10% of building facade, the residential portions of the
building must be excluded.
b. Perpendicular signs are allowed on mixed-use buildings but shall not exceed six
square feet in size, and shall be attached by hardware that does not extend from
the wall more than eight inches. Further, the sign area used by perpendicular
signs shall be subtracted from the allowable sign area for parallel signs.
v. The prohibitions of Section V-B of this By-Law shall apply to the mixed use district.
12. Amendments - After approval of the mixed use Special Permit by the Board, the developer may seek
amendments to the final plan as approved by the Board as provided below:
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 82
a. Minor amendments shall be defined and administered in accordance with regulations
adopted by the Board.
b. An application for a major amendment shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The applicant
shall also submit copies of the application for a major amendment with the Building
Commissioner, the Planning Board and the Board of Appeals. An application for a major
amendment shall comply with subsections 5 and 6 of this Section.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 83
SECTION V
Special Regulations
V-A Off-Street Parking Requirements
1. Introduction
Safe and convenient off-street parking shall be provided in all zoning districts in accordance with
the requirements of this Section. The parking criteria are directed toward lessening congestion and
securing safety from personal injury or property damage on public and private ways and abutting
lands in the Town of Hingham. The Planning Board may impose appropriate time, use or
dimensional conditions on the granting of such a Special Permit. Frequent parking of vehicles on a
street adjacent to the premises shall be considered evidence of the inadequacy of the off-street
spaces provided.
2. Off-Street Parking Space Requirements
Provision for off-street parking, drives, services, and display and loading areas shall be as specified
below. Providing fewer or more parking spaces than required by this Section V-A, or deviating from
the Design Standards specified by this Section V-A, requires a Special Permit A3. Applicants are
encouraged not to construct parking in excess of the typical projected demand. These parking
requirements shall be met for new construction, the enlargement or increase in gross floor area of
an existing building, the development of a use not located in a building, or the change from one
type of use to another. Parking areas for each land use shall be located on the same parcel unless a
Special Permit A3 is granted by the Planning Board to permit parking on a contiguous parcel or on a
parcel across the street. Within Business District A, parking space requirements are reduced by
25%.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 84
Use Requirement
Residential Uses
Residential 2 spaces/unit
Elderly Residential 1 1/4 spaces/unit
Congregate or Assisted Living Facility 1 space/living unit
Office/Retail/Commercial Uses
Retail Store and Service Business 5 spaces/1000 SF of GFA
Hotel/Motel 1 space/room plus 1 space/2
employees of 2 consecutive shifts
Bank 4 spaces /1000 SF of GFA
Medical & Dental Office 1 space/175 SF of GFA
Professional Office 5 spaces/1000 SF of GFA
General Business Office 3 1/2 spaces/1000 SF of GFA
Greenhouse, Nursery and Roadside Stand 1 space/1000 SF of display area
whether indoors or outdoors
Marina 1 space per 2 berths
Motor Vehicle Service/Filling Station 2 spaces per bay or work station
Eating Establishments
Sit-Down & Take-Out Restaurants 1 space/3 seats
Fast-Food Restaurant 30 spaces/1000 SF of GFA
Institutional
Auditorium 1 space/3 seats
Clubs & Fraternal Lodges 1 space/3 seats in assembly area
Recreation 1 space/3 persons at capacity use
Nursing & Convalescent Home 1/4 space/bed plus 1 space/
employee of 2 consecutive shifts
Churches & Funeral Parlors 1 space/3 seats
Industrial
Manufacturing 2 spaces/1000 SF of GFA
Research & Development 3 1/2 spaces/1000 SF of GFA
Warehousing & Wholesaling 1 space/1000 SF of GFA
(SF of GFA = square feet of gross floor area)
For uses not specifically covered by the Zoning By-Law, parking requirements shall be determined by
Special Permit A3.
Notes:
a. Where the structure, activity or any portion thereof is susceptible to more than one use, the
parking requirement shall unless otherwise determined, be calculated according to that possible use
requiring the greatest number of spaces.
b. Parking areas serving a clearly defined mixture of uses that do not place coincident demands on
the parking area may have the parking requirements reduced by 10 percent for lot size from 50 to
99 spaces, and by 15 percent if the lot size is 100 spaces or greater by Special Permit A3.
c. When the computation of required parking spaces results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space, but in any event not less than 1 space.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 85
d. No space reserved for any person, tenant, activity or purpose (except for spaces reserved for
“visitor” or “customers” parking) shall be included to satisfy the parking requirement.
3. Parking Dimension Requirements
The following standard parking dimensions shall govern the design of parking areas. All uses other
than Single-Family Dwelling shall comply with these dimensional regulations, unless relief is granted
by the Planning Board by Special Permit A3.
TABLE OF PARKING DIMENSIONS
Standard Parking Spaces Parallel Parking Spaces
Width 9 ft. Width 8.5 ft.
Length 18 ft. with overhang Length 22 ft.
20 ft. without overhang
Loading Spaces
Width 12 ft.
Height Clearance 14 ft.
Aisle Width
Parking Angle 45 degree 60 degree 75 degree 90 degree Parallel
14 ft. 18 ft. 22 ft. 24 ft. 14 ft.
Minimum Driveway Widths
One way - 12 ft.
Two way - 20 ft.
4. Plan Requirements
When construction or alteration of a parking area is proposed, or a Special Permit A2 or A3 is
sought, a plan shall be prepared and wet stamped with original signature of a Massachusetts
professional civil engineer at a scale of 1" = 20' or 1" = 40' conforming to the design standards
presented below and showing the following information:
a. construction details and the location, size and type of materials for surface paving, drainage
facilities, curbing or wheel stops, signs, screening and lighting;
b. location of all buildings, lot lines, and zoning boundary lines from which the parking lot and
loading area must be set back; and
c. where landscaping is to be provided, the location, species, size and number of plantings.
5. Design Standards
a. All parking areas designated for a use other than Single-Family Dwelling shall be designed to
provide safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access, circulation and maneuverability and
pedestrian activity, in accordance with this Section.
b. All driveways shall be located and designed so as to minimize conflict with traffic on public and
private ways and to provide good visibility and sight distance for observation of approaching
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
c. Loading spaces shall be provided for all commercial activities. Their location, number and length
will be reviewed and approved during the site plan review process.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 86
d. Ample space shall be designated for access to loading and service doors separate from all
parking areas and without obstruction or hindrance to travel on streets, driveways and aisles.
e. Required parking and loading facilities shall be laid out so that each vehicle may proceed to and
from its parking space without requiring the movement of any other vehicle. In no case shall
parking or loading spaces be located as to require the backing or maneuvering of a vehicle onto a
sidewalk, or public or private way in order to leave the space. Driveways should be located and
designed so that queues do not obstruct effective use of aisles and parking spaces.
f. Parking space overhangs are not permissible beyond a property line, over a sidewalk, into a fire
lane, or adjacent to a structure where a minimum clear distance of four feet cannot be provided.
g. A substantial bumper of masonry, steel or heavy timber, or concrete or granite curb, or berm
curb which is backed shall be placed at the edge of the surfaced areas except driveways to protect
abutting structures, properties, sidewalks and screening materials.
h. Any illumination of parking areas or loading or service areas shall be directed so as not to shine
upwards or on abutting properties or public or private ways.
i. Parking spaces shall be delineated by white pavement markings.
j. Handicap spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Architectural Access Board
regulations (521 CMR) for all parking areas exceeding 15 spaces.
k. The layout of the parking area shall provide sufficient space for the storage of plowed snow
unless removal by other means is assured.
l. The maximum parking lot grade shall be 4 percent and the minimum 1 percent. Parking areas
shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or similar non-erosive surface, and drained in a manner
deemed to be best management practice (BMP) to prevent erosion or excessive water flow across
public and private ways or abutting properties as well as graded and drained such that stormwater
runoff does not accumulate on the ground surface. In addition to the foregoing, pervious paving
materials may be permitted at the discretion of the Planning Board, subject to compliance with
design and construction standards referenced in this sub-paragraph. The drainage system shall be
designed to control the 10 year storm event, and stormwater management shall conform to the
Stormwater Performance Standards and Guidelines of the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection. The submittal should include information on the specific design proposed
for pervious or porous pavement, and details of the required maintenance should be noted on the
plans and incorporated as part of the submittal.
m. Parking lots containing 10 or more parking spaces shall have at least one live tree and
additional understory plantings per 10 spaces, such trees to be located within landscaped sections
and islands in or around the parking area so as to soften the visual impact of large areas of
hardscape and parked vehicles as much as possible. All landscaped sections and islands shall
contain a mix of evergreen shrubs, trees and plantings. Landscaped sections shall be so designed
and located to provide visual relief, channelize logical areas for safe pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, and screen the parking lot from adjoining properties. Where landscaped sections abut a
residential zone or use, the landscaping shall provide a year-round screening effect with plantings
and berms to shield abutters from headlights. If parking areas are designed so as to face a public
way, the landscaping shall provide a year-round screening effect to prevent headlight glare from
shining into the way and soften the visual impact of the parking field. Trees shall be at least a three
inch (3") caliper, with a clear trunk at least five feet (5') from the ground, and planted in raised
plots providing a minimum of fifty square feet of seeded or landscaped permeable area per tree,
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 87
whether planted singly or in groves. Preference should be given to species of growth and cultivation
habit appropriate to the site. Existing trees shall be retained to meet this requirement whenever
appropriate and practicable. Any landscaped areas may be included in the calculations for open
space area.
Parking lot trees must be maintained in a healthy growing condition at all times. The property
owner is responsible for regular trash removal weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing,
pruning, and other maintenance of all plantings as needed. Any tree which dies shall be removed
promptly and replaced within the next planting season.
Parking lot trees shall not be cut down or removed when a parking lot is reconstructed or enlarged.
Said trees may be moved to another location on the lot upon approval of a site plan modification by
the Planning Board.
n. Shared Parking/Reduction in Parking Requirements – A reduction in the required number of offstreet
parking spaces may be granted by Special Permit A3. Parking areas serving a clearly defined
mixture of uses that do not place coincident demands on the parking area may have the parking
requirements reduced by 10 percent for a lot with 50-99 spaces, and by 15 percent if the lot size is
100 spaces or greater. Projects are encouraged to provide shared parking, cooperative parking,
bicycle accommodations, landbanked parking spaces, consolidation of curb cuts and driveways, and
other on-site amenities to alleviate the demand for parking and the adverse impact of impervious
surfaces.
Requests for reductions in off-street parking space requirements shall be accompanied by an
analysis of the demand for off-street parking, a parking management summary, other like use
parking demand studies and/or reports, a summary of the parking plan to reduce parking demand,
and any other documentations necessary to adequately review the request for the reduction of
parking requirements, prepared in accordance with the standards promulgated by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE), the Urban Land Institute (ULI) or other appropriate source.
o. Landbanked Off-Street Parking Areas – For projects requesting a reduced parking requirement,
the Planning Board may require that an area equivalent to the total area of the reduced off-street
parking spaces and related landscaped areas and driveways be preserved and identified on the Site
Plan. Each landbanked parking space shall meet the dimensional requirements in the By-law. The
landbanked parking spaces shall be designed as part of the overall parking development, and in no
event shall any landbanked parking space be located within the front or side yard setbacks, unless
specifically permitted within the Zoning District. At the request of the Planning Board, the Applicant
may be required to provide a parking monitoring program at specified times from the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy, in order to determine if and when the landbanked parking spaces are
needed. If, after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the Planning Board or the Applicant
finds that all or a portion of the landbanked parking spaces are needed, the Applicant shall submit a
written request to the Planning Board, which states the need for the additional off-street parking
spaces, and a revised site plan denoting the un-landbanked parking spaces. Frequent parking of
vehicles on a street adjacent to the premises or in areas not designated as formal parking spaces
shall be considered evidence of the inadequacy of the off-street spaces provided.
6. An applicant is not entitled to a Special Permit. The Planning Board may approve such an
application for a Special Permit A3 Parking Determination if it finds that, in its judgment:
a. The parking is sufficient in quantity to meet the needs of the proposed project;
b. Pedestrian access and circulation has been provided for;
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 88
c. New driveways have been designed to maximize sightline distances to the greatest extent
possible;
d. It is impractical to meet these standards and that a waiver of these regulations will not result in
or worsen parking and traffic problems on-site or on the surrounding streets, or adversely affect the
value of abutting lands and buildings; and
e. The granting of relief is consistent with the intent of this By-Law and will not increase the
likelihood of accident or impair access and circulation.
V-B Signs
1. Purpose
This Section is adopted by the Town to reasonably regulate signs and other advertising devices
within the Town in order to advance the public interest by preserving and enhancing natural
scenic, historic and aesthetic qualities and promoting pedestrian and vehicular safety.
2. Definitions
In this Section the following terms shall have the following respective meanings:
Accessory Sign
any sign, which with respect to the premises on which it is located, indicates, calls attention to
or advertises either the person occupying the premises on which it is located, or the business or
activity being conducted on such premises, or which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the
premises or any part thereof, and which contains no other advertising matter of any kind.
Awning
a retractable type structure of flexible material (plastic, canvas) on a frame attached to the
facade of a building and projecting therefrom as a protection against sun or rain.
Awning Sign Area
the area encompassed by any wording, logo, or design distinct from the awning background
color. Awning signs are measured and included within the allowances for parallel building signs.
Building Sign
any outdoor sign affixed to or painted on or in any manner supported by or forming a part of
the exterior of a building and any sign on or in a window or door of a building.
Business Establishment
each separate place of business whether or not consisting of one or more buildings.
Commercial Message
any wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product or service or other commercial activity.
Ground Sign
any sign other than a building sign as herein defined.
Incidental Sign
a sign, generally informational, relating to the business or service conducted on the premises,
such as “open/closed,” or “hours of operation,”. No sign with a commercial message legible
from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 89
Non-Accessory Sign
any sign other than an accessory sign as herein defined.
Sign
a sign shall include any lettering, word, numeral, emblem, design, device, trademark, drawing,
picture, flag, pennant, streamer, or other object of whatever material or method of
constructions and however displayed whether being a structure or any part thereof, a building
or other structure or object and used to indicate, announce, direct, attract, advertise or
promote.
Window Sign
any temporary accessory sign, pictures, symbol or combination thereof, designed to
communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale or service that is
placed in or on a window and is visible from the exterior of a window. Signs painted on the
window glass shall be considered permanent, parallel, exterior building signs.
3. Schedule of Sign Regulations
Signs hereafter erected or placed on property within the Town of Hingham shall conform to the
requirements of this Section V-B. As set forth in the table below, signs permitted as of right will
not require Building Permits. Building Permits for signs complying in all respects with the given
requirements shall be issued by the Building Commissioner. In the alternative, but not in
addition, Special Permits A1 for signs meeting all Special Permit limitations may be granted by
the Board of Appeals. In those cases where a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals is
required and granted, a Building Permit for the work in conformance with the terms of the
Special Permit is also mandatory. Signs not meeting the regulations in all respects shall require
a Variance from the Board of Appeals in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40A, Section 10.
In granting a Special Permit, the Board of Appeals shall find that the location, nature and use of
the premises are such that the proposed sign or signs may be permitted in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of this Section. In granting any such permit the Board shall specify
the size, height, type and location of the sign and impose such other terms, restrictions and
conditions as it may deem to be in the public interest.
For explanation of the terms used in this table, refer to the footnotes on the pages which
follow.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 90
Schedule of Sign Regulations
Sign Type1 Maximum Area 2 Maximum Height Minimum Setback3 Maximum No.4 Illumination5 Permit Procedure6
IN ALL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS AND THE OFFICIAL AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
Bldg.-Parallel 1 s.f. 5’ above ground
floor
n.a. 1 External N
Bldg.-Parallel 4 s.f. 5’ above ground
floor
n.a. 1 External B
Bldg. - Parallel 10 s.f. 5’ above ground
floor
n.a. 1 External Z
Ground 2 s.f. 6’ - 1 External N
Ground 4 s.f. 6’ - 1 External B
Ground 20 s.f. 6’ 15’ 1 External Z
IN BUSINESS DISTRICT A:
Bldg.- Parallel 1 s.f. 5’ above ground
floor
n.a. 1 External N
Bldg.-Window
and/or incidental
- n.a. n.a. 20% glass area in
the aggregate and
no more than
45% of any
individual window
None N
Bldg.- Projecting7 - n.a. 1 External B
Perpendicular 4 s.f.
Business flag 15 s.f.
Awning See Definitions
Bldg. – Parallel 30 s.f. - n.a. 1 External B
Bldg. – Projecting
Perpendicular 9 s.f. - n.a. 1 External Z
Bldg.-Parallel 45 s.f. - n.a. - External Z
Ground 2 s.f. 6’ 10’ 1 External N
Ground 15 s.f. 12’ 10’
30’ from Res.
Zone
1 External B
Ground 24 s.f. 12’ 10’
30’ from Res.
Zone
1 External Z
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 91
Schedule of Sign Regulations (continued)
Sign Type1 Maximum Area 2 Maximum Height Minimum Setback3 Maximum No.4 Illumination5 Permit Procedure6
IN BUSINESS DISTRICT B, WATERFRONT BUSINESS AND WATERFRONT RECREATION DISTRICTS:
Bldg.-Parallel 1 s.f. 5’ above ground
floor
n.a. 1 External N
Bldg.-
Perpendicular
4 s.f. - n.a. 1 External B
Bldg.- Parallel 30 s.f. - n.a. 1 External B
Bldg.-
Perpendicular
9 s.f. - n.a. 1 External Z
Bldg.- Parallel 60 s.f. - n.a. - External Z
Ground 2 s.f. 6’ 10’ 1 External N
Ground 15 s.f. 12’ 10’
30’ from Res.
Zone
1 External B
Ground 24 s.f. 12’ 10’
30’ from Res.
Zone
1 External Z
IN ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS AND THE OFFICE PARK DISTRICT:
Bldg.-Parallel 1 s.f. 5’ above ground
floor
n.a. 1 External N
Bldg.-Parallel not exceeding
10% wall area
- n.a. 1 External B
Bldg.-Parallel not exceeding
10% wall area
- n.a. - External Z
Ground 2 s.f. 6’ 10’ 1 External N
Ground 50 s.f. 12’ 10’ 1 External B
Ground 50 s.f. per unit of
200’ of frontage
12’ 10’ - External Z
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 92
Table footnotes
1. Sign Type
Parallel wall signs shall not extend beyond the face of the wall, horizontally or vertically,
nor project out from the wall more than 12".
Perpendicular wall signs shall not extend above the top of the wall nor project out from
the wall more than 3'.
No sign shall be mounted on or form a part of a roof, cupola, tower, spire, chimney,
enclosure or other object or structure located on or above the roof of any building.
2. Maximum Area
In the case of a building sign composed of separate letters the size shall be calculated as
the area of a rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, including any structural
parts thereof.
3. Minimum Setback
Setback requirements are measured from front, side and rear property lines. This
Section shall not exempt signs from the corner clearance requirements of Section IV-C, 6
of the Zoning By-Law of the Town of Hingham. See also Section V-B, 6 (e).
4. Maximum Number
If such business establishment has more than one public entrance, a secondary sign may
be affixed to each wall in which such entrance is located other than the wall on which the
principal sign is affixed. In Business District A if a business establishment abuts two
public streets, a secondary sign may be affixed on the wall facing the side street. A
secondary sign shall not exceed fifty percent of the maximum area of the principal sign.
For each business establishment in a building having two or more such establishments,
provided that such establishment has a separate public entrance to its premises and that
such sign is affixed to that portion of the wall which forms a part of the enclosure of such
premises, there shall be not more than one exterior building sign per business
establishment.
One directory sign of the business establishments occupying a building having a common
public entrance, which sign shall be affixed parallel to the wall of the building at such
public entrance. Such directory sign shall not exceed an area determined on the basis of
one square foot for each establishment in the building. After public hearing and making
the requisite findings, the Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit to allow more or
larger signs up to the maximum total square footage allowed in the table (V-B, 3) for
individual businesses.
In Office Park, Industrial Park, Limited Industrial Park and Industrial Districts, but
excluding retail groups within those Districts, one or more directory ground signs listing
the business establishments within the development, provided that a Special Permit A1
for such sign(s) has been issued by the Board of Appeals. Such directory ground sign(s)
shall be placed in a safe location off the main road or driveway, which has at least two
off-street parking spaces for the convenience of visitors reading the directory. The size of
the directory sign(s) and lettering shall be scaled to the size of the development and the
number of businesses, but shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height, fifteen (15) feet in
length, and one hundred (100) feet in total area.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 93
5. Illumination
Lighting shall be exterior to the advertising matter by white steady stationary light
shielded and directed solely at the sign. No backlighting is permitted.
6. Permit Procedure
N = No permit required; permitted as-of-right
B = Building Permit required
Z = Zoning Special Permit required
7. Where projecting signs are installed over the public sidewalk, they shall be hung not
lower than 7' from the ground to the lower edge of the sign.
8. Temporary Signs
The Board of Selectmen may grant permits for the erection and display of temporary
signs, as follows:
a. one unlighted ground sign advertising any function or activity of the applicant
which will be open to the public, provided that such sign not exceed 4 square feet. The
permit for such sign shall be for a stated period of time not exceeding 30 days.
Applications for temporary signs shall be in such form as the Selectmen shall determine
and shall contain a description of the proposed sign, including the size, height, material
color, wording and supporting structure and the proposed location and inclusive dates of
display. The Board of Selectmen may refer such application to the Building Commissioner
for review and recommendation. In granting any such permit the Selectmen shall specify
the inclusive dates of the effective term thereof and may impose such further restrictions
and conditions as they may deem to be in accordance with the purposes of this Section
V-B and the public interest. Temporary signs shall not require Building Permits.
9. Exempted Signs
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following signs:
a. any sign which is required or authorized by any law, rule, regulation or permit of the
federal or state government or any agency thereof or any public authority created
thereby;
b. any sign erected or placed on any Town premises under the provisions of any Town
By-Law or Building Code or by direction or order of the Town board or committee having
lawful jurisdiction over such premises;
c. nonconforming signs as defined in paragraph 7 of this Section;
d. any sign not exceeding 4 square feet in area, limited solely to directing traffic within
a parking area, indicating parking restrictions in the use of such parking area, or
indicating the location of building or unit numbers in a multi-unit complex;
e. memorial building sign or tablet denoting the name of a building and/or date of
erection, not to exceed 2 s.f. in residential districts or 6 s.f. in other districts, provided
that nothing herein shall limit the authority of the Historic Districts Commission to further
regulate signs within duly designated local historic districts;
f. customary signs on gasoline pumps indicating in usual size and form the name and
type of gasoline and the price thereof,
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 94
g. holiday decorations and lights when in season;
h. one unlighted ground sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or any
part thereof, provided that such sign shall not exceed 8 square feet;
i. one unlighted ground sign in a residential subdivision of six or more approved lots,
which advertises the sale, rental or lease of the individual lots therein, provided that such
sign not exceed 40 square feet;
j. one unlighted ground sign on each lot which advertises the name and address of the
owner, architect, engineer and/or contractor responsible for any construction on the
premises, provided that such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet; or
k. paper or cardstock window signs not exceeding 11" x 17" in size advertising any
campaign, drive, event or activity of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious
organization for noncommercial purposes, provided they are to be removed within thirty
days of initial display.
10. Prohibited Signs
a. Any sign not expressly permitted or exempted under this Section, including, without
limitation, an “A”-shaped or “V”-shaped sign, a trailer sign and a billboard, is prohibited.
b. Flashing, moving or animated signs or signs designed to attract attention by a
change in light intensity or by repeated motion, which such change or motion is
generated by or internal to the sign itself, are prohibited.
c. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited.
d. Non-accessory signs promoting commercial activities are prohibited; non-accessory
signs promoting non-commercial activities are permitted so long as they comply with the
requirements of this Section V-B.
For the purposes of this Section, fund-raising activities by charitable organizations shall
not be considered commercial activities.
e. No sign shall be erected at or near the intersection of any streets, or of a street and
driveway, in such manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or be erected at any
location where, by reason of the position, shape, color, illumination or wording, the sign
may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device or otherwise constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic
because of intensity or direction of illumination.
11. Nonconforming Signs
a. Any nonconforming sign legally erected prior to the adoption of this By-Law may
continue to be maintained; provided, however, that no such sign shall be enlarged,
redesigned, or altered except in accordance with the provisions of this By-Law.
b. The exemption herein granted shall terminate with respect to any sign which (1)
shall have been abandoned; (2) shall not have been repaired or properly maintained
within sixty (60) days after notice in writing to that effect has been given by the Building
Commissioner.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 95
12. Pertinence to Other Laws
All signs shall be subject to any and all other applicable by-laws and regulations of the
Town of Hingham and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Nothing in this By-Law is
intended to limit the exercise of the right of free speech guaranteed under the
Constitutions of the United States or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
V-C Earth Removal Regulations
1. Permit Required
a. No soil, loam, sand, gravel, or other earth materials shall be removed from any lot
within the Town unless such removal will constitute an exempt operation as hereinafter
provided or is done pursuant to a Special Permit A2 therefor issued by the Board of
Appeals.
b. No Special Permit A2 for removal of earth materials shall be granted unless the Board
finds that operations conducted under such permit, subject to the conditions imposed
thereby, will not be contrary to the best interests of the Town. For this purpose an
operation shall be considered contrary to the best interests of the Town which:
i. will be injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety;
ii. will produce noise, dust or other effects observable from adjacent property in
amounts seriously objectionable or detrimental to the normal use of adjacent
property;
iii. will result in such use of Town streets so as to cause congestion or hazardous
conditions;
iv. will result in the change in topography and cover which will be disadvantageous
to the most appropriate use of the land on which the operation is conducted; or
v. will have a material adverse effect on the water supply, health or safety of
persons living in the neighborhood or on the use of or amenities of adjacent
land.
2. Application and Reference to Planning Board
a. Each application for a Special Permit A2 for earth material removal shall be
accompanied by a plan, submitted in triplicate (the exact size and number of copies of
which may be indicated by rule of the Board of Appeals), prepared at the expense of the
applicant by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer, showing:
i. the existing contours of the land;
ii. the contours as proposed after completion of the operation;
iii. the proposed lateral support to all adjacent property;
iv. the proposed drainage including calculations; and
v. other information necessary to indicate the complete physical characteristics of
the proposed operation.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 96
3. Conditions of Permit
a. In granting a Special Permit A2 hereunder the Board of Appeals shall impose
reasonable conditions specially designed to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town;
which may include conditions as to:
i. method of removal;
ii. type and location of temporary structures;
iii. hours of operation;
iv. routes for transporting the material through the Town;
v. area and depth of excavation;
vi. distance of excavation to street and lot lines;
vii. steepness of slopes excavated;
viii. re-establishment of ground levels and grades,
ix. provisions for temporary and permanent drainage;
x. disposition of boulders and tree stumps;
xi. replacement of loam over the area of removal;
xii. planting of the area to suitable cover, including shrubs and trees and
xiii. cleaning, repair, and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal activities which
have been adversely affected by the removal activity.
b. No permit for removal of earth material shall be issued for a period of more than
three (3) years, although such a permit may be renewed for additional periods in the
same manner. The Board shall require a bond or other security to insure compliance with
its conditions of authorization, unless, in a particular case, it specifically finds that such
security is not warranted and so states in its decision, giving the reasons for its finding.
4. Existing Operations
A sand or gravel removal activity in lawful operation on any premises on March 10, 1941,
may continue as an exempt operation unless and until abandoned, or if operating under
a prior permit issued by the Board of Appeals until the expiration thereof.
Discontinuance for more than twenty four (24) consecutive months shall be deemed to
constitute abandonment. However, unless specifically authorized by such prior permit or
by a new permit issued hereunder:
a. the depth of excavation shall not be extended below the grade of the lowest point
excavated on the effective date of this Section of the By-Law;
b. the total area of excavation shall not be increased by more than fifty (50) percent
over its area on said date; and
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 97
c. the amount of material removed per day shall not be increased by more than fifty
(50) per cent the daily average for the twelve (12) months preceding said date (or the
actual period of operation, if less than twelve months).
5. Other Exceptions
The removal of earth material in any of the following operations shall be an exempt
operation:
a. the removal of less than ten (10) cubic yards of material in the aggregate in any year
from any one lot;
b. the transfer of material from one part of a lot to another part of the same lot; or
c. the removal of material necessarily excavated in connection with the lawful
construction of a building, structure or street, or of a driveway, way, sidewalk, path or
other appurtenance incidental to any such building, structure or street; provided that the
quantity of the material removed does not exceed that actually displaced by the portion
of such building, structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other appurtenance below
finished grade.
d. activities specifically directed by a valid Order of Conditions from the Hingham
Conservation Commission.
6. Permits in Proposed Subdivisions
It is the intention of the By-Law that the removal of earth materials in an amount in
excess of that permitted in paragraph 5 (a) above from any parcel of land for which a
definitive subdivision plan has been prepared shall be allowed only in the same manner
as removal from other parcels of land in the Town. Consequently, approval of a
subdivision plan by the Planning Board shall not be construed as authorizing the removal
of material in excess of ten (10) cubic yards from the premises, even though in
connection with the construction of streets shown on the plan unless the material
removed is below the finished grade of the constructed street as provided in paragraph 5
(c).
V-D Noise
In an Industrial District, all parties engaged in any industrial activity will provide methods
to protect the abutting residential districts from the hazards and nuisances caused by the
emission of noises so as to eliminate any such noises which exceed the maximum
permitted sound levels defined herein as measured at any point along a district line.
Noise shall be measured with an A-scale sound level meter, calibrated in accordance with
specifications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or as specified by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Environmental Protection, measured
over a representative period of time.
TABLE OF MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS
Sound measured at a lot line abutting Continuous Slow-Meter Response
a residential district or school dB (A) 55
1. Between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 9:00 P.M., the permissible sound levels at the
boundary of any abutting residential district shall be reduced by five (5) decibels, and
between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. the permissible sound levels at the
boundary of any abutting residential district shall be reduced by ten (10) decibels.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 98
2. The following sources of noise are exempt from noise level regulations:
a. noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure-relief valves;
b. noises emanating from temporary construction and maintenance activities between
7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M.; and
c. transient noises of vehicular traffic.
V-E Personal Wireless Services
1. Purposes
The purposes of this Section are to allow adequate Personal Wireless Services to be
developed while simultaneously preserving the character and appearance of the Town by
protecting the scenic, historic, environmental and natural resources of the community, by
requiring owners of Towers and Personal Wireless Service Facilities to configure them so
as to minimize and mitigate the adverse visual impact of the Towers and Facilities, and
by providing standards and requirements for regulation, placement, construction,
monitoring, design, modification and removal of Towers and other Personal Wireless
Service Facilities to ensure public safety.
2. Consistency with Federal Law
This Section V-E is intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in
that
a. it does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of Personal
Wireless Services;
b. it is not intended to be used to unreasonably discriminate among providers of
functionally equivalent Personal Wireless Services;
c. it does not regulate Personal Wireless Services on the basis of the environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that the regulations of Personal
Wireless Services and Facilities comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such
emissions.
3. Definitions
Act
the Telecommunications Act of 1996
Antenna
a device which is attached to a Tower or a Host Structure, as permitted hereunder, for
transmitting and receiving Personal Wireless Service transmissions
Communication Equipment Shelter
a structure located with a Tower designed principally to enclose equipment used in
connection with Personal Wireless Service transmissions
Distributed Antenna System(DAS)
A multiple antenna system including antennas and control boxes typically installed on
utility poles interconnected via cable or fibers belonging to the access point/base station
dispersed across a coverage area. The system shall be capable of co-locating multiple
Personal Wireless Service providers simultaneously.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 99
FCC
Federal Communications Commission
Host Structure
Any building or structure (as defined in Section VI of this By-Law) other than a Tower,
but including (notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section VI) utility poles, signs
and flagpoles, upon or within which a new Personal Wireless Service Facility or major
modification thereof is proposed, including, without limitation, any newly constructed
building or structure or any addition to any existing building or structure upon or within
which installation of a Personal Wireless Service Facility is simultaneously proposed.
Major Modification of an Existing Facility
any change, or proposed change, to an existing or permitted Facility designed to support
Personal Wireless Service transmission, receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or
equipment
Monopole
a single, self-supporting vertical pole
Personal Wireless Services
commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless
exchange access services, as defined in the Act
Personal Wireless Service Facility (also referred to herein as a “Facility”)
all equipment (including any repeaters) with which a Personal Wireless Service provider
broadcasts and receives the radio-frequency waves which carry their services and all
locations of said equipment and any part thereof. This Facility may be sited on a Tower
or other structure, as provided herein.
Tower
a lattice structure or structure or framework, or Monopole, that is designed to support
Personal Wireless Service transmissions receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or
equipment
4. Location
Notwithstanding any language to the contrary in Section III-F, a Personal Wireless
Service Facility including a Tower may be erected in an Industrial, Industrial Park or
Limited industrial Park zoning district, upon issuance of a Special Permit A2 by the Board
of Appeals.
Within the Industrial, Industrial Park or Limited Industrial Park and Office Park zoning
districts, an Antenna may be attached to a Host Structure upon issuance of a Special
Permit A2 by the Board of Appeals.
In all zoning districts any Personal Wireless Services Facility, other than a Tower, which is
completely concealed within a non-residential structure such that no part of the Facility is
visible from the exterior of the structure may be installed upon issuance of a Special
Permit A2 by the Board of Appeals.
In all zoning districts a DAS may be installed on non-residential Host Structures upon the
issuance of a Special Permit A2 by the Board of Appeals.
A Tower may be permitted in the locations specified in this By-Law only after it is found
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 100
that a DAS cannot provide as adequate coverage or service as the proposed Tower.
The Applicant must provide evidence that utilizing a DAS, or connecting into an existing
DAS, will not provide such adequate coverage or service.
5. Independent Review
In accordance with Section I-F, 3, upon receipt of an application for a Special Permit
under this Section V-E, the Board may hire independent consultants whose services shall
be paid for by the Applicant, for the purpose of reviewing the application.
6. Submittal Requirements
An application for a Special Permit A2 under this Section V-E shall include all of the
following:
a. The information required for site plan approval, as set forth in Section I-I, as it may
be amended from time to time.
b. Where the Applicant is not the owner of record, evidence of the Applicant’s right to
possession and/or control of the premises shall be presented. Without limiting the
foregoing, every application must be joined by a Personal Wireless Service provider who
will be an immediate user of the proposed Personal Wireless Service Facility.
c. A narrative description of the proposed Facility including the location and
identification of all components together with plans, photographs or other graphic
illustrations fairly depicting the physical appearance of the proposed Facility equipment
when installed.
d. A description of the capacity of the Facility, including, in the case of a Tower, the
number and types of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis for calculation of
capacity. Description of the proposed equipment should include data as to noise,
certified by an acoustical engineer, and the beam widths at ground level for the energy
outputs from each Antenna sector and degree of down-tilt of each Antenna.
e. A site plan showing location of the Facility, any proposed Communications Equipment
Shelter along with other buildings, lot lines, easements, rights-of-way and also an
elevation showing details of the installation.
f. A map showing all Personal Wireless Service Facilities within ten miles of the
proposed installation currently existing, or which the applicant expects to install and/or
reasonably knows will be proposed or installed by other Personal Wireless Service
providers within the next twenty-four (24) months.
g. A listing of the state and/or federal permits, licenses or approvals acquired or
needing to be acquired for the proposed installation.
h. A description in both geographic and radio frequency terms of the scope and quality
of the service currently available to the Town, the need to be addressed by the Facility
and the manner in which the Facility will address the perceived need for service,
including, in the case of a Tower, consideration given to other alternatives.
i. A description of the terms of any co-location agreements between the Applicant and
any other Personal Wireless Service provider.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 101
7. Towers
The following requirements apply to all Towers:
a. At the Board’s discretion, the Applicant shall conduct a balloon or crane test, or such
other reasonable equivalent, of the height of the proposed Tower. Upon notice that such
a test will be required, the Applicant is responsible for making arrangements with the
Board’s staff so that notice of the test may be included within the legal notice for the
public hearing. Photographs of the actual test from a suitable number of locations so as
to depict the visual impact of the proposed facility on the Town shall be submitted to the
Board at the public hearing.
b. No new Tower shall be erected if there is technically suitable space available on an
existing Tower, or capacity within a DAS, within the geographic area that the proposed
Tower is to serve. The Applicant shall make reasonable accommodation and shall agree
to rent or lease space on the Tower, under the terms of a fair-market lease, without
discrimination to other Personal Wireless Service providers.
c. Tower height shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet. The Board of Appeals may
waive this restriction within the Special Permit A2 to allow for co-location which will
reduce the need for other Facilities.
d. In order to maintain a safety fall zone, a Tower shall not be erected nearer to any
property line than a distance equal to the vertical height of the Tower (inclusive of any
appurtenant device), plus 10 percent or 20 feet, whichever is greater (or such greater
distance to the extent that federal or state law allows for any additional increases in the
height of the Tower), measured at the mean finished grade of the Tower base.
e. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
The Board may require the planting of screening vegetation around the perimeter of the
proposed site and around Communication Equipment Shelters and any other proposed
buildings.
f. The Tower shall minimize, to the extent feasible, adverse visual effects on the
environment. The Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions to ensure this
result, including painting and lighting standards. Any Communication Equipment Shelter
or accessory building for support of communication equipment, as well as any fencing
installed to control access to it, shall be designed to be architecturally similar and
compatible with the surrounding area and, whenever feasible, structures shall be
constructed underground.
g. To the extent feasible, all network interconnections from the Personal Wireless
Services Facility shall be via land lines.
h. The area surrounding the Personal Wireless Service Facility and accessory buildings
shall be completely secure from trespass or vandalism. A sign not larger than one
square foot shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate indicating the name of the
Facility’s owner and a 24-hour emergency telephone number.
i. Traffic associated with the Tower and accessory facilities shall not adversely affect
abutting ways.
j. All unused Towers or parts thereof which have not been used for two years shall be
dismantled and removed at the owner’s expense. The Board of Appeals may require that
the proper dismantling and removal of a Tower be secured by a bond or other form of
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 102
security sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure performance under this
subsection (j).
k. No commercial signage or advertising may be affixed to any Tower.
l. Unless an earlier expiration date is specified by the Board of Appeals in the special
permit, all special permits issued under this subsection 7 shall expire automatically five
years from the date of issuance. Prior to expiration the Applicant may apply for
successive five-year renewals, subject to the public hearing process. In determining
whether the special permit shall be renewed, the Board shall take into consideration
whether there then exist any structures and/or technology available to the Applicant
which would enable the Applicant to provide functionally-equivalent services in a less
intrusive manner.
8. Personal Wireless Service Facilities on Host Structures
The following requirements apply to all Personal Wireless Facilities on Host Structures:
a. Antennas and related equipment shall be camouflaged, that is, disguised, shielded,
hidden or made to appear as an architectural component of the structure, provided
however, antennas installed on utility poles, signs or flag poles as part of a DAS shall not
be required to be camouflaged.
b. Facade-mounted Antennas shall not extend above the face of any wall or exterior
surface of the Host Structure.
c. Antennas installed on utility poles, signs or flag poles as part of a DAS shall not
exceed ten feet in height beyond the highest point of such utility pole, sign or flag pole.
d. Unless an earlier expiration date is specified by the Board of Appeals in the special
permit, all special permits for Distributed Antenna Systems shall expire automatically ten
years from the date of issuance. Prior to expiration the Applicant may apply for
successive ten-year renewals, subject to a public hearing process. In determining
whether the special permit shall be renewed, the Board shall take into consideration
whether there then exists any structures and/or technology available to the Applicant
which would enable the Applicant to provide functionally-equivalent services in a less
intrusive manner.
e. Roof-mounted Personal Wireless Service Facilities may be permitted on buildings in
accordance with the following table:
Height of Building Maximum Height of Facility
above Highest Point of Roof
Required Setback from Edge of
Roof or Building
Up to 15 feet 8 feet
height, including Antenna
1 foot for every foot of
equipment
15-36 feet 10 feet
height, including Antenna
1 foot for every foot of
equipment
More than 36 feet 12 feet, or 20% of building
height, whichever is greater
½ foot for every foot of
equipment height, including
Antenna
9. Personal Wireless Service Facilities Within Host Structures
a. All Facilities shall be concealed, that is, entirely contained within a Host Structure
such that no part of the Facility, including the Antenna, is visible from the
exterior of the structure.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 103
10. Additional Requirements
a. The installation of Towers and Personal Wireless Service Facilities shall avoid the
removal or disruption of historic resources on and off-site.
b. There shall be no illumination of the Towers or Personal Wireless Service Facilities
except as required by state and federal law.
c. The Personal Wireless Service provider shall continuously insure its Tower and/or
Personal Wireless Service Facilities against damages to persons or property in an amount
established by the Board based upon the nature and extent of the proposed Facility. On
an annual basis, the Personal Wireless Service provider shall provide a Certificate of
Insurance, in which the Town shall be specifically listed as an additional insured, to the
Town Building Commissioner.
d. Towers and Personal Wireless Service Facilities shall be installed, erected, maintained
and used in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
e. All Personal Wireless Service providers shall monitor emissions annually and file a
written statement annually with the Town Building Commissioner stating that the Facility
is in compliance with any applicable laws and government regulations including, but not
limited to, those of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation
Administration. If the Facility is not in compliance with said laws and regulations, the
Personal Wireless Service provider shall come into compliance with said laws and
regulations within fifteen (15) days of the date of any such non-compliance or cease all
Personal Wireless Service operations until such time as said Personal Wireless Service
provider comes into full compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. Such
statement shall be filed with the application and thereafter by February 28 of each year.
The data which form the basis of the statement shall be provided to the Town at no cost
to the Town upon the request of the Town Building Commissioner.
f. Towers and/or Personal Wireless Service Facilities must at all times be maintained in
good and safe condition. The Personal Wireless Service provider shall arrange for a
professional structural engineer licensed in Massachusetts to review the Tower and/or
Personal Wireless Service Facilities and any accessory buildings every five (5) years to
certify these structures and Facilities are in sound condition. A report of the engineer’s
findings shall be filed with the Town Building Commissioner at the completion of
construction and by February 28, of the fifth year of operation of the Facility. All costs
for the inspection shall be borne by the Applicant. Should the engineer deem the
structure or Facility not to be sound, the owner of the Facility shall submit to the Town,
within ten (10) business days, a plan to remedy the structural defect(s). Upon approval
of the plan by the Building Commissioner, the remediation plan shall be completed as
soon as is reasonably possible.
g. No Personal Wireless Service Facility shall be installed on or within any single-or
multi-unit dwelling or on or within any accessory structure to a residential use in any
zoning district.
h. All applicable requirements of this Section V-E shall also apply to any Major
Modification of an Existing Facility and/or any Major Modification of an Existing Tower.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 104
i. A Personal Wireless Service Facility shall be permitted only if the Applicant
demonstrates that no other existing or proposed facility can, or can reasonably be
adapted to, provide adequate coverage and service. An Applicant shall provide all
information relative to existing and proposed facilities as may reasonably be requested
by the Board of Appeals.
j. All unused Personal Wireless Service Facilities or parts thereof which have not been
used for two year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner’s expense. The Board
of Appeals may require that the proper dismantling and removal be secured by a bond or
other form of security sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure performance under
this subsection (j).
11. Exemptions
The following types of wireless communications facilities are exempt from this Section
V-E:
a. Amateur radio towers used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio service
license issued by the Federal Communications Commission, provided that
i. the tower is not used or licensed for any commercial purpose.
b. Personal Wireless Facilities Service solely providing safety or emergency services for
any federal, state or municipal department.
V-F Adult Uses
1. Purpose
It is the purpose and intent of this By-Law to regulate adult entertainment businesses
through the Special Permit process. Since the effects of adult uses on the surrounding
community in terms of crime, effects upon children and family life, property values and
quality of life are well documented, it is the intention of this By-Law to assure contentneutral
regulation of these activities for the general health and welfare of the inhabitants
of the Town.
The provisions of this By-Law have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative matter or materials, including
sexually-oriented matter or materials protected by the Constitution of the United States
or of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or of denying rights that individuals may
have to such matter or material. Further, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this By-
Law to legalize the distribution of such matter or material. Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 40A, Section 9A, states that a municipality may limit the extent to which adult
entertainment is allowed in a community but cannot prohibit adult entertainment from its
boundaries.
Definitions
Adult Bookstore or Paraphernalia Store
an establishment and/or business which has, as a substantial or significant part of its
stock in trade, books, magazines, or other devices, objects, tools, or toys which are
distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual activity or their emphasis
depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Live Entertainment Establishment
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 105
an establishment offering performances by men or women engaging in sexual conduct or
display of nudity as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Motion Picture Theater
an establishment used for the purpose of presenting visual material distinguished by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Video Store
an establishment having, as a substantial or significant part of its stock in trade, videos,
movies or other film materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
depicting, describing or relating to sexual excitement and/or conduct as defined in
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 272, Section 31.
Massage Service Establishment
an establishment and/or business providing pressure or friction upon any or all parts of
the external human body independently or in conjunction with mechanical or electrical
apparatus, lotions or creams, and upon which a party receiving such service would be
reasonably expected to provide consideration for such service, exclusive of physicians,
surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists, nurses, barbers, beauticians or
other parties licensed by the Hingham Board of Health under Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 140, Section 51.
Satisfactory Criminal Record Check
evidence that the applicant has not been imprisoned for, or convicted of the following
offenses or similar offenses, however defined, within the past two (2) years if a
misdemeanor or within the past five (5) years if a felony; prostitution or promotion of
prostitution; sale, distribution or display or harmful material to a minor; possession or
distribution of pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
sexual assault; gambling; organized criminal activity; or distribution of a controlled
substance.
Substantial or Significant Part of its Stock in Trade
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the subject establishment’s inventory stock or
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the subject premises’ gross floor area.
3. Submittal and Review Requirements
A Special Permit A2 is required to build or operate any establishment falling within the
scope of the definitions of this Section. As part of any application for said Special Permit,
applicants shall submit, at a minimum, the information required for site plan approval, as
set forth in Section I-I, as it may be amended.
Applicants shall also comply with all of the following conditions.
a. No such use shall be located in any residence district or in any other district except
Industrial Park and Limited Industrial Park Districts but not as part of a retail group in
either of those districts.
b. No such establishment shall be located within 1000 feet of any residence district,
Official and Open Space District, church and/or place of worship, school, playground,
daycare center, or nursery.
c. No such establishment shall be located within 1000 feet of any other such
establishment.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 106
d. The names and addresses of all individuals holding any interest (including but not
limited to all legal and equitable interests, security interests, mortgage, lease, including
the naming of all trustees and beneficiaries of any trusts, LLC’s and/or other device
holding ownership of such establishment) in such establishment shall be listed on the
Special Permit A2 application.
e. The names and addresses of all owners, managers and employees must be provided
as well as evidence of a satisfactory criminal record check of each.
f. An adequate security plan shall be presented for each establishment.
g. Any display or advertising shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section V-B of
this By-Law, provided that no advertisement, display or other promotional material which
contains sexually-explicit graphics or sexually-explicit text is to be visible to the public
from any private or public way or walkway.
h. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing, advertised not more than one time in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, within 30 days of the filing of the Special
Permit application, to make a recommendation to the Board of Appeals relative to
drainage, adequate buffer zones, parking, traffic and safety hazards, and any materially
adverse impact on the surrounding area.
i. No Special Permit shall be issued under this Section for any establishment which is,
in whole or in part, owned or operated by any person who has been convicted of
violating Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 119, Section 63 or Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 272, Section 28.
V-G Bed & Breakfast Establishment
1. Purpose
a. Under the authority conferred by Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40A, as
amended, and every other power and authority thereto pertaining, the Town of Hingham
adopts this By-Law for the regulation of Bed & Breakfast establishments to achieve the
following purposes:
(i) to encourage the utilization of homes in residential and business zoned districts
which because of their size are costly and/or difficult to maintain as private
residences; to provide an economic incentive to maintain and to rehabilitate
older, larger residences.
(ii) to regulate Bed & Breakfast establishments to insure sensitivity and
compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods in residentially zoned
districts through minimizing adverse impacts on neighboring residential uses.
2. Description
A Bed & Breakfast is a Single-Family Dwelling having a mixed use as a home for the
residential owner and as an accessory use for guest lodging. The home is to be the
primary and legal residence of the owner.
3. Submittal and Review Requirements
A Special Permit A2 shall be required to operate a Bed & Breakfast establishment. As a
part of any application for said Special Permit, applicants shall submit, at a minimum, the
information required for Site Plan approval.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 107
4. Minimum Requirements
i. The Bed & Breakfast establishment and operation shall be located within an
existing owner-occupied Single-Family Dwelling containing a minimum of four (4)
bedrooms as of March 10, 1941.
ii. Up to three (3) rooms, but not more than one-half (1/2) of the bedrooms as of
March 10, 1941, may be dedicated to the Bed & Breakfast establishment.
Additionally, not more than forty-five (45%) percent of the entire habitable living
space shall be allocated for Bed & Breakfast establishment purposes, and there
shall be no more than six (6) guests lodging at the establishment at any one
time, and the term of any guest’s residence shall not exceed fourteen days.
iii. The Special Permit authorizing a Bed & Breakfast establishment shall be issued
to the owner of the property only and is not transferable to a subsequent
property owner.
iv. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the operation of the property
and shall be a resident of the property when the Bed & Breakfast establishment
is in operation. The owner shall file an affidavit with the Building Commissioner
and Town Clerk on an annual basis in the month of January, stating that the
property is the principal residence of the owner and that the owner is in
residence at all times that the Bed & Breakfast is being operated. If the affidavit
is not filed, the operation shall cease forthwith, and any Special Permit issued
hereunder shall be considered null and void.
v. The Single-Family Dwelling in which the Bed & Breakfast operation is located
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the building and grounds remain
that of a Single-Family Dwelling.
vi. No cooking facilities, including, but not limited to, stoves, microwave ovens,
toaster ovens, and hot plates, shall be available to guests and no meals, except
continental breakfast, shall be served to guests. Alcohol shall also be prohibited
from being served on the premises to any Bed & Breakfast guest. Additionally,
there shall be at least one (1) bathroom solely dedicated to the guests of the
Bed & Breakfast establishment.
vii. If the property is not to be served by public water, the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals that the proposed use will not have any
detrimental impact on any water supply on-site or off-site.
viii. Any septic system shall have the design capacity to support the proposed
number of rooms available for rent, as said design capacity is defined by the
Hingham Board of Health. Any Certificate of Occupancy shall be signed by the
Hingham Board of Health. New Bed & Breakfast establishments served by an
existing septic system shall not be granted approval for operation until the
Health Department confirms compliance with inspection and/or design
requirements as set forth in 310 CMR 15.301; 302; 303; 352; 414 State
Environmental Code Title V Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal
of Sanitary Sewage and any applicable local Board of Health rules and
regulations.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 108
ix. Exterior lighting shall be so shaded as to prevent illumination off-site. All external
lighting, except for demonstrated security needs, shall be extinguished by 10:00
P.M.
x. No parking shall be located in any required building yard setback. Parking areas
shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a fence or dense
plantings, not less than five (5) feet in height. Furthermore, parking shall be
prohibited in the front yard(s) as defined in the Hingham Zoning By-Law, Section
Vl. All parking for a Bed & Breakfast facility shall be located on the premises.
There shall be provided two (2) parking spaces for the home owner and one (1)
parking space for each room which the Bed & Breakfast establishment has
available for rent to guests.
xi. Applicants for Special Permits under the provisions of this By-Law shall provide
sketches, drawings or plans necessary to illustrate compliance with the
requirements of this By-Law. The Planning Board or Board of Appeals may, at its
discretion, require plans to be prepared by registered land surveyors, architects
or engineers to illustrate the Special Permit application for the benefit of the
Board and other Town officers such as the Building Commissioner and the Health
Officer. Illustration required may include but not be limited to parking and
driveway plan, room layout, sanitary facilities, and kitchen facilities.
xii. Any sign relating to a Bed & Breakfast operation shall comply with the applicable
sign By-Law as set forth in Section V-B. However, all signs for a Bed & Breakfast
operation shall be no greater than 1 1/2 x 1 1/2 feet in size.
xiii. Prior to the renting of any rooms to guests the applicant shall obtain a Certificate
of Occupancy from the Hingham Building Commissioner. The Certificate of
Occupancy shall be renewable every year according to the applicable fee
schedule established by the Board of Selectmen.
V-H Registered Marijuana Dispensaries
1. Purpose
a) To regulate the siting, security, and operation of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries,
subject to the applicable provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 94I and the regulations
promulgated at 105 CMR 725 et. seq., as the same may be amended or replaced
(collectively referred to in this Section V-H as “applicable law”). Terms used in this
Section V-H and not otherwise defined in this By-Law shall have the meaning set forth
under applicable law.
b) To minimize the adverse impacts of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries on adjacent
properties, residential neighborhoods, schools and land uses potentially incompatible with
Registered Marijuana Dispensaries.
2. Definitions
Registered Marijuana Dispensary (“RMD”) (also known as Medical Marijuana
Treatment Center) means the premises at which a medical use marijuana licensee is
permitted under applicable law and this By-Law to possess, cultivate, process, transfer,
transport, sell, distribute, dispense, or administer medical use marijuana to registered
qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Medical Use of Marijuana shall mean the acquisition, cultivation, possession,
processing, including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols,
oils or ointments, transfer, transportation, sale, distribution, dispensing or administration
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 109
of marijuana for the benefit of registered qualifying patients in the treatment of
debilitating medical conditions or the symptoms thereof.
3. Exclusion of Other Marijuana Establishments.
This Section V-H shall govern Registered Marijuana Dispensaries as defined herein and
shall not be interpreted to allow any other establishment, including any marijuana
establishment as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 94G, that acquires, cultivates, possesses,
processes, transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana,
products containing marijuana, or related activities except as, and to the extent,
expressly permitted under this Zoning By-Law and any other bylaws and regulations of
the Town of Hingham.
4. Exclusion of Accessory Uses.
In no event shall the acquisition, cultivation, possession, processing, transference,
transportation, sale, distribution, dispensing, or administration of marijuana, products
containing or derived from marijuana, or related products be considered accessory to any
other use, provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit hardship cultivation to
the extent permitted under, and subject to, the provisions of applicable law.
5. Special Permit Requirements.
a) A special permit for a Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall be limited to the uses
permitted by applicable law and shall not be combined with other uses permitted or
allowed under the Zoning By-law.
b) In addition to the application requirements set forth in this Section V-H, a special
permit application for a Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall include the following:
(i) the name and address of each owner of the RMD;
(ii) copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the applicant by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the RMD;
(iii) trade name, logo and building signage which complies with applicable provisions
of this By-law and applicable law;
(iv) evidence of the Applicant’s right to use the site of the RMD for the RMD, such as
a dead or lease;
(v) if the Applicant is a business organization, a statement under oath disclosing all
of its owners, shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers, or
other similarly situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the
above are entities, rather than persons, the Applicant must disclose the identity
of the owners of such entities until the disclosure contains the names of
individuals; and
(vi) proposed security measures for the Registered Marijuana Dispensaries, including
lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc., to ensure the safety of persons and to
protect the premises from theft.
c) Mandatory Findings. The Board of Appeals shall not issue a special permit for a
Registered Marijuana Dispensary unless it finds that:
(i) the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of this Section
V-H and any other applicable provisions of the Zoning By-law; and
(ii) the RMD demonstrates that it will meet the permitting requirements of all other
applicable state and local authorities related to the use and operation of an RMD;
and
(iii) the RMD is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on
abutters or the surrounding neighborhood.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 110
6. General Requirements and Conditions.
a) In no event shall RMDs be considered to be, or permitted as, a retail, medical office,
clinic, or consumer service establishment use, or any other use otherwise permitted
under this Zoning By-law. RMDs shall not be permitted as part of a retail group or
shopping center in the Industrial Park District. Use variances shall be strictly prohibited.
b) In addition to the dimensional requirements set forth in Section IV-A for the South
Hingham Development Overlay District (or the underlying zoning districts therein), RMDs
(or any part thereof) shall not be located within 500 feet of the boundary of any (i)
Residence zoning district, (ii) school, or (iii) outdoor playground or athletic fields; except
when such uses are separated by Derby Street, Whiting Street or Route 3.
c) The hours of operation shall be set by the Board of Appeals.
d) Special permits shall remain exclusively with the original applicant to whom it is
issued, who shall be the owner or lessee of the land and/or building described in the
application. The Special Permit shall automatically terminate on the date the applicant
transfers or conveys (other than the granting of a mort-gage to an institutional lender)
its title or leasehold interest, as applicable, in the land or the building where the RMD is
located. A special permit may be transferred only with the approval of the Board of
Appeals by major modification to the special permit with all information required in this
Section V-H.
e) All sales or other distribution of products containing marijuana or marijuana-related
products shall occur indoors. Except as permitted by applicable law, no smoking,
burning or consumption of any product containing marijuana or marijuana-related
products shall be permitted on the premises of an RMD.
f) RMDs shall provide the Hingham Police Department, Building Commissioner and the
Board of Appeals with the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses of all
management staff and key holders to whom one can provide notice if there are operating
problems associated with the RMD.
g) As a condition of its special permit, the holder shall (i) prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy, provide to the Board of Appeals a copy of all local permits
required for operation of the RMD, and (ii) file an annual report to the Board of Appeals
no later than January 31st, providing a copy of all current applicable local permits and
state licenses for the RMD and its owners and demonstrating continued compliance with
the conditions of the Special Permit.
h) Any special permit issued under this Section V-H shall lapse if not exercised within one
year of issuance.
i) Immediately upon the earlier of the expiration, surrender or revocation of any state
issued licenses or registration, or the ceasing of operations at the RMD, all plants,
marijuana infused products or other marijuana products of any kind shall be destroyed or
removed from the property.
V-I Common Driveways
1. Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide guidelines for the Planning Board to permit
Common Driveways in order to reduce the number of access points on public or private
streets; to protect wetlands and sensitive natural areas from disturbance; and to
preserve historic streetscapes in the Town, when these driveways meet reasonable
construction and design standards.
2. Applicability and Scope
Common driveways may be allowed by Special Permit A3 issued by the Planning Board.
A Common Driveway provides common vehicular and pedestrian access, extending from
a street, to more than one but not more than three lots. All lots served by the Common
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 111
Driveway shall satisfy the frontage requirements as defined in Section VI and specified in
Section IV-A for the zoning district in which the lots are located. Without limiting the
foregoing, access over the frontage must be actual and not illusory. The Planning Board
may find frontage to be illusory if the frontage would fail to provide acceptable physical
access as contemplated by MGL Chapter 41, Section 81M. Such failure may include, but
is not limited to, the inability of the applicant to obtain an order of conditions under
applicable state or local wetlands regulations for construction of the access, the presence
of distinct physical impediments to threshold access, or extreme lot configurations.
Where the proposed development constitutes a subdivision under the Subdivision Control
Law, this By-law shall not apply.
3. Plan Requirements
A plan shall be prepared and wet stamped with the original signature of a Massachusetts
professional civil engineer (the “Design Engineer”) at a scale of 1”= 20’ or 1” = 40’,
providing sufficient detail to demonstrate conformance to the Construction and Design
Standards detailed below. The plan must clearly depict zoning requirements and
potential driveway locations for all lots. Upon completion of construction, a certified asbuilt
must be submitted.
4. Construction and Design Standards
All Common Driveways shall conform to the following minimum standards:
a) Common Driveways shall provide the following minimum easement widths
and minimum paved surface widths as applicable:
Use Served Minimum
Easement
Width
Minimum
Paved Surface
Width
Residential 24 Feet 20 Feet
Non-residential 40 Feet 24 Feet
Access roads serving individual lots off of Common Driveways shall comply with 527 CMR
1.00, Chapter 18. The Planning Board may require that the Minimum Paved Surface
Width of a Common Driveway serving residential multi-family dwellings, non-residential
lots or any combination thereof be increased based on the type and volume of traffic
projected to be generated by the proposed development, provided that the Minimum
Easement Width must at all times be a least 4’ greater than the Minimum Paved Surface
Width. If no development is proposed with the application for the Common Driveway,
the minimum non-residential standard shall be required. There shall also be provided a
12” cape cod berm on each side of the Common Driveway serving non-residential uses.
b) Common Driveways shall not exceed 400’ in length in residence zoning districts and
800’ in all other zoning districts, measured from the street line to the end of the shared
portion of the Common Driveway. Where a Common Driveway exceeds 150’ in length,
turnarounds for emergency vehicles shall be provided in locations approved by the Fire
Department. There must be adequate directional signage provided identifying the
addresses served by the Common Driveway for emergency vehicle response, as well as
routine traffic.
c) No Common Driveway shall be allowed to be constructed off any cul-de-sac or dead
end of a public or private way. No Common Driveway shall be connected or attached to
any other Common Driveway. No Common Driveway shall be extended without prior
approval of the Planning Board pursuant to this Section V-I.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 112
d) Sight distances at the entrance of a Common Driveway along the intersecting street
shall conform to current American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) standards and be indicated on the plan.
e) To provide better traffic safety and reduce the visual impacts of traffic on abutting
properties, the Planning Board may require Common Driveways to be set back a
minimum of 15’ from lot lines and/or be screened with a buffer of trees and/or shrubs.
f) Common Driveways shall be constructed using a minimum 12” thick sorted gravel
sub-base. The base course shall be a minimum of 2” binder and the top course for
paved driveways shall each be a minimum 1 ½” thickness. Surfacing with gravel,
crushed stone, or another permeable or semi-permeable surface may be proposed,
especially for use within one hundred feet of a wetland or in other sensitive areas.
g) Runoff draining onto abutting properties shall not exceed that which existed prior to
construction of the Common Driveway, or be concentrated at any one point of discharge.
Runoff shall not discharge into the public way. The Design Engineer shall provide a
drainage statement and sufficient analysis to support the proposed storm water drainage
system, including pre and post construction flows.
h) Common Driveway easements may allow space for installation of water lines and
other utilities as needed. Utilities shall be shown on the Common Driveway Plan. The
Planning Board may require that utilities be installed underground.
i) No portion of a Common Driveway or turning area shall be located above major
components of a septic system, including septic tanks, leaching fields, and distribution
boxes, except where approved by the Board of Health, and only upon a finding by the
Planning Board that there will be no negative impact on access for the lots served by the
Common Driveway during future maintenance or replacement of these components.
5. Common Driveway Easement and Agreement
Proposed documents shall be submitted to the Planning Board with an application for a
Common Driveway Special Permit A3 demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Board
through easements, restrictive covenants, or other appropriate recordable instruments
that the maintenance, repair, snow removal, and liability for the Common Driveway shall
remain perpetually the responsibility of one or more of the record owners of the lots
served by the Common Driveway, or their successors-in-interest. Easement areas shall
be shown on the Common Driveway Plan. Approved legal documents shall be recorded
prior to a) issuance of a building permit for any building to be served by the Common
Driveway or b) construction of or improvements to the Common Driveway, whichever
occurs first.
V-J Regulation of the Sale and Consumption of Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed
Repealed in its entirety – Town Meeting 2018
V-K Accessory Dwelling Units
1. Purpose
Consistent with the Master Plan Goals adopted March 20, 2017, the purpose of
permitting accessory dwelling units in single-family dwellings is to:
a) Provide accessory dwelling units without adding to the number of buildings in the
Town or substantially altering the appearance of the dwelling and for the purpose of
enabling owners of single-family dwellings to share space and the burdens of
homeownership with family members (as defined in this Section V-K) while also
protecting the stability, property values and residential character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 113
b) Provide housing units for family members with diverse housing needs including,
without limitation, family members with mental and physical disabilities.
c) Enable the Town to monitor accessary dwelling unit construction for code
compliance.
2. Definitions
a) An “accessory dwelling unit” is a second self-contained dwelling unit within a singlefamily
dwelling, which second dwelling unit is subordinate in size to the principal
dwelling and otherwise complies with the provisions of this Section V-K.
b) For the purposes of this Section V-K, a “family member” shall be a person related to
the owner by blood, adoption or marriage, and may also include domestic help and
caregivers.
c) A “principal dwelling” for the purposes of this Section V-K is a single-family dwelling
exclusive of the area that constitutes the accessory dwelling unit.
d) A single-family dwelling with an accessory dwelling unit shall not be deemed to be a
two-family dwelling.
3. Eligibility Requirements
The Board of Appeals may only issue a Special Permit A1 for an accessory dwelling unit
that meets the following minimum eligibility requirements:
a) As of the date that the application for a special permit is filed with the Board of
Appeals, the total number of accessory dwelling units in the Town shall not exceed
two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the total single-family dwelling units in the Town
(the “ADU Cap”). The ADU Cap shall be determined by a fraction represented as
follows: the numerator shall be the total number of accessory dwelling units allowed
by special permit pursuant to this Section V-K plus the number of accessory dwelling
unit permit applications pending approval before the Board of Appeals and the
denominator shall be the total number of single-family dwelling units existing in the
Town as classified in the Hingham assessors’ records.
b) The applicant shall, at the time application is made for the special permit, be the
owner of the lot and single-family dwelling thereon in which the accessory dwelling
unit is proposed and must certify in such application that (i) the owner currently
occupies the single-family dwelling or will occupy the principal dwelling or accessory
dwelling unit as his or her primary residence immediately upon issuance of the
special permit and (ii) that the other unit shall be occupied by a family member.
c) The area of the lot on which the existing single-family dwelling is located shall not be
less than five thousand (5,000) square feet or, in the case of new construction, shall
comply with the applicable minimum lot size for the single-family zoning district in
which the single-family dwelling is proposed.
d) The application must be accompanied by written confirmation from either (i) the
Board of Health that the requirements of the Massachusetts Title 5 septic system
regulations and the Hingham Board of Health Supplemental Rules and Regulations
for septic systems have been or can be met or (ii) the Sewer Department that there
exists available capacity in the applicable sewer district, in either case, to support the
total number of bedrooms proposed for the lot inclusive of the accessory dwelling
unit.
e) Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted within a single-family dwelling
and per lot so that the total number of dwelling units per lot shall not exceed two.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 114
f) In Residence District D and in Business Districts A and B accessory dwelling units are
only permitted in preexisting nonconforming single-family dwellings.
4. Dimensional and Design Requirements
The Board of Appeals may only issue a Special Permit A1 for an accessory dwelling unit
that meets the following dimensional and design requirements:
a) The architectural character of a detached single-family dwelling shall be maintained.
b) All stairways accessing an accessory dwelling unit above the ground floor of a singlefamily
dwelling shall be enclosed within the exterior walls of the single-family
dwelling.
c) The maximum area of an accessory dwelling unit shall be the lesser of 750 square
feet or 30% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling. For this calculation, the
gross floor area shall be as defined in Section VI of this By-Law.
d) An accessory dwelling unit shall not be created by any extension of a non-conforming
building dimension, including the front, side or rear yard setback.
e) Any new entrance for the accessory dwelling unit or principal dwelling shall be
located to the side or rear of the single-family dwelling.
f) Water and sewer utilities serving the accessory dwelling unit shall not be metered
separately from the principal dwelling.
g) Additional or modified landscaping, fences or other buffers may be required to
protect abutting properties from potential negative visual or auditory impacts of the
accessory dwelling unit.
h) The parking requirement for an accessory dwelling unit is one space per bedroom in
addition to the minimum required parking spaces for a single-family dwelling.
i) An accessory dwelling unit may not have more than two (2) bedrooms.
5. General Conditions
Any special permit issued pursuant to this Section V-K shall be subject to, and shall
incorporate the following conditions:
a) The owner of the single-family dwelling shall occupy either the principal dwelling or
the accessory dwelling unit as the owner’s primary residence. Temporary absences
of the owner for a period of not more than nine months in the aggregate in any
twelve month period and active military service of the owner for any length of time
shall not be deemed a violation of this requirement provided that the dwelling units
may only be occupied by family members of the owner during the owner’s absence.
b) The owner shall recertify annually, by submission of a notarized letter to the Building
Commissioner, that the owner will continue to occupy either the primary dwelling or
the accessory dwelling unit as the owner’s primary residence, except for a bona fide
temporary absence as provided above in subsection 5.a.
c) Upon the sale or other conveyance or transfer of a single-family dwelling which has
been issued a permit for an accessory dwelling unit, if the new owner wishes to
maintain the special permit for the accessory dwelling unit use, such new owner
must, within thirty (30) days of such transfer, submit a notarized letter to the
Building Commissioner certifying that the new owner will occupy one of the dwelling
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 115
units as the new owner’s primary residence and comply with the other conditions of
the accessory dwelling unit use.
d) Neither the principal dwelling nor the accessory dwelling unit may be sold or
otherwise conveyed or transferred separately from the other.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 116
SECTION VI
Definitions
In this By-Law, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless a contrary meaning is required
by the context, or as specifically prescribed, as in Sections III-D, IV-D and V-B of the By-Law.
Accessory Buildings
A building customarily incidental to and located on the same lot with a principal building or on an
adjoining lot under the same ownership.
Agricultural Uses
Commercial agriculture, horticultural and such other uses defined in and/or governed by the first
paragraph of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
Alteration of Drainage Patterns
Any activity on an area of land that changes the water quality, force, direction, timing or location of
runoff flowing from the area. Such changes include: change from distributed runoff to confined,
discrete discharge; change in the volume of runoff from the area; change in the peak rate of runoff
from the area; and change in the recharge to groundwater in the area.
Apartment House
A structure utilized wholly for residential dwelling units (and permitted uses accessory thereto) and
containing three or more dwelling units.
Automotive Filling Station
A building or premises primarily used for retail sale of automotive fuels and lubricants and
automotive accessories, and which may include facilities of secondary importance for servicing,
lubricating, polishing and inspecting motor vehicles, but not painting thereof by any means.
Basement
That portion of a Building which is partly or completely below Finished Grade. See also definition of
Story (above grade).
Body Art
The practice of physical body adornment by permitted establishments and practitioners using, but
not limited to, the following techniques: Body Piercing, Tattooing and Cosmetic Tattooing, as
defined by the Board of Health. This definition does not include practices that are considered
medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine of the Commonwealth, such as
implants under the skin.
Body Art Establishment
A specified place or premise that has been granted a Permit by the Board of Health, whether public
or private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for profit.
Building
An independent structure having a roof supported by columns or walls resting on its own foundation
and designed for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any
kind.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 117
Business Office or Agency
Administrative, executive, research, servicing, processing or similar businesses or organizations
having only limited face-to-face contact with the general public. See also, Professional Office or
Agency.
Clinic
A facility providing medical, dental, surgical, psychiatric, therapeutic, diagnostic or other health care
service with no overnight patient facilities.
Commercial/Residential Building
A building containing commercial uses on the first floor at ground level and a dwelling unit or
dwelling unit(s) above the first floor. A Commercial/Residential Building may also contain
commercial uses above the first floor, but in no event shall residential uses be permitted on the first
floor, at ground level, or below ground level.
Commercial Service Establishment
An establishment primarily engaged in providing services on-site, including walk-in services, directly
to individual or businesses, such as printing, copying, shipping, but excluding Business Offices. See
also, Service Business.
Congregate Living Facility
A facility providing private or communal lodging for elderly persons, including those requiring
limited medical attention or supervision and who ordinarily are ambulatory. In addition to bed
space, such facilities may include semi-private or private food preparation facilities, semi-private
or private living rooms, common dining facilities, and common, semi-private or private bath and
toilet facilities.
Consumer Service Establishment
An establishment primarily engaged in providing personal services directly to consumers on-site,
such as hair or nail salons, drop-off/pick-up dry cleaner, tailor, shoe repair, animal grooming
and educational services such as tutoring, but excluding medical or dental professional offices
and health clubs. See also, Service Business.
Craft Establishment
Any business establishment that produces on the premises non-edible articles for sale on the
premises of artistic quality or effect or handmade workmanship directly to the public, including
handmade articles for production by the public on-site. Examples include weaving, pottery,
painting, sculpting, candle-making, and associated activities. Craft Establishment shall be
considered a “Retail Business” for the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements.
Dwelling
A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family
dwelling, two-family dwelling, and multi-unit dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding
houses, tourist home or bed and breakfast establishments, or trailers, or structures solely for use of
transient or overnight occupants.
Dwelling Unit
One or more rooms providing complete living facilities for one household, including rooms and
facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Elderly Person(s)
One person who is 62 years of age or over, or two persons, sharing a dwelling unit, the elder of
whom is 62 years of age or over.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 118
Erosion
The wearing away of the land surface by natural or artificial forces such as wind, water, ice, gravity
or vehicle traffic and the subsequent detachment and transportation of soil particles.
Family
One or more persons of recognized family relationship maintaining a common household, including
domestic help.
Farmers’ Market
An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in a structure where groups of individual
sellers offer for sale to the public from booths located on-site “agricultural products” (fresh produce,
seasonal fruits, and fresh flowers), freshly caught seafood (“seafood”), “freshly prepared foods”
packaged for sale, “arts and crafts items”, and beverages. To classify as a Farmers’ Market, the
following must apply:
a. Agricultural products, seafood and freshly prepared foods must be grown, caught or prepared
directly by the vendor or acquired by the vendor directly from an identified local producer.
Freshly prepared foods (for example, baked goods, jams, dressings, salsa) must be locally
produced and packaged.
b. The majority of the vendors in the Market shall not be vendors of arts and crafts items. Any
arts and crafts items must be created by the vendor offering such items for sale at the Market.
Fast Food/Take-Out Restaurant
An establishment offering prepared foods and beverages on a self-serve basis or ordered at a
counter, to be consumed on or off the premises.
Floor Area Ratio
The total gross floor area of all buildings on one lot divided by the total area of the lot.
Frontage
The distance between adjacent intersections of lot and street sidelines measured in a continuous
line along the street sideline over which vehicular and pedestrian access to the lot must be
attainable.
Garden Apartment
A building designed to accommodate more than two dwelling units, with each entrance serving not
more than four dwelling units, each of which extends through the building from front to rear.
General Business Office – See “Business Office or Agency”.
Grade, Finished
The topography of a site at the completion of construction.
Grade Plane
A reference plane representing the average of Finished Grade intersecting the Building at all exterior
walls. Where the Finished Grade slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane for such
side of the Building shall be established by using, instead of the measurement at the Building, the
average of the lowest points within the area between the Building and the lot line or, where the lot
line is more than 10 feet from the Building, between the Building and a point 10 feet from the
Building.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 119
Grade, Pre-Construction
The existing topography of a site prior to any disturbance for new construction. This must be
certified by a registered professional civil engineer or land surveyor.
Gross Floor Area
The sum of the horizontal surfaces of all floors of a building measured from the interior faces of
exterior walls or from the centerlines of party walls, including all porches or balconies. Areas used
for accessory garage purposes and areas used exclusively for heating, cooling, mechanical and
electrical equipment necessary to the operation of the building may be excluded from GFA.
Ground Floor
Within the Downtown Hingham Overlay District, the floor of a Building that exits directly at street
level. For any Building having more than one floor that exits directly at street level each such floor
shall constitute a “ground floor”.
Half-Story (1/2 Story)
A floor level situated wholly or partly under a sloping roof, suitable for any use permitted in the
Zoning District, in which the ceiling area (in plan projection) at a height of at least 7’-3” above the
finish floor is not more than ½ the area of the floor level next below.
Health Club
An establishment that provides members and non-members with equipment, space, and/or
facilities for the purpose of physical exercise as a primary or secondary use.
Height, Building
The vertical distance from Grade Plane to the height of the highest roof surface, peak or parapet.
See also section IV-C, 8 for general height exceptions.
Home Occupation
An accessory use involving the production of goods or services, the giving of lessons for
compensation, or the performance of custom work of a domestic nature conducted from a dwelling
by a resident thereof and which does not change the dwelling’s residential character.
House Trailer or Mobile Home
A vehicle, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle, which is used for sleeping or living purposes,
whether standing on wheels or rigid supports.
Land Disturbance
Any action that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel
or similar earth material. Land disturbance activities include demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, excavation, grading, filling, or creation of impervious surface.
Light Industry
Activity concerned with the manufacturing, storage, processing, fabrication, packaging and
assembly of products developed from previously refined or similarly processed raw materials,
provided, however, that no activity may be considered light industry if such activity:
1. results in the production of low level or high level radioactive waste;
2. results in ambient noise levels exceeding the standards set forth in Section V, Special
Regulations, V-D, Noise, of this By-Law;
3. causes ground transmitted vibrations which exceed the following levels identified by the
International Organization of Standards (ISO) 2631 draft addendum ISO DAD Roman Numeral I
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 120
(1980) Guide to the Evaluation of Human Exposure to Vibration and Shock in Buildings when
measured at a residential building by a three component measuring system capable of
measurement of vibration in three mutually perpendicular directions:
ISO Standard
Daytime and Evening Residential
(7:00 A.M. - 9:00 P.M.) Daytime
Nighttime Residential
(9:00 P.M. - 7:00 A.M.) Nighttime
4. or produces any other measurable air, water or soil pollution not in conformance with the Rules
and Regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts for the control of pollution.
Lot
A single area of land in one ownership defined by metes and bounds or boundary lines in a
recorded deed or in a recorded plan.
Lot Area
The total land area of a lot expressed in terms of square feet or acres. When the distance between
any two (2) points on lot lines is less than fifty (50) feet, measured in a straight line, the smaller
portion of the lot which is bounded by such line and lot lines shall only be considered in computing
minimum lot area if the distance along such lot lines between such two points is less than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet.
Lot Line, Front
The property line dividing a lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of a lot bounded by more
than one street, the front lot line of greatest length shall be known as the primary front lot line.
When a lot has front lot lines of equal length, the owner shall designate a single front lot line as
the primary front lot line on the applicable plan and/or application.
Lot Line, Rear
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 121
The property line most nearly opposite and furthest from the front lot line or primary front lot line
in the case of lots bounded by more than one street. In some cases, there may be no rear lot line.
Lot Line, Side
Any property line not a front or rear lot line.
Lot Width
The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured parallel to the lot frontage.
Mean High Water Line
a. For tidelands, the present mean high tide line as established by the arithmetic mean of the
water heights observed at high tide over a specific 19-year Metonic Cycle (the National Tidal
Datum Epoch) as determined using hydrographic survey data of the National Ocean Survey of
the U.S. Department of Commerce; and
b. For great ponds, rivers and streams, the present arithmetic mean of high water heights
observed over a one-year period using the best available data as determined by the Planning or
Appeals Boards.
Media Broadcasting or Production Studio
An establishment which engages in production or broadcast of content for television, cable,
internet, or other media.
Medical or Dental Office
An office used exclusively by physicians, dentists, and similar healthcare professionals for the
treatment and examination of patients and clients on an outpatient basis.
Multi-Unit Dwelling
A building intended and designed to contain three or more dwelling units.
Nonconforming Structure
A structure not in conformance with one or more provisions of this By-Law which was lawfully in
existence or was lawfully begun before the first publication of notice of the public hearing
concerning amendment of a zoning provision that would render the structure not in compliance, but
not including a nonconforming structure resulting from a variance or other relief granted by the
Board of Appeals.
Nonconforming Use
A use of a building, structure or land not in conformance with one or more provisions of this By-Law
which was lawfully in existence or was lawfully begun before the first publication of notice of the
public hearing concerning amendment of a zoning provision that would render the use not in
compliance, but not including a nonconforming use resulting from a variance or other relief granted
by the Board of Appeals.
Outdoor Concession
The sale of non-alcoholic beverages and snack foods from a counter accessible from the outside of
a building or from a temporary outdoor location, providing no indoor seating and operating only
during the hours that athletic activities are occurring at the site.
Premises
A lot together with all structures, buildings, and uses thereon.
Private Passenger Vehicle
A motor vehicle used by an individual or family for personal transportation.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 122
Professional Office or Agency
The office of a member of a recognized profession, including but not limited to accountants,
architects, doctors and physicians, dentist, engineers, real estate or insurance brokers and lawyers,
but excluding businesses defined under Business Office or Agency, Consumer Service Establishment
and Professional Studio.
Professional Studio
The studio of an artist, a musician or a photographer, provided such studio may also constitute a
Craft Establishment or a Consumer Service Establishment if the primary use of such space meets
the definition of such an establishment.
Recorded or Of Record
Recorded or registered in the Plymouth County Registry of Deeds or a record title to a parcel of land
disclosed by any or all pertinent records.
Roof Deck
An uncovered flat surface on the roof of a structure for use for outdoor passive recreation.
Uncovered shall mean that no covering structures of any kind, including a roof trellis, shall be
permitted.
Service Business
For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements the following shall each be
considered a Service Business: Commercial Service Establishment, Consumer Service
Establishment, and Craft Establishment.
Shopping Center
A group of three or more retail and other commercial establishments that are planned and managed
as a single property.
Shoreline
The water side face of waterfront retaining walls.
Single-Family Dwelling
A free standing dwelling, excluding house trailers and mobile homes, intended and designed to be
occupied by a single dwelling unit. For all purposes in the By-law, including the provisions set forth
in Section III-I, single-family dwellings shall include attached garages, or other fully enclosed,
attached structures, whether heated or unheated, connected to the primary structure.
Sit-Down Restaurant
An establishment offering prepared foods and beverages to be primarily ordered, served and
consumed at tables on the premises. Does not permit drive-thru service.
Sit-Down Restaurant Service Rate
An anticipated peak service capacity of not more than 40 persons per hour, per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
Slope
Amount of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, measured as a numerical ratio, as a percent,
or in degrees. Expressed as a ratio, the first number is the horizontal distance (run) and the second
number is the vertical distance (rise), as 2:1. A 2:1 slope is a 50 percent slope.
Street
1. A public way or way which the Clerk of the Town certifies is maintained and used as a
public way; or
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 123
2. A way shown on a plan approved or endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law;
or
3. A way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Hingham
having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the
land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve
such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
Story (above grade)
That portion of a Building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of
the floor or roof next above having its finished floor surface entirely above Finished Grade, except
that a Basement shall be considered as a Story (above grade) where the finished surface of the
floor above the Basement is:
1. more than five feet above the highest elevation of Pre-Construction Grade where it intersects
the building perimeter wall at any point; or
2. more than six feet above Grade Plane; or
3. more than six feet above the Finished Grade where it intersects the perimeter wall for more
than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
4. more than 12 feet above the Finished Grade where it intersects the perimeter wall at any point.
See also definitions of Half Story (1/2 Story) and Basement.
Structure
Anything constructed or erected at a fixed location on the ground to give support, provide shelter,
or satisfy other purposes, but excluding a fence or wall six (6) feet or less in height, a sign, a
flagpole, and a public utility pole. In residential districts, “structure” shall further exclude one
detached accessory building per lot, provided that said accessory building does not exceed sixtyfour
(64) square feet in ground coverage and nine (9) feet in height, and further provided that said
accessory building is located to the rear of the dwelling and no closer than five (5) feet from the
side or rear lot line. In residential districts, and for any lot that abuts a residential district,
“structure” shall include, without limitation, mechanized or motorized equipment that is placed or
installed at a fixed location on the ground, or at a fixed location on a pad, platform or foundation
that itself is on or in the ground, which equipment is used to ventilate, heat or cool a building or
structure, or to heat or filter water, unless such equipment is fully enclosed in an accessory building
that is permitted under this By-Law.
Town House
A dwelling unit, attached by party walls on one or both sides to one or two other dwelling units,
which has its own ground level entrance and front and rear yards.
Two-Family Dwelling
A dwelling intended and designed to be occupied as two separate dwelling units. For all purposes
in the By-law, including the provisions set forth in Section III-H, two-family dwellings shall include
attached garages, or other fully enclosed, attached structures, whether heated or unheated,
connected to the primary structure.
Wireless Communications Tower
A structure including antennas and other similar wireless communications devices designed to
facilitate the following types of services: cellular telephone service, personal communications
service, and extended specialized mobile radio service.
Yard: Front, Side, Rear
An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building or structure. The drawing that
follows illustrates the positions of the front, side and rear yards.
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 124
Chimney
Ridge Ridge Ridge
40
39
38
37
36 1/2 Story
35 (Shown @ 7.25' Clear)
34
33
32
31 Structure
30
29
28
27 2nd Story
26 (Shown @ 8' clear)
25 40' MAXIMUM
24 35' MAXIMUM Above
23 Above Grade Plane Finished Grade
22 Structure (Shown @ 35') At Any Point
21 (Shown @ 39')
20
19
18
17 1st Story
16 (Shown @ 10' clear)
15
14
13
12
11 Structure
10
9 Basement = Story if > 6'
8 Pre-Construction Grade Above Grade Plane
7 (Shown @ 6') Basement = Story if > 12' Above
6 Finished Grade At Any Point
5 Basement (Shown @ 10')
4 (Shown @ 10' clear)
3 Grade Plane
2
1
Footing
3/15/2005
Finished Grade
Pre-Construction Grade
Annex "A", Building Height Diagram
5' MAXIMUM Above Heighest Point of
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
ELDRIDGECT
LAURELST
CHESTNUT ST
ASHST
CHUCHILL RD
STATIONST
BANKAVE
OREGON CT
BISHOPS
LN
QUINCYAVE
HILLSIDETERRACE
ALDEN RD
WESTONRD
BARE COVE DR
ADAMSCT
LEAVITTST
SPRING LN
MELODY LN
HIGH ST
JOY LN
VILLAGELN
LINCOLN ST
CLIFFORD CT
BROAD COVE RD
DOWNERAVE
SUMMERST
HOWLANDLN
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAINST
MAIN ST
WATER ST
OTIS ST
LINSCOTT RD
SUMMERST
UNION ST
UNION ST
CROSS ST
NORTH ST
RICHARD RD
MANATEERD
FRIEND ST
ANDERSON RD
PAUL REVERE RD
GARDNER ST
GARDNER ST
GARDNER
ST
OAKST
SOUTH ST
SOUTH ST
SCOTLAND ST
STATE HWY 3
WOODLOCKRD
STATE HWY 3
GEORGE WASHINGTON BLVD
WH
ITINGLN
HEMLOCKRD
PILGRIM
RD
BURR RD
JARVIS AVE
EAST ST
EAST ST
EAST ST
CUSHING AVE
PASSAGE WAY
WOMPATUCK RD
ABINGTON ST
P RESIDENTS RD
BULOWR D
HOBART ST
HOBART ST
GLACIER LN
STUDLEY RD
MALCOLMST
OLDDERBYST
PLEASANTST
BEAL ST
BEALST
NORTHST
COMMON ST
HIGH ST
HIGHST
GREEN ST
NEWBRIDGEST
NEWBRIDGEST
OAK ST
CHESTNUT RD
FORTHILL ST
FORT HILL ST
MILL ST
OAK RD
BEALS COVE RD
WEST ST
WILDERRD
SMITH WAY
MIDDLE ST
GOLFVIEW DR
CENTRALST
CENTRAL ST
BATH ST
HOWEST
GOVERNORLONGRD
LYNDON RD
QUEENANNE
LN
IVYWAY
PARKVIEW PL
BRADFORDRD
HOPE RD
WHITON AVE
WEIRST
SUMNER ST
FOUNDARY FALLS
PLANTERSFIELDLN
MALLARD RN
NOKOMIS RD
PALMERS LN
BUTLER RD
DENNIS RD
POLK RD
ELMST
PAIGEST
FRESH RIVER AVE
WHITING ST
WHITING ST
WHITING ST
MANN ST
CANTERBURY ST
HERITAGE RD
FOXRUNWAY
HANCOCK RD
VICKI LN
TAURASI RD
PATRIOTS WAY
THAYERST
FOREST LN
ROCKY RUN
SANBORN RD
LEAVITT ST
LEAVITT ST
WILLOW CIR
WINDSONGWAY
HIGHVIEW DR
HICKEY RD
WOODBINE LN
MARTINS LN
HOWARD RD
BURDITT AVE
LINCOLN ST
COLLINS RD
SPRUCEST
GARDNER TERR
KILMER RD
SUMMER ST
OLDHOBART ST
RITTER RD
COLERD
CAPE COD LN
RICE RD
CONCORD CIR
HULLST
CATHA LN
KNOLL RD
WILLIAMS ST
SUNSET LN
SYCAMORELN
U S BATES RD
FEEST
OCEANVIEW DR
BEACH RD
SCHOOLST
ROSEWOOD DR
ROBIN LN
HEATHER LN
POWERS LN
CHERRYST
VIKINGLN
LEONARD ST
HOWE ST
JONES ST
HOLLYST
MAPLEST
CLARK RD
PAOLARD
DOWNERAVE
FLINTLOCKCIR
HERSEY ST
DELPRETE DR
FEARING RD
BLUESKYDR
SAYLESRD
DEVON TER
EAST STREET
LECLAIR DR
ROCKLANDST
LIBERTY
POLERD
SHERMANWAY
COMMERCE RD
JULIANWAY
NICHOLSRD
MERRILLST
BLACKROCKDR
WINTERST
ABERDEEN RD
TURKEY
HILLLN
MERRYMOUNT RD
SQUIRREL HILLLN
CONDITO RD
ALEXANDRAWY
ROCKWOOD RD
ELIZABETH LN
HIGHFIELD RD
WINDSORDR
DWIGGINSPATH
TOWERBROOKRD
GREATROCKRD
RECREATIONPARKDR
MARSHALL R D
OAKCRESTRD
SUMMERST
PINE
ST
CHARLES ST
CHARLES ST
CRAIGLN
HARVARD DR
PHEASANT RUN
KEITH WAY
BEL AIR DR
THOMPSON AVE
HOOVER RD
HERSEY ST
RESEARCH RD
LIBERTY RD
KIMBALL BEACHRD
PONDPARKRD
BUCKETMILLLN
TALBOT
RD
SHARP ST
CEDAR ST
TUPELODR
HMSFITZROY DR
MILL LN
SOPLEASANTST
JAMESHILLLN
SIMMONS RD
SUMMITDR
LINCOLN ST
LINCOLN ST
CUSHING ST CUSHING ST
CUSHING ST
OLMSTED DR
GARRISONRD
BACKRIVERROAD
WOODBRIDGERD
SAWMILLPONDRD
LONGMEADOW RD
MYERS FARMRD
MICHAEL RD
ELAINERD
FREEST
FULLING MILL LN
BRADLE YHILL RD
SENTINELRD
BOULDER GLENRD
COLONIAL RD
PETER HOBARTDR
BLACK ROCK
DR
STEAMBOATLN
CROOKED MEADOW LN
IRVINGST
HARBORVIEWDR
SIDE HILLRD
HMSHALSTED
DR
SMITH RD
HARVEST
LN
HULL ST
WINFIELDRD
LAZELL ST
LAZELL ST
ACCORD PONDDR
CANTERBURYST
SHIPYARDDR
BLACK
ROCK
DR
WARD ST
WARD ST
EASTGATE LN
ROC FALL RD
RIDG EWOODCROSSING
MARK LN
PARK VIEWDR
FOLEY BEACH RD
SHIP ST
MARSHST
BEL AIRRD
FRENCHST
MARTINS LN
MAIN ST
OTISHILLRD
FAIRVIEW ST
HUNTLEY RD
TRIPHAMMER RD
WHITCOMBAVE
COLONIALRD
HERSEYST
STAGECOACH RD
HOLLY HOCK LN
AUTUMNCIR
OLDCOUNTYRD
CAMELOTDR
RHODES CIR
ISAAC
SPRAGUEDR
THISTLEPATCHWAY
PARTRIDGE DR
SEAL COVE RD
INDIANROCK LN
PARK CIR
RINGBOLTRD
ALICEWALK
STODDARDRD
CROWESLN
FRANKLINRODGERSRD
SPRINGST
BREWSTER RD
INDUSTRIALPARKRD
ELMORERD
TUCKERS LN
AMBERRD
VOLUNTEER RD
MASTHILLRD
BRADLEY PARKDR
TOWER
RD
BERKLEYCIR
GILFORDRD
HILLTOP RD
STONEGATELN
BEALSCOVERD
THAXTERST
MINUTEMAN RD
DOWNINGST
NEW
TOWNEDR
USS AMESBURYDR
MARYKNOLLDR
WIN THROP RD
ARNOLDRD
FISHERRD
OLD DERBYST
HAZELWOODDR
INDEPENDENCE
LN
HMS ESSINGTONDR
PORTERSCOVERD
BAKERHILLDR
POPESLN
WANDERS DR
WANDERSDR
FOTTLER RD
FLORET
CIR
HULLSTREET
KILBY ST
PIONEERRD
GOLFVIEW DR
SURRY RD
TURKEYHILLLN
DERBY ST
HAYES RD
MANOR DR
MAYFLOWER RD
COUNTRYDR
BAY VIEWAVE
VOLUSIARD
UPLAND DR
TILLINGHASTDR
RIDGEHILLRD
PLEASANTST
KENTSLN
STEVENS WAY
OTISST
EVER GREENLN
PINEGROVE RD
TOWERRD
NOKOMISRD
PROSPECT ST
PROSPECT ST
ANDREWISLE RD
CARLETONRD
STANFORDDR
SOPLEASANTST
HOCKLEY DR
ROCKLAND ST
ROCKLAND ST
HMSSTAYNERDR
CHAMBERLAIN RUN
FARMHILLSLN
PINECREST RD
GRENADIERRD
BLAISDELL RD
Hingham Massachusetts Zoning Parts A and C
0 0.5 1 2 3 4 µ
Miles
The Town of Hingham makes no warranty or guarantee of the accuracy of the maps nor assumes responsibility for any errors or inaccuracies in these maps. The Town also takes noresponsibility for any
decision(s) made or action(s) taken as a result of reliance on these maps. The use of these maps is at the users' own risk.
Data from the Office of Geographic Information (MassGIS), Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
MassIT and the Town of Hingham.
April 2019
WEYMOUTH
ROCKLAND
NORWELL
SCITUATE
COHASSET
HULL
Legend
Zoning Districts
BUSINESS A
BUSINESS B
BUSINESS RECREATION
INDUSTRIAL
INDUSTRIAL PARK
LIMITED INDUSTRIAL PARK
OFFICE PARK
OFFICIAL AND OPEN SPACE
RESIDENCE A
RESIDENCE B
RESIDENCE C
RESIDENCE D
RESIDENCE E
WATERFRONT BUSINESS
WATERFRONT RECREATION
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
HINGHAM HARBOR OVERLAY
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES OVERLAY
SOUTH HINGHAM DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY
DOWNTOWN HINGHAM OVERLAY
ACCORD POND WATERSHED AND HINGHAM
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
MAIN ST
WATER ST
OTIS ST
SUMMER ST
NORTH ST
SOUTH ST
NORTH ST
GREEN ST
MILL ST
CENTRAL ST
SUMMER ST
COLE RD
ELDRIDGECT
FEARING RD
STEAMBOAT LN
ANDREWISLERD
SHIP ST
STATIONST
BANKAVE
Hingham Harbor
Weymouth
Back River
Downtown Inset
AQUIFER PROTECTION
See Inset
ELDRIDGECT
LAURELST
CHESTNUT ST
ASHST
CHUCHILL RD
STATIONST
BANKAVE
OREGON CT
BISHOPS
LN
QUINCYAVE
HILLSIDETERRACE
ALDEN RD
WESTONRD
BARE COVE DR
ADAMSCT
LEAVITTST
SPRING LN
MELODY LN
HIGH ST
JOY LN
VILLAGELN
LINCOLN ST
CLIFFORD CT
BROADCOVERD
DOWNERAVE
SUMMERST
HOWLANDLN
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAIN ST
MAINST
MAIN
ST
MAIN ST
WATER ST
OTIS ST
LINSCOTTRD
SUMMERST
UNION ST
UNION ST
CROSS ST
NORTH ST
RICHARD RD
MANATEE RD
FRIEND ST
ANDERSON RD
PAUL REVERE RD
GARDNER ST
GARDNER ST
GARDNER
ST
OAKST
SOUTH ST
SOUTH ST
SCOTLAND ST
STATE HWY 3
WOODLOCK RD
STATE HWY 3
GEORGE WASHINGTON BLVD
WHITINGLN
HEMLOCKRD
PILGRIMRD
BURR RD
JARVIS AVE
EAST ST
EAST ST
EAST ST
CUSHING AVE
PASSAGE WAY
WOMPATUCK RD
ABINGTON ST
PRESIDENTS RD
BULOWRD
HOBART ST
HOBART ST
GLACIER LN
STUDLEY RD
MALCOLMST
OLDDERBYST
PLEASANTST
BEAL ST
BEALST
NORTHST
COMMON ST
HIGH ST
HIGHST
GREEN ST
NEWBRIDGE ST
NEWBRIDGEST
OAK ST
CHESTNUT RD
FORTHILL ST
FORT HILL ST
MILL ST
OAK RD
BEALS COVE RD
WESTST
WILDERRD
SMITH WAY
MIDDLE ST
GOLFVIEW DR
CENTRALST
CENTRAL ST
BATH ST
HOWEST
GOVERNORLONG RD
LYNDON RD
QUEENANNE
LN
IVYWAY
PARKVIEW PL
BRADFORD RD
HOPE RD
WHITON AVE
WEIRST
SUMNER ST
FOUNDARY FALLS
PLANTERSFIELDLN
MALLARD RN
NOKOMIS RD
PALMERS LN
BUTLER RD
DENNIS RD
POLK RD
ELMST
PAIGEST
FRESH RIVER AVE
WHITING ST
WHITING ST
WHITING ST
MANN ST
CANTERBURY ST
HERITAGE RD
FOXRUNWAY
HANCOCK RD
VICKI LN
TAURASI RD
PATRIOTS WAY
THAYERST
FOREST LN
ROCKY RUN
SANBORN RD
LEAVITT ST
LEAVITT ST
WILLOW CIR
WINDSONGWAY
HIGHVIEW DR
HICKEY RD
WOODBINE LN
MARTINS LN
HOWARD RD
BURDITT AVE
LINCOLNST
COLLINS RD
SPRUCEST
GARDNER TERR
KILMER RD
SUMMER ST
OLDHOBARTST
RITTER RD
COLERD
CAPE COD LN
RICE RD
CONCORD CIR
HULLST
CATHA LN
KNOLL RD
WILLIAMS ST
SUNSET LN
SYCAMORELN
U S BATES RD
FEEST
OCEANVIEWDR
BEACH RD
SCHOOLST
ROSEWOOD DR
ROBIN LN
HEATHERLN
POWERS LN
CHERRYST
VIKINGLN
LEONARD ST
HOWE ST
JONES ST
HOLLYST
MAPLEST
CLA RK RD
PAOLARD
DOWNERAVE
FLINTLOCKCIR
HERSEY ST
DELPRETE DR
FEARING RD
BLUESKYDR
SAYLES
RD
DEVON TER
EAST STREET
LEC LAIRDR
ROCKLANDST
LIBERTY
POLE
RD
SHERMANWAY
COMMERCE RD
JULIANWAY
NICHOLSRD
MERRILLST
BLACKROCKDR
WINTERST
ABERDEEN RD
TURKEY
HILLLN
MERRYMOUNT RD
SQUIRREL HILL LN
CONDITO RD
ALEXANDRAWY
ROCKWOOD RD
ELIZABETHLN
HIGHFIELDRD
WINDSORDR
DWIGGINSPATH
TOWERBROOKRD
GREATROCKRD
RECREATIONPARKDR
MARSHALL RD
OAKCRESTRD
SUMMERST
PINE
ST
CHARLES ST
CHARLES ST
CRAIGLN
HARVARD DR
PHEASANT RUN
KEITH WAY
BEL AIR DR
THOMPSON AVE
HOOVER RD
HERSEY ST
RESEARCH RD
LIBERTY RD
KIMBALL BEACH
RD
POND PARKRD
BUCKETMILLLN
TALBOTRD
SHARP ST
CEDAR ST
TUPELODR
HMS FITZROY DR
MILL LN
SOPLEASANTST
JAMESHILLLN
SIMMONS RD
SUMMITDR
LINCOLN ST
LINCOLN ST
CUSHING ST CUSHING ST
CUSHING ST
OLMSTEDDR
GARRISONRD
BACKRIVER ROAD
WOODBRIDGERD
SAWMILL PONDRD
LONGMEADOW RD
MYERS FARM RD
MICHAEL RD
ELAINERD
FREEST
FULLING MILL LN
BRADLEY HILL RD
SENTINELRD
BOULDER GLEN
RD
COLONIAL RD
PETER HOBARTDR
BLACK ROCK
DR
STEAMBOATLN
CROOKEDMEADOWLN
IRVINGST
HARBORVIEWDR
SIDE HILLRD
HMS HALSTE D
DR
SMITH RD
HARVEST
LN
HULL ST
WINFIELDRD
LAZELL ST
LAZELL ST
ACCORDPONDDR
CANTERBURYST
SHIPYARDDR
BLACKROCK
DR
WARD ST
WARD ST
EASTGATELN
ROC FALL RD
RIDGEWOODCROSSING
MARK LN
PARKVIEWDR
FOLEY BEACH RD
SHIP ST
MARSHST
BEL AIRRD
FRENCHST
MARTINS LN
MAIN ST
OTISHILLRD
FAIRVIEW ST
HUNTLEY RD
TRIPHAMMERRD
WHITCOMBAVE
COLONIALRD
HERSEYST
STAGECOACH RD
HOLLY HOCK LN
AUTUMNCIR
OLDCOUNTYRD
CAMELOTDR
RHODES CIR
ISAAC
SPRAGUEDR
THISTLEPATCHWAY
PARTRIDGE DR
SEAL COVE RD
INDIANROCKLN
PARK CIR
RINGBOLT RD
ALICEWALK
STODDARDRD
CROWESLN
FRANKLINRODGERSRD
SPRINGST
BREW STER RD
INDUSTRIAL PARKRD
ELMORE RD
TUCKERS LN
AMBERRD
VOLUNTEER RD
MASTHILLRD
BRADLEYPARKDR
TOWER
RD
BERKLEYCIR
GILFORDRD
HI LLTOPRD
STONEGATELN
BEALSCOVERD
THAXTER ST
MINUTEMAN RD
DOWNINGST
NEWTOWNEDR
USS AMESBURYDR
MARYKNOLLDR
WINTHROP RD
ARNOLDRD
FISHERRD
OLD DERBYST
HAZELWOODDR
INDEPENDENCELN
HMS ESSINGTON DR
PORTERSCOVERD
BAKERHILLDR
POPESLN
WANDERS DR
WANDERSDR
FOTTLERRD
FLORET
CIR
HULLSTREET
KILBY ST
PIONEERRD
GOLFVIEW DR
SURRY RD
TURKEYHILLLN
DERBY ST
HAYES RD
MANOR DR
MAYFLOWER RD
COUNTRYD R
BAY VIEWAVE
VOLUSIARD
UPLAND DR
TILLINGHASTDR
RIDGEHILLRD
PLEASANTST
KENTSLN
STEVENS WAY
OTISST
EVERGREENLN
PINEGROVE RD
TOWERRD
NOKOMIS RD
PROSPECT ST
PROSPECT ST
ANDREWISLE RD
CARLETONRD
STANFORDDR
SOPLEASANTST
HOCKLEYDR
ROCKLAND ST
ROCKLAND ST
HMSSTAYNER DR
CHAMBERLAIN RUN
FARMHILLSLN
PINECREST RD
GRENADIERRD
BLAISDELL RD
NORWELL
SCITUATE
WEYMOUTH
COHASSET
ROCKLAND
HULL
Hingham Massachusetts Zoning Part B Floodplain Protection Overlay District
0 0.5 1 2 3 4 µ
Miles
The Town of Hingham makes no warranty or guarantee of the accuracy of the maps nor assumes responsibility for any errors or inaccuracies in these maps. The Town also takes no responsibility for any
decision(s) made or action(s) taken as a result of reliance on these maps. The use of these maps is at the users' own risk. Flood zone designations are based on 2012 Flood Insurance Rate Maps
issued by FEMA and revised by Letters of Map Revision effective August 14, 2015, September 8, 2017, and December 13, 2017 for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program.
Data from the Office of Geographic Information (MassGIS), Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
MassIT and the Town of Hingham.
April 2018
Legend
FEMA Flood Zones
0.2 PCT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD HAZARD
A
AE
VE
Beal Cove
Weymouth
Back River
Hingham Harbor
Mill Pond
Foundry
Pond
Triphammer
Pond
Fulling
Mill Pond
Cushing
Pond
Accord Pond
Bouve
Pond
Broad Cove
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 128
INDEX
Topic Section Page
Accessory Buildings, setbacks IV-C,3 57
Accessory Buildings, definition VI 116
Accessory Dwelling Units III-A, V-K 21, 113
Accessory Uses, to Single and Two-Family Dwellings III-A, I.8 20
Accessory Uses, additional requirements III-J 50
Accord Pond Watershed and Aquifer Protection District III-D 29
Adult Uses III-A,4.20 25
Adult Uses, Special Regulations V-F 104
Affordable Units, in exchange for density bonus in Flexible Residential
Developments
IV-D,7 62
Affordable Units, requirement in Multi-Family Housing IV-E 65
Agricultural Uses III-A,2 21
Amendments, to the Zoning By-Law I-K 13
Amusement, Indoor III-A,4.12 24
Amusement, Outdoor III-A,4.13 24
Animal Breeding III-A,4.5 23
Animal Hospitals III-A,4.4 23
Apartment House III-A,1.4 19
Apartment House, definition VI 116
Appeals I-D 4
Art Studios, Residential III-A,1.8.5 20
Athletic Clubs III-A,3.7 22
Auto Filling/Service Stations, III-A, 5.1 25
Auto Filling Stations, definition VI 116
Auto Sales III-A,5.3 25
Auto Repair III-A,5.2 25
Awnings V-B,2 88
Banks III-A,4.11 23
Basements, definition VI 116
Board of Appeals I-D 4
Boat Livery, Sales, Storage, Repair III-A,5.4 25
Body Art Establishments III-A,4.21 25
Body Art, definition VI 116
Boundaries between Districts II-D 16
Building, definition VI 116
Building Heights, Diagram showing limits Appendix “A” 125
Business Office or Agency, definition VI 117
Building Permits with Site Plan Review I-H 7
Cell Phone Towers (see Personal Wireless Services) V-E 98
Cemeteries III-A,3.9 22
Charitable Institutions III-A,3.8 22
Christmas Tree Sales III-A,2.3 21
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 129
Topic Section Page
Churches III-A,3.1 21
Clinic VI 117
Cluster Development (see Flexible Residential Development) IV-D, 2 58
Civic Clubs III-A,3.7 22
Commercial Service Establishment, definition VI 117
Commercial Uses III-A,4 22
Commercial/Residential Buildings III-G, 6 40
Common Driveways V-I 110
Community Centers, Private III-A,3.6 22
Consumer Service Establishment, definition VI 117
Corner Lots IV-C,7 58
Craft Establishment, definition VI 117
Country Clubs III-A,3.7 22
Definitions VI 116
Dimensional Requirements, schedule of IV-A 51
Dimensional Requirements, FRD IV-D,9 64
Distributed Antenna System (DAS) V-E,3 98
Downtown Hingham Overlay District III-G 37
Dwelling, definition VI 117
Dwelling Unit, definition VI 117
Earth Removal Regulations V-C 95
Effective Date of Amendments I-M 14
Enforcement I-C 2
Entertainment, Indoor III-A,4.12 24
Entertainment, Outdoor III-A,4.13 24
Erosion, definition VI 118
Exempt Uses I-B 1
Farms, Permitted Uses III-A,2 21
Fast-Food Restaurants III-A,4.9B 23
Fast Food Restaurant, definition VI 118
Fencing Requirements (Industrial / Business Districts) IV-C,10 58
Financial Institutions III-A,4.11 23
Flexible Residential Development IV-D 58
Floodplain Protection Overlay District III-C 27
Floor Area Ratio (FAR), definition VI 118
Floor Area Ratio requirements IV-A 53
Freight Terminals III-A,4.14 24
Frontage Requirements IV-A 51
Frontage, How to Measure IV-C,1 56
Frontage, definition VI 118
Funeral Homes III-A,4.3 23
Garaging, Non-Commercial Vehicles III-A,1.8.1 20
Garages, Commercial III-A,5.2 25
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 130
Topic Section Page
Garden Apartments III-A,1.7 19
Garden Apartments, definition VI 118
Gas Stations III-A,5.1 25
Greenhouses, Commercial III-A,4.6 23
Ground Floor, definition VI 119
Half-Story, definition VI 119
Health Club III-A,4.12A 24
Health Club, definition VI 119
Height, Maximum IV-A 51
Height, Diagram Appendix “A” 125
Height Exceptions IV-C,9 58
Heliports III-A,4.15 24
Hingham Harbor Overlay District III-H 44
Home Occupation, definition VI 119
Home Occupations III-A,1.8.6 20
Hospitals III-A,3.8 22
Hotels III-A,4.16 24
Industrial Districts, Mixed-Use IV-G 71
Industrial Packaging and Assembly III-A,6.2 26
Intensity Regulations IV 51
Libraries, Private III-A,3.6 22
Libraries, Public III-A,3.5 22
Light Industry III-A,6.2 26
Light Industry, definition VI 119
Lot Area, definition VI 120
Lot Coverage (Dimensional Requirements) IV-A 51
Lot Line (Front, Rear, Side) VI 120-121
Lot Shape Factor in Residential Districts IV-C,2 56
Lot Size (Dimensional Requirements) IV-A 51
Manufacturing III-A,6.2 26
Marijuana Regulations V-H, V-J 108, 112
Marinas III-A,5.4 25
Marine Retail and Service III-A,4.19 24
Mean High Water Line, definition VI 121
Media Broadcasting or Production Studio VI 121
Medical or Dental Office, definition VI 121
Mixed-Use Commercial Residential Building in Downtown Overlay District III-A,4.22 25
Mixed-Use Development in Industrial District IV-G 71
Mobile Homes III-A,1.3 19
Motels III-A,4.16 24
Multi-Unit Development IV-E 65
Municipal Buildings III-A,3.5 22
Museums, Private III-A,3.6 22
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 131
Topic Section Page
Museums, Public III-A,3.5 22
Newspapers III-A,4.8 23
Noise V-D 97
Nonconforming Conditions III-I 48
Nonconforming Structures, definition VI 121
Nonconforming Uses, definition VI 121
Nursery Schools III-A,3.4 21
Nursing Homes III-A,3.8B 22
Occupancy Permits I-C,2 2
Off-Street Parking Requirements V-A 83
Offices III-A,4.10 23
Offices, Wholesale / Industrial III-A,6.1 26
Open Space, Requirements for Flexible Residential Development (FRD) IV-D,2 59
Outdoor Concession, definition VI 121
Overlay Districts II-B 15
Parks, Public III-A,3.5 22
Parking for Commercial/Residential Buildings in Downtown Overlay District III-A,4.23 25
Parking Regulations V-A 83
Penalties I-C,3 3
Personal Wireless Services V-E 98
Personal Wireless Services Overlay District III-F 36
Planning Board, Site Plan Review I-I 7
Planning Board – Special Permit A3 I-J 12
Playgrounds III-A,3.2 21
Ponds III-C,4d 28
Pools III-C,4d 28
Printing III-A,4.8 23
Private clubs III-A,3.7 22
Private Passenger Vehicle, definition VI 121
Private Schools III-A,3.3 21
Professional Office or Agency, definition VI 122
Professional Offices III-A,4.10 23
Professional Studio, definition VI 122
Professional Offices, residential III-A,1.8.4 20
Prohibited Uses I-B 1
Projections into Yard Space IV-C,8 58
Protected Open Space IV-D,2 59
Public Buildings III-A,3.5 22
Public Utilities III-A,3.10 22
Radioactive Waste I-B 1-2
Recreation, Indoor III-A,4.12 24
Recreation, Outdoor III-A,4.13 24
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 132
Topic Section Page
Recreational Clubs III-A,3.7 22
Registered Marijuana Dispensaries V-H 108
Regulation of Sale & Consumption of Marijuana not Medically Prescribed V-J 112
Religious Establishments III-A,3.1 21
Repetitive Petitions I-D,4 5
Residential Art Studios III-A,1.8.5 20
Residential Multi-Unit Development IV-E, IV-F 65, 69
Residential Uses III-A,1 19
Restaurants III-A,4.9 23
Restoration (Nonconforming Use) III-I,1B 48
Retail Groups III-A,4.17 24
Retail Stores III-A,4.1 22
Retail, Marine III-A,4.19 24
Roof Deck III-G.4 39
Roof Deck, definition VI 122
Peer Review Costs I-F, 3 7
Schedule of Uses III-A 19
Schools
Private Schools III-A,3.3 21
Public Schools III-A,3.2 21
Nursery Schools III-A,3.4 21
Service Business, definition VI 122
Service Establishments III-A,4.2 23
Service, Marine III-A,4.19 24
Setbacks, Requirements IV-A 51
Setbacks, in Business A IV-B,9 55
Shopping Center, definition VI 122
Shoreline, definition VI 122
Side Yards, Special Requirements IV-B,11 56
Sign Regulations V-B 88
Single-Family Dwelling, definition VI 122
Sit-Down Restaurants III-A,4.9A 23
Sit-Down Restaurant, definition VI 122
Site Plan Review I-I 7
Site Plan Review, Waivers from Requirement I-I, 5 9
Site Plan Review, when Required for Special Permits I-G 7
Site Plan Review, when Required for Building Permits I-H 7
South Hingham Development Overlay District III-E 33
Social Clubs III-A,3.7 22
Special Conditions to Schedule of Uses III-B 17
Special Permit A1 I-F 6
Special Permit A2 I-F 6
Special Permit A3 I-J 12
Hingham Zoning By-Law – April 2019 133
Topic Section Page
Stables III-A,4.7 23
Story, definition VI 123
Streams and Tributaries III-C,9 29
Street, definition VI 122
Structure, definition VI 123
Swimming Pools III-C,4D 28
Take-out Restaurants III-A,4.9B 23
Tattoo Parlors III-A,4.21 25
Town Houses III-A,1.6 19
Trailer Homes III-A,1.3 19
Two-Family Dwelling, definition VI 123
Unrestricted Uses I-B 1
Utilities III-A,3.10 22
Variances I-D,2 5
Vehicles, Commercial III-A, 1.8.2, 1.8.3 20
Veterinary Hospitals III-A,4.4 23
Violations, Penalties I-C,3 3
Warehouses, Storage III-A,4.14 24
Warehouses, Wholesale III-A,6.1 26
Wholesale Uses III-A,6 26
Wireless Communications Tower, definition VI 123
Yacht Clubs III-A,3.7 22
Yard, definition VI 123
Yard Dimensions (Dimensional Requirements) IV-A 51
Yard Shape (Lot shape Factor, Residential Districts) IV-C,2 56
Zoning Administrator I-E 6
Zoning Districts II-A 15
Zoning, District Boundary Lines II-D 16
Zoning Enforcement Officer I-C,3 3
Zoning Map – Part A & C Appendix “B” 126
Zoning Map – Part B Appendix “C” 127
TOWN OF HINGHAM
PLANNING BOARD RULES AND REGULATIONS
ADOPTED UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
AS AMENDED THROUGH AUGUST 18, 2014
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
i
HINGHAM PLANNING BOARD RULES & REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 – AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND LIMITATION 1
A. Authority 1
B. Purpose 1
C. Limitation 2
SECTION 2 - GENERAL 3
A. Definitions 3
B. Administration 5
C. Certification of Plans 5
D. Format 5
E. Waiver of Compliance
F. Fee Regulations 6
G. Separability 11
H. Amendments 11
SECTION 3 - SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS 12
A. Plan Believed Not To Require Approval 12
(1) Contents of Plan Believed Not to Require Approval 12
(2) Fees 13
B. Preliminary Plan 13
(1) General 13
(2) Contents of Preliminary Plan 14
(3) Board Actions 13
C. Definitive Plan 14
(1) General 14
(2) Contents of Definitive Plan 16
(3) Review by Board of Health as to the Suitability 20
(4) Review by Other Officials 21
(5) Performance Guarantee 22
(6) Public Hearing 22
(7) Approval, Modification or Disapproval 23
(8) Certificate of Approval 23
(9) Inspection Fees 23
(10) Recording of Plan 24
(11) Revision of Definitive Plan 24
(12) Evidence of Satisfactory Performance 25
(13) Release of Performance Guarantee 26
(14) Reduction of Deposit or Letter of Credit 27
(15) Time of Completion of Ways and Installation
of Municipal Services 27
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
ii
(16) As-Built Plans 27
(17) Requirements for As-Built Plans 28
SECTION 4 - DESIGN STANDARDS 29
A. General 29
B. Streets (or Ways) 29
(1) Types of Streets 29
Fire Apparatus Access Roads Minimum Requirements 31
(2) Location of Streets 32
(3) Width, Alignment and Grades of Streets 33
Table 1-Minimum Design Standards for Streets 34
(4) Dead-End Streets 35
C. Subsurface and Storm Drains 36
(1) Compatibility and General Design 36
(2) Groundwater Interception 36
(3) Storm Drains 36
D. Open Drainage Systems 38
E. Detention Areas 39
F. Easements 39
G. Sidewalks 39
H. Lots 40
I. Open Spaces 40
J. Protection of Natural Features 40
K. Municipal Services 40
L. Soil Surveys 42
M. Foot Paths, Bridle and Bicycle Paths 42
SECTION 5 - SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED
IMPROVEMENTS 43
A1. General 44
B1. Subdivision Layout 44
C1. Clearing, Grubbing and Excavation 44
D1. Excavation/Backfill 45
E1. Disposal of Surplus and Unsuitable Materials 47
F1. Test Pits 47
G1. Excavation for Structures 48
H1. Trench Excavation 48
I1. Miscellaneous Trench Excavation 49
J1. Below Grade Excavation 49
K1. Rock Excavation 50
L1. Drainage and Stormwater Management 50
M1. Culvert Piping 52
N1. Stormwater Management Structures 52
O1. Fine Grading and Compacting Subgrade Area 53
P1. Lot Grading/Drainage 53
Q1. Catch Basin and Drain Manholes 53
R1. Pre-Cast Manhole and Catch Basin Materials 54
S1. Catch Basins (Built) 56
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
iii
T1. Manhole Construction Methods 57
U1. Drop Inlets 58
V1. Dry Wells/Leaching 58
W1. Raising Casting Construction 59
X1. Construction Method for Frame and Cover Construction 59
Y1. Concrete Materials for Adjusting Sewer or Drain Casting Collars 60
Z1. Construction Methods for Concrete Placement 61
A2. Reinforced Concrete Pipe 62
B2. Joints on RCP 62
C2. Pipe Manufacture Inspection and Acceptance 63
D2. Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe for Drain 64
E2. Construction Methods for Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe 64
F2. Construction Methods for Handling and Placing Reinforced Concrete Pipe 65
G2. Ductile Iron Pipe 66
H2. 4” Corrugated High Density Polyethylene Pipe (Slotted) 67
I2. Corrugated Hdpe Materials 67
J2. Fill 70
K2. Filter Fabric 70
L2. Gravel Material for Backfill or Road Base 71
M2. Processed Gravel 72
N2. Screened Gravel Construction Methods 73
O2. Screened Gravel 73
P2. Special Borrow 73
Q2. Gravel Borrow 73
R2. Sand Borrow 74
S2. Crushed Stone 74
T2. Concrete Sand General 74
U2. Concrete Sand Construction Methods 74
V2. Backfilling and Compacting 75
W2. Subgrade 76
X2. Utilities/Municipal Services 76
Y2. Water Systems 77
Z2. Maintaining Water Service During Construction 78
A3. Water Installation Methods 78
B3. Construction of Water Supply 78
C3. Installation of Valve Box Construction Methods 78
D3. Raise Water/Gas Castings 79
E3. Gas 79
F3. Fire Service 79
G3. Sewers 79
H3. Electrical Service 80
I3. Other Utilities 80
J3. Roadway Foundation 80
K3. Pavement Material 81
L3. Pavement 81
M3. Pavement Compaction & Testing 83
N3. Driveway Installations (Pavement) 84
O3. Sidewalks 84
P3. Paved Sidewalks 85
Q3. Concrete Sidewalks 85
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
iv
R3. Crosswalks 86
S3. Pedestrian Wheel Chair Ramps & Crosswalks 86
T3. Curbing 86
U3. Vertical Curbing 87
V3. Sloped (Slant) Granite 88
W3. Curb at Driveways 88
X3. Street Lighting 89
Y3. Unaccepted Street Lighting 89
Z3. Accepted Street Lighting 89
A4. Landscaping (Grass Plot, Side Slopes, Street Trees) 90
B4. Street Trees 91
C4. Bounds/Monuments 91
D4. Street Signs 92
E4. Transformers, Fire Alarm Boxes, Mailboxes 92
F4. Cleaning Up 93
SECTION 6 - INSPECTION 94
A. General 94
B. Preconstruction Requirements 95
C. Notification to the Engineer 96
D. Lines and Grades 97
E. Inspection of Required Improvements 97
F. Engineers Report 100
FORMS
A. Preconstruction Checklist 101
B. R1 – Report of Inspection for Construction of Required Improvements 102
C. R2 – Certificate of Construction and Performance 103
D. Plan Believed Not To Require Approval (Form A) 104
Checklist for Form A Approval 105
E. Application for Approval of Preliminary Plan (Form B) 106
F. Application for Approval of Definitive Plan (Form C) 107
Application for Modification, Rescission or Amendment of
Definitive Plan (Form C-1) 110
G. Performance Bond - Secured by Deposit (Form D) 112
H. Covenant Form (Form E) 113
I. Agreement (Form F) 115
J. Certificate of Performance (Covenant Approval Release) (Form G) 117
K. Performance Secured by Funds Retained by Lender (Form D4) 118
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Typical Road Cross Section 121
Figure 2 Turnaround and Island Plan (Minimum Requirements) 122
Figure 3 Example Storm Water Flow Chart 123
Figure 4 Wooden Guardrail 124
Appendix D Fire Apparatus Access Roads 125
Typical Basin Detail 127
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 1
Amended through August 18, 2014
TOWN OF HINGHAM
RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Adopted under the Subdivision Control Law of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81-K et seq.
SECTION 1
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, and DEFINITIONS
A. Authority
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 81-Q of Chapter 41 of the General
Laws and for the purpose specified in Paragraph B of this Section, the Planning
Board of the Town of Hingham has adopted the following Rules and Regulations
governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Hingham.
B. Purpose
These subdivision regulations have been enacted for the purpose of protecting the
safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by regulating the
laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the
several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and insuring sanitary
conditions in subdivisions and in proper cases parks and open areas. The powers
of a planning board and of a board of appeal under the Subdivision Control Law
shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of
the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for
lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways; for reducing
danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in
the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies; for insuring compliance with
the applicable zoning ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequate provision
compatible with town municipal services and natural features existing as of the
date of submission of a subdivision plan for approval, for water distribution,
sewerage, drainage, protection of natural water sources, flood control, wetland
areas, underground utility services, fire, police, and other similar municipal
equipment, and street lighting; and other requirements where necessary in a
subdivision; and for protecting, promoting and enhancing the natural beauty and
amenities of the Town and coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other
and with the public ways in the Town and with the ways in neighboring
subdivisions. No subdivision shall be approved unless it complies with these
Rules and Regulations and with the applicable provisions of zoning and other
town bylaws and regulations and of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 2
Amended through August 18, 2014
Massachusetts, nor unless, in the opinion of the Board, such subdivision meets the
requirements of public safety, including reasonable precautions against possible
natural disasters, of traffic safety and convenience, or adequate water supply,
storm water drainage and sewage disposal and is designed with due regard to the
rights, health and welfare of Hingham's inhabitants, including the residents of
such subdivision. Proposed subdivisions shall conform to overall development
plans adopted by the Planning Board and shall adhere to the principles of correct
land use, sound planning and good engineering.
C. Limitation
No person shall make a subdivision of any tract, parcel, or lot of land into two or
more lots in such a manner as to constitute a “subdivision” within the Town of
Hingham, or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the
construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, and until a
definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the
Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
3
SECTION 2
GENERAL
A. Definitions
For the purpose of these Rules and Regulations, the following words and terms used
herein are hereby defined as follows:
Abutter An owner or owners of property, which has (a) one or more boundaries or
parts thereof, in common with the property being subdivided or, (b) has frontage in
whole or in part directly opposite any portion of the property being subdivided or, (c)
is deemed by the Planning Board to be affected by the proposed subdivision of land.
Applicant A person who applies for approval of a plan of a subdivision or who
applies for a determination that approval is not required. The applicant (or
applicants) shall be the owner (or owners) or the duly authorized agent or
representative of the owner(s), or his or their assigns of all land included in the
subject request for action before the Planning Board. If a plan for a subdivision of
land is to be submitted by one representing to be the agent or assign of an owner, a
notarized certificate shall be submitted, signed by the owner, authorizing the person
filing the plan to act as agent or assign and the agent or assign shall also file
sufficient documentation to explain the nature and extent of his own actual or
potential interest in the land.
Board The Planning Board of the Town of Hingham.
Dead End Street A street, or network of streets, whether existing or proposed, which
has only one public access from the remainder of the community street network. For
the purpose of this definition, the length of the dead-end street shall be the sum of the
lengths of all roadways beyond the limit of multiple access.(see also Sections
4,B.,(1),(d) and 4,B.,(4),(a).
Definitive Plan The plan of a subdivision as submitted (with appropriate
application) to the Board for approval, in its entirety, to be recorded in the Registry
of Deeds or filed with the Recorder of the Land Court when approved by the Board.
Department's Specifications The Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges
of the Massachusetts Highway Department, dated 1988 including all revisions
thereto.
Department's Standards The Construction Standards of 1977 of the Massachusetts
Highway Department, and all revisions thereto.
Developer Same as "Applicant".
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
4
Engineer A Registered Professional Engineer as defined in Chapter 112 of the
General Laws, Section 81-D, as qualified in Chapter 112, Section 81-J and 81-M.
General Laws The General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, with all
additions thereto and amendments thereof. (Abbreviated G.L.)
Land Surveyor A Registered Professional Surveyor as defined in Chapter 112 of the
General Laws, Section 81-D, as qualified in Chapter 112, Section 81-J and 81-M.
Lot An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used, or
available for use, as the site of one or more buildings or for any other definite
purpose.
Utility Services Sewers, surface and subsurface water drains, water pipes, fire
hydrants, gas pipes, oil pipes, steam lines, electric lines or ducts, telephone lines or
ducts, fire alarm cables and boxes, CATV, street lights, and their respective
appurtenances, or other similar facilities.
Owner The person holding the ultimate fee simple title to a tract, parcel, or lot of
land, as shown by the record in the Plymouth Registry of Deeds or Plymouth
Registry of Probate. A certified copy of such record shall accompany any
application.
Person An individual, two or more individuals, partnership, corporation,
association, society, or any entity recognized by the General Laws, having common
or undivided interests in a tract of land. Person shall also include, to the extent
allowed by the General Laws, agents, administrators, executors, heirs, devisee,
successors, and assigns.
Preliminary Plan A plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision of land drawn
on tracing paper, or a print thereof, showing (a) the subdivision name, boundaries,
north point, date, scale, legend and title "Preliminary Plan"; (b) the names of the
record owner and the applicant and the name of the designer, engineer or surveyor;
(c) the names of abutters, as determined from the most recent local tax list; (d) the
existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and any public areas within
the subdivision in a general manner; (e) the proposed system of drainage, including
adjacent existing natural waterways, in a general manner; (f) the approximate
boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions; (g) the
names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets; (h) and the topography
of the land in a general manner.
Print A reproduction of an original drawing - dark line on white background.
Roadway A portion of a way which is designed and prepared for vehicular traffic.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
5
Site A portion of a lot, tract or parcel of land provided for the location of a
building, with the necessary or convenient amount of land adjacent to such building
used or to be used in connection with such building.
Street A public way, a way approved under Subdivision Control Law, or a way
having in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and
adequate construction to provide for the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby, (major, secondary, minor and limited residential streets are defined
in Section 4,B. of these Regulations).
Subdivision The division of a tract of land into two or more lots and as further
defined in Section 81-L, Chapter 41, G.L.
Subdivision Control Law Sections 81K to 81GG, inclusive of Chapter 41 of the
General Laws and any acts in amendment thereof.
Way A way shall be the full strip of land designated as a way or street as
distinguished from the roadway.
B. Administration
No plan shall be deemed to have been submitted to the Board until said plan,
together with all application forms, fees and other items as required and executed as
specified herein has been delivered in person to the Board at a meeting thereof, or by
registered mail to the Planning Board by the owner of the land involved or his
authorized agent. If so mailed, the date of receipt shall be the date of submission of
the plan. (For matters not covered by these Rules and Regulations, reference is made
to Sections 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive, Chapter 41, G.L.)
C. Certification of Plans
All definitive plans submitted to the Board shall include a certification as to their
conformance in every respect, with these Rules and Regulations and as to the
validity of their content executed by a person registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as a land surveyor or professional engineer or both as required by the
Board. If the Plan fails to comply in any respect with these Rules and Regulations,
then the definitive plans must be accompanied by a list, certified by said land
surveyor or engineer, setting forth each and every Regulation with which the Plan
does not comply, the location and nature of the noncompliance, and the reason
therefor. The Board suggests that the owner be represented at any meeting with the
Board by the person responsible for the design of the subdivision and the preparation
of the plans.
D. Format
All information submitted to the Planning Board shall be typewritten.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
6
E. Waiver of Compliance
Strict compliance with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations may be
waived when, in the judgment of the Board, such action is in the public interest, and
not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law. The application for approval of a
definitive plan must be accompanied by a written request for waiver of strict
compliance with these Rules, identifying with particularity the regulation sought to
be waived, the nature and location of the waiver sought, and a demonstration
certified by the applicant's surveyor or engineer that such waiver is consistent with
each of the purposes set forth in Section 1,B. of these Rules and Regulations.
F. Fee Regulations
(1) Purpose
These regulations and fees schedules have been adopted to produce a more
equitable schedule of fees which more accurately reflects the costs of technical
and legal review of applications to the Planning Board; to take advantage of the
procedures offered by G.L. c. 44, s. 53G; to establish a review procedure in the
selection of consultants; and to promote more informed decision-making by the
Planning Board.
(2) Fee Structures and Regulations
(a) General. The Planning Board shall impose reasonable fees for the review
of applications that come before it. The Planning Board may impose
Administrative Fees and Project Review Fees as may be applicable to the types
of applications set forth below.
(b) Form of Payment. All Administrative and Project Review Fees shall be
paid by bank or certified check.
(3) Administrative Fees
(a) Applicability. An Administrative Fee shall be assessed to offset the
expense of processing and review with regard to all applications set forth
in Section 3(c), below.
(b) Submittal. Administrative Fees shall be submitted at the time of the
submittal of the application. Any application filed without this fee shall be
deemed incomplete and no review work shall commence until the fee has
been paid in full.
(c) Schedule of Administrative Fees. The following schedule applies to the
types of applications to the Planning Board set forth below. This schedule
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
7
supersedes all previous schedules as they may have appeared in the
Zoning By-Laws, the Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land,
and any listings which may have been compiled from time to time for the
benefit of applicants.
APPLICATION FEE SCHEDULE AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
PERMIT TYPE P E R M I T F I L I N G FEE NUMBER OF PLAN
COPIES REQUIRED
PEER REVIEW FEES
(for Approval Phase
only)
APPROVAL NOT
REQUIRED (ANR /
FORM A)
$250 plus $250 per
buildable lot
1 Mylar
5 Copies $0
PRELIMINARY
SUBDIVISION $500 8 Sets $0
DEFINITIVE
SUBDIVISION $2,000 14 Copies
As estimated by Peer
Review Engineer and
approved by Applicant per
MGL 44, S. 53G
LOT RELEASE $250 per lot NA $0
INSPECTION FEE $16 per linear foot NA
Supplemental Fee as
needed and determined by
DPW, and Approved by
Applicant
SUBDIVISION
MODIFICATION $1,000 14 Copies
As estimated by Peer
Review Engineer and
approved by Applicant per
MGL 44, S. 53G
SITE PLAN REVIEW
in association with a
Building Permit
$500 7 Copies
As estimated by Peer
Review Engineer and
approved by Applicant per
MGL 44, S. 53G.
SITE PLAN REVIEW
in association with
Special Permit A2
Included in ZBA Fee Included in Submittal to
ZBA $0
SPECIAL PERMIT A3 A3-Parking: $500; A3 for
FRD: $2000 14 Copies
As estimated by Peer
Review Engineer and
approved by Applicant per
MGL 44, S. 53G.
(d) Fee Waivers. The Planning Board may waive or reduce any
Administrative Fee, if, in the opinion of the Board, unusual circumstances
exist regarding the subject property or the applicant.
(e) Refund. Once the review process has been commenced, the Planning
Board shall not refund Administrative Fees, including the case of
withdrawal of the application by the applicant.
(4) Project Review Fees
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
8
(a) Applicability. In addition to an Administrative Fee, the Planning Board
shall impose a Project Review Fee on those applications which require, in
the judgment of the Planning Board, review by outside consultants due to
the size, scale, or complexity of a proposed project, the project’s potential
impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary expertise to perform the
review work related to the permit or approval. In hiring outside
consultants, the Board may engage engineers, planners, lawyers,
designers, or other appropriate professions able to assist the Board and to
ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, by-laws and
regulations. Such assistance may include, but shall not be limited to,
analyzing an application, monitoring or inspecting a project or site for
compliance with the Board’s decisions or regulations, or inspecting a
project during construction or implementation.
(b) Submittal. Project Review Fees shall be submitted at the time of the
submittal of the application for deposit in an account established pursuant
to G.L. c. 44, s. 53G (53G Account). Any application filed without this fee
shall be deemed incomplete and no review work shall commence until the
fee has been paid in full.
(c) Schedule of Project Review Fees. The following schedule applies to the
types of applications to the Planning Board set forth below. This schedule
supersedes all previous schedules as they may have appeared in the
Zoning By-Laws, the Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land,
and any listings that may have been compiled from time to time for the
benefit of the applicants. Where more than one type of application has
been submitted for Planning Board action, only the largest of the
applicable Project Review Fees shall be collected for deposit into the 53G
Account, and not the sum of those fees.
(i) Preliminary Plan: $.50 per each 1 foot of way within the
subdivision
(ii) Definitive Plan: $1000 plus $3.00 for each foot of proposed or
reconstructed roadway in excess of 400 feet.
(iii) Modification of a Preliminary Plan: To be determined by the
Board
(iv) Modification of a Definitive Plan: To be determined by the Board
(v) Site Plan Review by Planning Board for Special Permit or Building
Permit As needed, fee determined per Section I-I (2) of the Hingham
Zoning By-Law
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
9
(d) Replenishment. When the balance in an applicant’s 53G Account falls
below twenty-five percent (25%) of the initial Project Review Fee, as
imposed above, the Planning Board shall consider whether to require a
supplemental Project Review Fee to cover the cost of the remaining
project review.
(e) Inspection Phase. After granting of a Definitive Plan approval, the
Planning Board will require a Supplemental Project Review Fee for the
purpose of ensuring the availability of funds during the inspection phase
of the review process, as follows: five dollars ($5.00) times the number of
linear feet of proposed or reconstructed ways within or without the
subdivision.
(f) Handling of Project Review Fees. The Project Review Fee is to be
deposited into a special account as set forth in G.L. c. 44, s. 53G.
(i) Outside consultants retained by the Planning Board to assist in the
review of an application shall be paid from this account.
(ii) Project Review Fees shall be turned over to the Town Accountant
by the Planning Board for deposit into a 53G Account.
(iii) Confirmation of the establishment of the 53G Account shall be
forwarded from the office of the Town Accountant to the Planning Board
office as soon as it is received for timely and accurate accounting.
(iv) The Town Accountant shall prepare a report on activity in the 53G
Account on an annual basis. This report shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and Selectmen for their review. This report shall also be printed in
the Annual Report for the Town.
(v) An accounting of an applicant’s funds held in the 53G Account
may be requested by the applicant at any time. The Planning Board shall
respond to the request in a timely fashion.
(vi) An applicant may request an estimate of bills pending from
consultants for work completed, or in progress, but not yet invoiced.
(vii) Excess fees in the 53G Account, shall be returned to the applicant
or the applicant’s successor in interest, at the conclusion of the review
process, as defined below. For the purpose of this section, any person or
entity claiming to be an applicant’s successor in interest shall provide the
Board with documentation establishing such succession in interest.
(1) With the approval or disapproval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plan.
Conclusion of the Review Process
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
10
(2) With the disapproval of a Definitive Subdivision Plan.
(3) With the release of the performance bond at the end of construction
of an approved Definitive Subdivision Plan.
(4) With the final inspection or the approval or disapproval on all other
types of applications under the Zoning By-Law, which ever comes
later.
(6) Delinquent Accounts.
The following rules apply to fees owed to the Planning Board by applicants:
(a) Consequences. Projects with accounts past due will be notified by the
Planning Board. If no payment has been received after 30 days, the Board
reserves the right to stop work on any project with past due accounts.
(b) Costs of Collection. All costs of collection associated with past due
accounts shall be borne by the applicant.
(c) Current Delinquents. All applicants owing fees to the Planning Board at
the time of any amendment to these provisions of the regulations shall be
sent the following:
(i) A duplicate notice of the amount past due.
(ii) A copy of the applicable sections of these regulations with all
amendments clearly indicated.
(iii) Notice of a 30-day grace period before the commencement of any
changes in interest rate or charges.
(7) Revision of Fee Schedules and Regulations Governing Fees.
The Planning Board may review and revise its regulations and fee schedules,
from time to time, as it sees fit.
(a) Amendments shall be preceded by a public hearing.
(b) Any new regulations or alterations to the fee schedule shall take effect
upon filing a copy of the amendments with the Town Clerk.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
11
G. Separability
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision of these Regulations shall be
adjudged not valid, the adjudication shall apply only to the material so adjudged, and
the remainder of these Regulations shall be deemed valid and effective.
H. Amendments
These Regulations or any portion thereof may be amended, supplemented or
repealed from time to time by the Board after a public hearing on its own motion or
by petition.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 12
Amended through August 18, 2014
SECTION 3
SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF PLANS
A. Plans Believed not to Require Approval (ANR or Form A Plans)
1. Submittal Requirements
Any person wishing to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or filed with the
Recorder of the Land Court a plan of land in the Town who believes that the plan
does not require approval under the Subdivision Control Law, G.L. c.41, S81P, may
submit such plan to the Board with six prints thereof, together with a properly
executed application in the form shown as Form A in the Appendix hereto, which
form may be changed from time to time by the Planning Board, and accompanied by
the necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require approval, and also shall
file (by delivery or registered mail, postage prepaid) with the Town Clerk a notice
thereof stating the date of such submission and accompanied by a copy of the
application. The applicant's attention is specifically called to the documentation
requirements set forth in Section 2,A., Applicant and Owner, of these Rules.
2. Contents of Plan Believed Not to Require Approval
Such plan shall be at a scale of either 1" = 40' or 1" = 80' and shall include:
(a) Date, scale, north point
(b) Assessor's plan number for each parcel referenced
(c) Name of the applicant, or person for whom the plan was prepared
(d) Name, seal and signature of the engineer or surveyor preparing the plan
(e) Zoning district classification, including all overlay districts
(f) All land included in the Floodplain and Watershed Protection District and
all other delineated wetlands and floodplain
(g) Lot area, frontage and all other applicable zoning dimensions
(h) Metes and bounds of all existing lots whose dimensions are altered by the
Plan, of all proposed lots and of any contiguous lots in common beneficial
ownership with any land that is the subject of the plan.
(i) Locus plan at a scale of at least 1" = 800' containing sufficient information
so that the land can be readily located, including streets bounding or near
the property.
(j) For a compiled plan, the identity of the plans from which it was compiled
must be noted on the plan, including the title and date of the plan, the
person who prepared the plan, date of preparation and approval by the
Planning Board, and the recorded reference to the Plan in the Registry of
Deeds or Land Court.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 13
Amended through August 18, 2014
3.
If the Board finds that the plan does not require approval, it shall, without a public
hearing endorse thereon the words "Approval under the Subdivision Control Law Not
Required.” Such endorsement shall not be deemed to constitute any determination of
compliance with requirements of the Zoning By-Law. If the Board determines that in
its opinion the plan requires approval, it shall within 21 days notify the Town Clerk
and the applicant of its determination to that effect.
Approval Process
4. Fees
For a plan believed not to require approval, there shall be an administrative fee as set
forth in Section 2(F) of these Rules and Regulations for each Form A application
submitted.
B. Preliminary Plan
1. General
In the case of a residential subdivision, a preliminary plan of a subdivision may be
submitted to the Board and to the Board of Health by the applicant for discussion and
consideration by the Boards prior to the submission of a definitive plan. In the case
of a nonresidential subdivision, it is required that the applicant shall submit a
preliminary plan. The submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the
applicant, the Planning Board, the Board of Health and other municipal agencies to
discuss and clarify the problems relating to such subdivision before a definitive plan
is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that a preliminary plan be filed in
every case.
2. Application Procedure
a. An application for consideration of the Preliminary Plan shall be made
accompanied by eight (8) sets of the Preliminary Plan, together with a
properly executed application in the form shown as Form B in the
Appendix hereto, which form may be changed from time to time by the
Planning Board, and a Project Review Fee as set forth in Section 2(F) of
these Rules and Regulations.
b. The applicant shall also, by delivery or registered mail, give written notice
to the Town Clerk stating the date of submission of the Preliminary Plan
and accompanied by a copy of the completed application.
c. Attention is directed to the Hingham Board of Health Supplementary
Rules and Regulations for the Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, for
percolation tests and other Board of Health requirements.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 14
Amended through August 18, 2014
d. The attention of the applicant is directed to the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 131, Sections 40 and 40A, and the
town’s local wetlands bylaw if any wetlands are included in the proposed
subdivision.
e. The attention of the applicant is directed to the requirement of the
Massachusetts Highway Department that a permit be obtained before any
work is performed within a State highway layout. Its permit will require a
specific geometric design for street connections.
3. Contents of Preliminary Plan
The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1”=40’ or such other scale as the
Board may accept. Said plan shall be identified as a Preliminary Plan and show
clearly and adequately the information required to form a clear basis for a discussion
of the problems and the preparation of the Definitive Plan. The Preliminary Plan
should include as many of the following as practicable to insure sufficient discussion
of relevant design issues:
a. All information specified in items (a) through (e), (i), (j), (o) and (p) under
the Contents of the Definitive Plan (Section 3,C.,(2)).
4. Board Actions
During the discussion of the Preliminary Plan the complete information required for
the Definitive Plan, the filing fees and the municipal services will be discussed. The
Board may give such Preliminary Plan its approval, with or without modification or
disapprove said Plan, stating reasons for such disapproval. Approval, if given, does
not constitute approval of a subdivision, but does facilitate the procedure in securing
final approval of the Definitive Plan.
The Planning Board shall act on the Preliminary Plan within forty-five (45) days of
the date of submission. Any plan submitted to the Board in advance of a Definitive
Plan which does not conform to the minimum requirements pertaining to a
Preliminary Plan specified in Chapter 41, Section 81-L shall not be so designated, nor
shall such plan be given approval by the Board.
C. Definitive Plan
1. General
An applicant seeking approval of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision shall file with the
Board the following:
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 15
Amended through August 18, 2014
(a) The original drawings of the Definitive Plan and fourteen (14) prints
thereof.
(b) A properly executed application in the form shown as Form C in the
Appendix hereto, which form may be changed from time to time by the
Planning Board. The application shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall state all easements and restrictions, and mortgages to
which the land is subject and all easements and restrictions appurtenant to
such land over the land of others, and shall include reference to any
recorded plan of the land in question. The applicant's attention is
specifically called to the documentation requirements set forth in Section
2,A., Applicant and Owner, of these Rules.
(c) The applicant shall, with the submission of a Definitive Plan, submit to the
Planning Board a Project Review Fee as set forth in Section 2(F)(4)(c) of
these Rules and Regulations. These Funds will be handed over to the
Town Accountant for deposit into a special account (a 53G account) as set
forth in G.L. c. 44, s. 53G and Section 2(F)(4) of these Rules and
Regulations. The Applicant is directed to Section 2(F)(4) of these Rules
and Regulations, which lays out all requirements and details relating to
Project Review Fees, including fees for modification of definitive plans,
replenishment of 53G accounts, and return of excess fees at the conclusion
of the review process. The failure of the applicant to make the initial
deposit and to maintain the account in accordance with Section 2(F) of
these Rules and Regulations, shall be grounds for disapproval of the plan.
(d) A sketch plan showing a possible or prospective street layout for any
adjacent unsubdivided land, whether or not owned or controlled by the
owner or subdivider of the subdivision, unless such a plan has already
been filed with the Board. In the case where the applicant does not own or
control any contiguous land, a statement to this effect shall appear in the
application.
(e) The applicant shall submit calculations for the determination of all
waterway openings to justify culvert and drain sizes as required by Section
(4,C.,3),(c). Such calculations shall be prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer, shall be based on the Rational Method and be
accompanied by a watershed area plan justifying said calculations. Such
plan shall clearly show the individual, delineated drainage areas used in
the calculations.
(f) The applicant shall submit calculations prepared by the Natural Resource
Conservation Service method to determine peak outflow from the site
under existing and proposed conditions.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 16
Amended through August 18, 2014
2. Contents of the Definitive Plan
The Definitive Plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn on mylar or linen acceptable to
the Registry of Deeds or Land Court at a scale of one inch equals forty feet or such
other scale as the Board may accept to show details clearly and adequately. The sheet
size shall be 24" x 36" with a minimum 2" border on the left hand side. If multiple
sheets are used, the key map (see (e) below) shall show the extent of coverage of each
sheet. The Definitive Plan shall include the following:
(a) Subdivision name, north point, date, scale, bench mark and datum, date of
original plan with provisions for dates and descriptions of any revisions.
All elevations to refer to National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
(b) Names and addresses of record owner, applicant and the applicant's
engineer and surveyor, and the seal and signature of said engineer and
surveyor together with proper certification as required in Section 2,
paragraphs C. and E.
(c) Boundary lines of the subdivision with the names of all abutters (including
those separated from the subdivision by a way) and any other person
required to receive notice of the Public Hearing in accordance with
Section 3,C.,(6) of these Rules, and the area of the adjoining parcels as
determined from the most recent tax list. The zoning classification of all
included property and all abutting and affected property shall be noted on
the plan.
(d) Existing and proposed lines of roadways and their width; ways and their
width; sidewalks, foot paths, bridle, and bicycle paths and their width;
easements and their purpose, and any public or common areas within the
subdivision. The proposed names of ways shall be shown.
(e) Location and names of ways bounding, approaching or within the vicinity
of the subdivision as well as the ways of the subdivision. This information
shall be in the form of a key map or location plan at a scale not smaller
than one (1) inch equals 800 feet.
(f) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction and length of
every way line, lot line and boundary line of the proposed subdivision, and
to establish these lines on the ground.
(g) Boundary lines, areas and dimensions of all proposed lots, including the
area of Flood Plain and Watershed Protection District and Accord Pond
Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District included within each
such lot, with all lots designated numerically and in sequence. Where the
frontage dimension given in item (f) is less than that required, the width of
the lot at the setback line also shall be given.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 17
Amended through August 18, 2014
(h) Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as to whether
existing or proposed.
(i) Location of natural waterways, swamps and water bodies, a soils map and
Flood Plain and Watershed Protection District and Accord Pond
Watershed and Hingham Aquifer Protection District boundaries within
and adjacent to the subdivision.
(j) The proposed system of drainage to include the size, location and material
of all subsurface drains, storm drains and culverts and the location of all
catch basins and manholes within and adjacent to the subdivision. Pipe
invert elevations shall be given at all drainage structures and outfalls. The
method of conducting the drainage to a natural waterway shall be
described completely and conform to Sections 4 and 5 herein.
A complete description of the compatibility of the proposed system of
drainage with town municipal services and waterways existing as of the
date of submission of the Definitive Plan shall be provided. Runoff
calculations shall be submitted to substantiate the adequacy of the
proposed drainage system within and outside of the subdivision together
with the existing town municipal services and waterways to be utilized for
discharge from the subdivision.
A schematic drainage diagram shall be provided for each stormwater
system, including the station and offset location of each structure with rim
and invert elevations, high ground- water elevations, pipe grades,
maximum and minimum flow rates and velocities, and outfall maximum
and minimum flow rates with 10-year flood elevations. Where detention
areas are utilized, outfall, 10-year flood and discharge structure invert and
flow elevations shall be shown with velocity and discharge rates. High
groundwater elevations shall be provided for all detention areas. An
example of an appropriate diagram is shown in Figure 3.
Wherever a proposed outfall pipe, swale, channel or drainage ditch will
discharge to a stream, brook, pond, marsh, or other wetland as may be
identified by the Planning Board, said wetland being either perennial or
seasonal, the ten year flood elevation shall be shown on the plan. If
experience at a particular location indicates that the ten year flood
elevation is exceeded at a frequency of greater than one in ten years, the
Planning Board may require that a higher flood elevation be shown. The
Board may seek advisory opinions and data from the Conservation
Commission and others in establishing the flood elevation at the point of
discharge.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 18
Amended through August 18, 2014
Whenever it is proposed to discharge drainage across land not owned by
the applicant, the applicant must demonstrate an easement or other legal
right to do so.
Where open drainage systems are employed, the plan shall show the
gradient of all cross slopes and swales or channels. Elevations shall be
shown on the plan every 100 feet along the swale line and at all changes in
gradient along that line.
(k) All existing and proposed municipal services and their appurtenances shall
be shown in such detail as necessary to coordinate all such services. An
approved utility plan (or plans) accurately showing all electric street
lighting, water, fire alarm, hydrants, sewer, storm drains, gas, oil lines,
telephone, and other municipal services may be submitted with the
Definitive Plan. Written approvals, if any, of the responsible officials
(Section 3,C.,(4)) shall be endorsed on the utility plan (or plans). The
Board shall review and approve, modify and approve or disapprove the
plans for municipal services and utilities as part of its approval.
(l) Location of existing street trees over 1 foot in diameter. Location, size
(diameter, breast, height) and species of proposed street trees. Size, type
and planting details must be approved by the Tree Warden.
(m) Suitable space near the title block of each sheet for recording thereon the
action of the Planning Board and the Board of Health with respect thereto.
(n) A separate layout plan for each proposed way in the subdivision, at a
horizontal scale of forty (40) feet to an inch, showing for each such way
the proposed exterior lines and the centerline of way with the centerline
stations, tangent bearings, angle points, points of intersection, points of
curvature, points of tangency, radii of curves, length of curves,
intersection angles and length of tangents. Information relative to the
exterior lines, (lot lines) shall be repeated in all instances where it is
different from that given for the centerline. The centerline and its
descriptive information shall be in red; all other data shall be in black.
The layout plan shall show the location of permanent monuments, together
with all lot lines with frontages, buildings, walks and drives. The layout
plan also shall show the size, location and elevation of all storm drains,
open drainage systems, subsurface drains, and all other municipal services,
together with their appurtenances, existing or proposed for each way. All
municipal services shall be shown on the layout plan by the use of
symbols the same as those used by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Works for work performed under Chapter 90, G.L.
On the same sheet, there shall be drawn cross sections of the proposed
way, properly located and identified by station number, at such intervals
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 19
Amended through August 18, 2014
along the way as will adequately indicate any variations in its section,
supplemented, where necessary, by lines on the layout plan showing the
width and location of proposed roadways, grass plots, gutters, sidewalks
and similar physical features. Provided, however, that where all cross
sections of the way will coincide with the appropriate cross section shown
on the Board's Typical Cross Section Plan, such agreement may be
indicated by proper notation on the layout plan, and the cross section
drawings may be omitted therefrom with the prior approval of the Board.
Directly below the layout plan of each proposed way, a profile shall be
drawn at a horizontal scale of forty (40) feet to an inch and a vertical scale
of four (4) feet to an inch, showing for such street existing centerline
grades in fine solid lines, existing exterior line grades in fine dash lines,
and proposed finished centerline grades in heavy solid lines. Proposed
grade elevations shall be shown by figures at fifty (50) foot stations,
except on vertical curves where they shall be shown at twenty-five (25)
foot stations and at PVC and PVT. Rates of gradient in percentage shall
also be shown. Lines and figures for the proposed edge of roadway shall
not be shown, except when the roadway is in other than a normal cross
section. Lines and figures indicating proposed grades shall be in red; all
other data shall be in black. All elevations shall be referenced to the
datum of 0.00 equals mean sea level as established by the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Profiles shall also indicate the location
of any intersecting public or private ways, and the location of existing and
proposed storm drains, including pipe invert elevations and gradients,
subsurface drains, connecting swales or channels, and all existing and
proposed municipal services and their appurtenances.
The layout plan shall have a space provided next to the title block for the
date and brief description of any revisions made thereto subsequent to the
approval of the subdivision by the Board. This space also shall include a
space for the signature of the Chairman or other authorized member of the
Board as evidence of the Board's approval of each revision made thereto.
Where only one way with a length of less than one thousand (1,000) feet is
proposed, the information required by item (n) (layout plan, cross sections,
and profile) may be shown either on the same sheet as items (a) through
(m), or on a separate sheet, but where one way with a length greater than
one thousand (1,000) feet or more than one way is proposed, the layout
plan, cross sections and profile (item (n)) shall be shown together on a
separate sheet for each way or portion thereof. All such sheets, together
with those showing items (a) through (m) shall be deemed to constitute the
Definitive Plan of the subdivision.
(o) All natural and historical objects and major site features, such as natural
waterways, water bodies, swamps, rock ridges and outcroppings, stone
walls, fences, buildings, etc.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 20
Amended through August 18, 2014
(p) Existing and proposed topography of the land at a contour interval of two
(2) feet except in cases where the Board directs that a smaller contour
interval is necessary in order to adequately interpret the topography of the
land, or agrees that the natural surface of the ground may be adequately
represented by contours with larger intervals.
Items (o) and (p) shall be shown on a separate sheet or sheets at the same
scale as the above plans and shall be drawn with pencil on tracing paper or
ink on cloth with all boundaries, lot and way lines of the subdivision
shown thereon.
Earthwork quantities shall be submitted with the Definitive Plan for all
roadway and other grading. An Earthwork Summary shall be provided,
indicating total surplus or borrow quantities. Disposal areas within the
subdivision for surplus earth or rock excavation, unsuitable materials and
tree stumps shall be noted on subdivision topographic plans. If materials
are to be disposed of outside the subdivision boundaries, a plot plan of the
site of disposal at a scale one inch equals eighty feet, including a locus
plan and property ownership, shall be provided indicating the location of
disposal areas outside the subdivision. Wetlands and floodplain lines shall
be shown on all plans identifying disposal areas.
(q) Such other information as may be required by the Board to evaluate the
proposed subdivision.
(r) The horizontal alignment of the centerline of each proposed way shall be
staked upon the ground at the time of the filing of the Definitive Plan.
(s) Stormwater Management Plan that complies with the most current version
of the Massachusetts DEP Stormwater Management Policy and Standards
and the Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines.
3. Review by Board of Health as to Suitability of the Land
At the time of filing of the Definitive Plan, the subdivider shall also file with the
Board of Health two prints of the Definitive Plan, and in unsewered areas, shall
submit a topographic plan with two foot contour intervals and comply with other
Board of Health requirements, including percolation tests and test excavations, as
specified in "Supplemental Rules and Regulations for the Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage".
The Board of Health shall within forty-five days after filing of the plan, report to the
Planning Board in writing, approval or disapproval of said plan. If the Board of
Health disapproves said plan, it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the
lots shown on such plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 21
Amended through August 18, 2014
health, and include such specific findings and the reasons therefor in such report.
Every building lot so located that it cannot be served by a connection to the municipal
sewer system shall be provided with a sewage disposal system approved by the Board
of Health.
4. Review by Other Officials
Before the Definitive Plan is submitted, the Applicant is encouraged to consult with
and may obtain written statements that the proposed improvements shown on a utility
plan, (3,C.,(2),(k)), are laid out to the satisfaction of the official and for the facilities
listed below:
(a) Superintendent of the Department of Public Works as to the design of the
street system, location of easements, design of the drainage system
including appurtenances and compatibility with existing municipal
services and waterways, effect on traffic congestion and safety in public
ways adjacent to the subdivision and the location, size and species of
street trees.
(b) The Chief of the Fire Department as to the location of the hydrants,
adequacy of water flow at the hydrant, and the layout of the fire alarm
system, including location of boxes.
(c) The Sewer Commissioners as to the requirements for provision for
connections to and compatibility with the sewer system and, if required,
the layout and design of the necessary connecting mains, laterals,
manholes and stubs for such system. In such cases, review by the Sewer
Commissioners will include the profiles of the streets.
(d) The Manager of the local water company as to the location and size of
water mains, including service to the fire hydrants.
(e) The Hingham Municipal Light Board as to the requirements for electricity.
(f) The Gas Company as to the location and size of gas mains.
(g) The Telephone Company as to the location of the telephone lines.
(h) The Postmaster of the Hingham Post Office, as to the type of delivery mail
proposed.
(i) The Conservation Commission as to requirements under the Wetlands Act
(G.L. Chapter 131, Sec. 40 and 40A), the local wetlands bylaw and the
Flood Plain and Watershed Protection District.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 22
Amended through August 18, 2014
5. Performance Guarantee
Before endorsement of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision, the applicant shall agree to
complete the required improvements as shown on the Definitive Plan and as specified
in Section 5 for all lots in a subdivision, such construction and installation to be
secured by one, or in part by one and in part by the other, of the following methods
which may from time to time be varied by the applicant:
(a) Final Approval with Deposit or Irrevocable Letter of Credit
The applicant shall file a deposit of money or negotiable securities, or an
irrevocable Letter of Credit, or whichever of the aforementioned is deemed by
the Board to provide adequate security in an amount determined by the Board
to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements as
shown on the Definitive Plan and as specified in Section 5 not covered by a
covenant under (b) below. Such security, if filed or deposited, shall be
approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Counsel and as to
sureties by the Town Accountant, and shall be contingent on the completion of
such improvements within two years of the date of the irrevocable Letter of
Credit or deposit of money. The form of the deposit may be as given by Form
D or Form F in the Appendix, or as otherwise required by the Board and shall
be contingent upon the completion of said improvements within two years of
the date of the Agreement. At the discretion of the Board, a time extension
may be granted for a period not to exceed one (1) year; provided that such an
extension may be conditioned upon an increase in the amount of such security
as determined by the Board.
(b) Final Approval with Covenant
The applicant shall file a covenant acceptable to the Board executed and duly
recorded by the owner of record, running with the land, whereby such
improvements as shown on the Definitive Plan and as specified in Section 5,
not covered by a deposit under (a) above, shall be provided to serve any lot
before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed.
A suggested, but not required, form of the covenant is given by Form E in the
Appendix; hereto, which form may be changed from time to time by the
Planning Board.
6. Public Hearing
Before approval of the Definitive Plan is given, a public hearing shall be held by the
Board at the time and place designated by the Board. Notice of the time, place, and
subject matter of such hearing will be given by the Board once in each of two
successive weeks, the first publication being at least fourteen (14) days prior thereto,
by advertisement in an official publication of, or in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town of Hingham. A copy of said notice will be mailed to the applicant and to
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 23
Amended through August 18, 2014
all owners of land abutting upon the subdivision and to anyone else entitled to receive
notice of any hearings held in accordance with Chapter 40A Section 12 of the General
Laws, as appearing in the most recent tax list.
7. Approval, Modification or Disapproval
In the case of a nonresidential subdivision or a residential subdivision where a
preliminary plan has been filed and duly acted upon, or where 45 days has elapsed
since the submission of the preliminary plan, and a definitive plan has been
submitted, the Board shall take action within 90 days of submission, or such further
time as may be agreed upon at the written request of the applicant.
In the case of a residential subdivision where no preliminary plan has been submitted,
or where 45 days has not elapsed since the submission of a preliminary plan, the
Board shall act within 135 days of submission, or such further time as may be agreed
upon at the written request of the applicant.
8. Certificate of Approval
The action of the Board in respect to said Plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall
be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by certified mail to the applicant.
Approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original drawing of the Definitive Plan
by the signature of the person officially authorized by the Board, but not until the
statutory twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate
of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk, and said Clerk has notified the Board
that no appeal has been filed and not until any and all modifications or conditions set
forth in the Certificate of Approval are incorporated in the Definitive Plan to the
satisfaction of the Board. In any case, approval of the Definitive Plan shall not
constitute the laying out or acceptance by the Town of any ways within a subdivision.
9. Inspection Fees
After granting of a site plan approval or Definitive Plan approval, the Planning Board
will require a Supplemental Project Review Fee, as set forth in Section 2(F)(4)(e) of
these Rules and Regulations for the purpose of insuring the availability of funds
during the inspection phase of the review process. These funds will be handed over to
the Town Accountant for deposit into a special account (a 53G account) as set forth in
G.L. c. 44, s.53 G and Section 2(F)(4) of these Rules and Regulations. The Applicant
is directed to Section 2(F)(4) of these Rules and Regulations, which lays out all
requirements and details relating to 53G accounts.
The failure of the applicant to make the initial deposit and to maintain the account in
accordance with Section 2(F) of these Rules and Regulations shall be grounds for
rescission of the approval of the plan and for disapproval. The full cost of any special
non-scheduled inspections deemed necessary by the failure of construction to proceed
entirely in accordance with the approved plan, or as a result of any question
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 24
Amended through August 18, 2014
concerning the accuracy of any data provided by the applicant at any time, shall be
borne by the applicant.
10. Recording of Plan
After the return to the applicant of the Definitive Plan as approved and endorsed, he
shall cause to be recorded at the Plymouth Registry of Deeds and, in the case of
registered land with the recorder of the Land Court, said plan, including all sheets
thereof, with covenant if any, and shall pay all fees and costs related to the registry of
the plan. After such plan, or modification thereof, is approved by the Board it shall
be recorded within six (6) months or the applicant shall be required to apply to the
Planning Board or Town Clerk for a certificate, dated within thirty days of the time of
recording, that the approval has not been modified, amended, or rescinded, nor the
plan changed. Furthermore, the applicant shall notify the Board of such recording,
submitting evidence thereof, satisfactory to the Board, before the commencement of
any work upon the subdivision. Upon receipt of notification of recording, the Board
shall file one print of the Definitive Plan with the Building Commissioner. Where
approval with covenant is noted thereon, he shall issue no permit for the construction
of a building on any lot within the subdivision except upon receipt from the Board of
a copy of the certificate of performance (Form G) releasing the lot in question.
11. Revision of Definitive Plan
If the applicant desires to make revisions due to field conditions or for any reason
whatsoever, he shall submit a reproducible copy of the Definitive Plan or plans to be
revised with a colored pencil representation of the changes he proposes to make
together with a written request for modification, and a request for waiver of these
Rules and Regulations with the information required by Section 2,E., if appropriate.
The Board will consider such change in the same manner as consideration of the
original plan and approve, disapprove or modify the requested change with or without
a public hearing as the Board may determine. The change as approved shall then be
incorporated on the original Definitive Plan or a mylar or linen reproduction thereof,
and prints shall be filed as required of the original plan. Upon approval of the
modification, the modification shall be recorded in accordance with (10) above.
(a) Work Inconsistent with the Approved Plan
No work may proceed that is inconsistent in any respect with the approved
plan, even if such work is pursuant to an order, decision, ruling or regulation
of any other municipal, state or federal agency or tribunal. It is the burden of
the applicant to seek modification of the approved plan, to incorporate such
order, decision, ruling or regulation, or to other- wise reconcile the
inconsistencies.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 25
Amended through August 18, 2014
12. Evidence of Satisfactory Performance
Before the Board will release the interest of the Town in an irrevocable Letter of
Credit or deposit of cash or, in the case of approval with a covenant, issue a release of
the covenant:
(a) The applicant shall pay all fees as specified in Section 3,C.,(9) and Section
2(F)(4)(e) to cover the cost of inspections, and shall submit copies of receipts,
releases, or other acceptable evidence that all due hydrant rentals, municipal
light rentals, or other bills for municipal services have been paid to date.
(b) The applicant shall be responsible for filing with the Planning Board as-built
plans of the ways of the subdivision. The as-built plans shall be clearly
identified as such, and shall include the profile plans and shall meet the
requirements as to format and content as given in Section 3,C.,(16) for the
Definitive Plans.
Where the ways, utilities and appurtenances of the subdivision have been
installed according to the approved Definitive Plan (including approved
subsequent amendments) the engineer may make certification in the form
shown as Form R-2 in the Appendix hereto, which form may be changed from
time to time by the Planning Board, to that effect which shall be submitted
with the request for release of performance guarantee or the statement of
performance to the Town Clerk. Evidence shall be submitted from each
inspection report (Section 6) supporting such a certification. If the Planning
Board concurs, the Definitive Plan or addenda to the Definitive Plan shall be
sufficient to satisfy the requirement for as-built plans.
As-built plans may be mylar reproductions of the Definitive Plans. The
as-built plans shall represent the as-built conditions of all work and
appurtenances constructed as a requirement of the subdivision and shall show
accurately all municipal services installed as part of the subdivision. As a
condition precedent to the preparation of the as-built plans, the applicant shall
engage the necessary engineering services to properly record the location of
the municipal services installed, and the as-built plans shall contain a
certification (see Section 2,C.) by such engineer that the municipal services
were installed in the locations as shown on the plans. The as-built plans shall
be submitted as a condition of the release of the bond or covenant, as required
for the approval of the Definitive Plan, and a condition of approval by the
Planning Board of acceptance of the ways by the Town Meeting.
(c) The Board shall obtain from its engineer the complete inspection form (R-1)
as given in Section 6 to the effect that all work required by these Rules and
Regulations has been completed for each way in the subdivision (or way or
ways serving the lots in question), and that he has approved the methods of
construction and the materials used in the performance of such work.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 26
Amended through August 18, 2014
(d) The applicant shall obtain from the Chief of the Fire Department a statement,
which shall be submitted to the Board, that he has approved the installation of
the hydrant system for each way in question and that the installation of the fire
alarm cable and boxes has been approved by the Fire Chief.
(e) The applicant shall obtain from the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works a statement, which shall be submitted to the Board, that he has
approved the location, size and species of street trees, the construction of the
streets and the installation of the drainage system, including appurtenances.
(f) The applicant shall obtain from the Sewer Commission a statement, which
shall be submitted to the Board, that they have approved the installation of the
sewer system as required by them.
(g) The applicant shall obtain from the Municipal Light Board a statement, which
shall be submitted to the Board, approving the installation of the street lights
and electric power service.
(h) The applicant shall obtain a statement from the Chairman of the Conservation
Commission that appropriate guarantees have been received, measures have
been taken, or orders of condition have been complied with to the satisfaction
of the Conservation Commission, where applicable, with respect to the
protection of wetlands under Chapter 131, Sections 40 and 40A of the General
Laws and under the local wetlands bylaw, and with respect to the Flood Plain
and Watershed Protection District Bylaw.
(i) The Board may at its discretion require the applicant to obtain, at his own
expense, additional professional engineering advice as to the satisfactory
completion of the construction of each street or way in the subdivision,
drainage systems within and outside of the subdivision, water mains and their
appurtenances, and installation of all other services required according to the
Definitive Plan.
(j) The improvements of the subdivision shall endure twelve (12) months without
substantial degradation. The twelve (12) months runs from the completion of
all of (a) through (i) and the completion of the rest of any repairs or
corrections required by the Board.
13. Release of Performance Guarantee
Upon the completion of the improvements as shown on the Plan, and as required
herein, security for the performance of which was given by deposit, Letter of Credit
or covenant, or upon the performance of any covenant with respect to any lot, the
applicant may request and agree on terms of release with the Board, or he may send
by registered mail to the Town Clerk a written statement, in duplicate, that the said
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 27
Amended through August 18, 2014
construction or installation in connection with such deposit, Letter of Credit or
covenant has been completed in accordance with the requirements contained in these
Rules & Regulations, such statement to contain the address of the applicant, and the
Town Clerk shall forthwith furnish a copy of said statement to the Board.
If the Board determines that said improvements have been completed, it shall release
the interest of the Town in such irrevocable Letter of Credit and return the deposit to
the person who furnished the same, or release the covenant by appropriate instrument
(Form G) duly acknowledged, with a copy to the Building Commissioner, except that
the Board shall retain a deposit of 10% of the original security for a period of 12
months after completion of the subdivision to insure the integrity of the construction.
If the Board determines that said improvements have not been completed, it shall
within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the applicant's statement by the Town
Clerk, specify to the applicant in writing the details wherein said improvements fail to
comply with its Rules & Regulations.
14. Reduction of Deposit or Letter of Credit
Upon written application of the applicant stating reasons therefore the amount of any
deposit held hereunder, or Letter of Credit may from time to time be reduced at the
discretion of the Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released by said
Board in part in the form shown as Form F in the Appendix hereto, which form may
be changed from time to time by the Planning Board. At no time shall the amount be
reduced to less than 10% of the original amount.
15. Time of Completion of Ways and Installation of Municipal Services
Every applicant shall state in his application the time which he agrees to complete the
proposed ways and to install the drainage system, water pipes, gas pipes and electric
lines, and all other municipal services required by the Board. A condition of the
approval of the Definitive Plan shall be conditioned upon the completion of the ways
and the installation of municipal services within 24 months of the date of application,
unless a longer period is expressly requested in the application with the justification
therefore, and unless a longer period is expressly allowed in the certificate of
approval.
In the event the work is not completed within the time set forth or as extended, the
Board shall rescind its approval and require the reapplication and filing of a new
Definitive Plan.
16. As-Built Plans
The developer shall supply as-built plans for each and every way of the subdivision,
and the subdivision shall not be considered complete until the Board accepts the
as-built plan. The as-built shall include the following:
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 28
Amended through August 18, 2014
Requirements for As-Built Plans
1. Legend on each page of the plan that the plan was prepared in compliance
with the Rules & Regulations of the Registers of Deeds and must be signed
and sealed by a registered land surveyor.
2. On each page of the plan a blank space, as required, to be reserved for use by
the Registry of Deeds which is marked "FOR REGISTRY USE ONLY".
3. The metes and bounds for ways must be complete so as to permit a continuous
metes and bounds description of the area of the way. This would include a
line or lines, or an arc or arcs, identified as to metes and bounds locating the
end of the area of a way which intersects with another way.
4. On each page of the plan signature lines:
a. For Planning Board Approval or endorsement that approval is not
required, as applicable.
b. For the Board of Selectmen.
c. For the Town Clerk; date of filing; date of acceptance.
5. All easement areas:
a. Must be clearly indicated with metes and bounds shown.
b. If a drainage easement is shown on the Plan, then the Plan must show the
body of water, stream, river or other terminus for drainage flow as well as
all other drainage easement areas through which drainage must flow to
reach its terminus.
6. Each parcel or lot of land shown on the plan (including all parcels abutting
any way and all parcels crossed by or abutting a drainage easement) must be
identified on the plan by a lot or parcel number (preferred method) or by the
name(s) of current owners.
7. All registered land shown on the plan should be identified by Land Court plan
number or Land Court case number or Land Court Certificate of Title number.
8. All abbreviations or codes used on the plan should be explained by the use of
a legend inscribed on the plan.
9. A certification by the engineer that the municipal services were installed at the
locations as shown on the plans.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 29
Amended through August 18, 2014
SECTION 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
A. General
Plans for a subdivision will not be approved unless the subdivision and its ways are
laid out in compliance with the requirements of these design standards. It should be
noted that these design standards are considered as a minimum acceptable to the
Board under its Rules and Regulations for subdivision control. Applicants are
encouraged to design the subdivision at a level above these standards so as to create
an attractive subdivision with the maximum livability, usefulness, and amenity.
It was not intended that these design standards would be applicable to all possible
situations which may arise in the design of a particular subdivision. In situations not
covered herein, and particularly in the case of subdivisions for business or industrial
purposes, planned unit development, multifamily development, and similar large scale
developments, the subdivision shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Board in
accordance with such design standards as will satisfy the purpose of the Subdivision
Control Law. In such cases, due consideration will be given to the prospective
character of the subdivision, the anticipated amount of travel upon the ways therein,
and/or to the relevant factors of the particular situation.
B. Streets (or Ways)
(1) Types of Streets
The following types of streets are hereby established for the purpose of developing
design criteria in accordance with the expected use and type of traffic anticipated
thereon.
(a) Major Streets A street which, in the opinion of the Board is being used or
will be used as a thoroughfare between different portions of the Town of
Hingham, or which will be the principal access to a business or industrial
subdivision.
(b) Secondary Street A street intercepting several minor streets and which, in
the opinion of the Board may carry traffic from such minor streets to a
major street or community facility, including the principal access streets or
principal circulation streets of residential subdivisions, and including all
streets, except those designated as major streets, or a business or industrial
subdivision.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 30
Amended through August 18, 2014
(c) Minor Street A street which, in the opinion of the Board is being used or
will be used primarily to provide access to abutting lots, and which is not
intended for use by through traffic.
(d) Limited Residential Street A street, or network of streets, less than 400' in
length ending in a turnaround and which intersects no other streets
except at its origin, which may never serve more than 7 lots, which in the
opinion of the Board is of such topography that its layout and design in
accordance with the Minimum Design Standards for limited residential
streets creates no risk to the public safety or convenience, and which the
developer agrees will never be lengthened. The requirements of this
section shall be guaranteed by a covenant running with the land of the
subdivision and each lot thereof. The Board will not entertain any request
for waiver of the length limitation or design requirements for such a street.
(e) Private Local Roadway A roadway, no more than 300' in length, ending
in a turnaround, to be in accordance with the International Fire Code
(IFC), as shown on the following diagram (Appendix D), or a 50’ circular
roadway which intersects no other streets except at its origin, which may
never serve more than 3 lots, which in the opinion of the Board is of such
topography that its layout and design in accordance with the Minimum
Design Standards for private local roadway creates no risk to the public
safety or convenience, and which the developer agrees will never be
lengthened. The requirements of this section shall be guaranteed by a
covenant running with the land of the subdivision and each lot thereof.
The road is to remain private in perpetuity. The Board will not entertain
any request for waiver of the length limitation or design requirements for
such a street.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 31
Amended through August 18, 2014
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 32
Amended through August 18, 2014
(2) Location of Streets
(a) General The streets shall be designed and located so as, in the opinion of
the Board, to be continuous and in alignment with existing streets; to
provide adequate access to all lots in the subdivision, by streets that are
safe and convenient for travel; to lessen congestion in such streets and
adjacent public streets; to reduce danger from the operation of motor
vehicles; to secure safety in case of fire, flood, panic and other emergency;
to insure compliance with applicable Zoning By-laws; to secure adequate
provision for proper drainage and water, sewers and other municipal
services, compatible with existing town municipal services and
waterways; and to coordinate the streets in the subdivision, with each
other and with the existing street system of the Town, and the streets in
neighboring subdivisions.
(b) The proposed streets shall be designed and located so as to conform so far
as practicable to the Master Plan if any, as adopted in whole or in part by
the Board.
(c) Provision, including grant of legal right, satisfactory to the Board shall be
made for the proper projection of streets, or for access to adjoining
property which is not yet subdivided. Where, in the opinion of the Board,
access, safety and congestion considerations necessitate, a developer shall
be required to construct or improve at his own expense, private ways
outside the subdivision to connect adequately with public ways.
(d) Due consideration will be given by the Board to the attractiveness of the
layout and to the conformance of the ways to the topography.
(e) Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property shall not
be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Board, such strips shall
be in the public interest.
(f) In case access to a subdivision crosses land in another municipality, the
Board may require certification, from appropriate authorities, that such
access is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan and conforms to
subdivision requirements of such municipality and that a legally adequate
performance bond has been duly posted or that such access is adequately
improved to handle prospective traffic.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 33
Amended through August 18, 2014
(g) The intersection of proposed streets of the subdivision with existing
private or public ways must conform to all design standards of these Rules
as if the intersection were entirely within the subdivision.
(3) Width, Alignment and Grades of Streets
(a) The criteria contained in Table 1 shall be referenced to AASHTO chapters
observed in the design of streets. The layout shall be designed to achieve
the following minimum stopping sight distances with unobstructed
visibility: for (a) limited residential streets, 150 feet; (b) minor through
streets and secondary streets, 250 feet; and (c) major streets, 500 feet.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 34
Amended through August 18, 2014
Table 1
Minimum Design Standards for Streets
Type of
Street Way
Width of
Right of
Way
Width of
Traveled
Edge
Treatment
Sidewalk Minimum
Centerline
Radii
Maximum
Centerline
Grade
Minimum
Centerline
Grade
Maximum
Curb
Radius at
Street
Intersection
Minimum
Length of
Tangent
Between
Reverse
Curves
Depth of
Pavement
Sub-base
Major 70' 40' *
24" CCB
ES or
VGC with
2" SS 5' ES 500' 5% 1% 50' 150'
3" Base
3" Top
24" - 6"
Lifts
Secondary 55' 28' *
24" CCB
ES or
VGC with
2" SS 5' OS 300' 5% 1% 30' 100'
3" Base
1.5" Top
24" - 6"
Lifts
Minor 46' 22' *
18" CCB
ES 5' OS 200' 8% 1% 30' 0
3" Base
1.5" Top
24" - 6"
Lifts
Limited
Residential 40' 18' *
18" CCB
ES 0 150' 8% 1% 30' 0
3" Base
1.5" Top
24" - 6"
Lifts
Private
Local 40' 14'
18" CCB
with 4' SS
ES 0 150’ 5% 1% 30’ 0
3" Base
1.5" Top
24" - 6"
Lifts
LEGEND: CCB = CAPE COD BERM ES = EACH SIDE OS = ONE SIDE VGC = VERTICAL GRANITE CURB SS = STABILIZED SHOULDER
These design specifications represent minimum standards. More stringent design criteria shall be required by the Board when deemed necessary for present and
future vehicular traffic.
Notes:
* The Board may require that the traveled way be separated by a raised median strip with a width to be determined by the Board. In this case, the traveled way
shall consist of two roadways, each with a minimum width of 20 feet or such greater width as the Bard may specify.
Major and secondary streets shall be superelevated in the cross section in the horizontal curve in accordance with the American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Policy on Design of Urban Highways and Arterial Streets 1973. The maximum superelevation shall be 0.06 ft. per foot
(6 percent). Secondary streets shall be designed for a speed of not less than 30 mph and major streets for a speed of not less than 40 mph.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 35
Amended through August 18, 2014
(b) The Board may require delineation of adequate easements of slope on
adjoining land in proper cases.
(c) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty (60)
degrees.
(d) Streets intersecting another street shall be laid out opposite one another or
shall be a minimum of two hundred (200) feet between centerlines
measured along the centerline of the intersected street.
(e) Where the angle of intersection between two streets varies more than ten
(10) degrees from a right angle, the radius of the curve at the curb line at
the obtuse angle shall be less and at the acute angle shall be
correspondingly greater than the radius specified in Section 4,B.,(3),(a)
above to the extent approved or required by the Board.
(f) A leveling area shall be provided having not greater than three (3) percent
grade for a distance of one hundred (100) feet, measured from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
(g) All changes in grade exceeding five tenths (0.5) of one percent shall be
connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to afford the sight
distances required in sub-paragraph (3),(a) above.
(h) In the case of a subdivision in which connections to the Town sewer
system are required, the sanitary sewer system within the subdivision shall
be subject to the approval of the Sewer Commissioners.
(4) Dead-End Streets
(a) Dead-end streets, excepting limited residential streets, shall not be longer
than 800' in length. A dead-end street shall be measured from the nearest
point of multiple access and then along the centerline or centerlines of the
street or streets to the furthermost limit or limits of the right-of-way of the
required turnaround. For the purposes of this regulation, the point of
multiple access shall be the intersection of the dead-end street's centerline
with the right-of-way limit of the intersected way or ways.
(b) Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround
having an exterior line (way line) radius of at least sixty-five (65) feet, the
roadway to have a radius of at least fifty-five (55) feet. An island of 30
feet in radius, suitably landscaped with grass, ground cover, trees, natural
rock and/or elements blending with the surroundings shall be provided in
the center of the turnaround. The island shall be enclosed with sloped
granite curbing with 6" reveal from the roadway pavement. (See Figure 2
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 36
Amended through August 18, 2014
for Turnaround and Island Plan). An island shall not be required in a
temporary turnaround; however, the turnaround shall be paved. When the
dead-end street is extended, the turnaround easement shall terminate, and
the applicant shall be required to remove, regrade, and restore the
turnaround area to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
C. Subsurface and Storm Drains
(1) Compatibility and General Design
All subsurface drains and storm drains and systems thereof shall be constructed in a
manner which will ensure their complete compatibility with the existing town
municipal services, wetland resource and flood plain areas and waterways. The
drainage systems shall be designed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board with
provision for such facilities and arrangement thereof as in the Board's opinion are
reasonably necessary to provide adequate disposal of surface water from all streets
and land within and adjacent to the subdivision.
Drainage systems shall be designed so as to avoid the flooding of downstream
properties through the maintenance of existing rates of runoff. Where site or
downstream flooding currently exist, the proposed drainage system shall be designed
such that the existing volume of storm water passing from the proposed subdivision
shall be maintained during the downstream flood period. These Regulations
specifically prohibit retention or direct subsurface discharge of storm water.
(2) Groundwater Interception
Subdivision roads shall be designed in a manner which ensures that roadway storm
drains and structures are placed above high groundwater. Evidence of high
groundwater in low or cut areas shall be observed by the Planning Board's engineer
and be provided to the Board as part of the definitive subdivision application.
Subdrains shall be installed in all ledge cuts and shall extend at least fifty (50) feet
beyond the limits of such cuts. The subdrain shall consist of a minimum of one
longitudinal drain for each side of the paved roadway. In addition, laterals may be
required as directed by the Board in areas in which an undue amount of water could
accumulate in the subgrade. The system of subdrains shall be discharged into the
storm drain system or be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the Board.
(3) Storm Drains
A complete storm drain system shall be designed for each street of the subdivision to
the satisfaction of the Board and shall be so laid out and of sufficient size to permit
unimpeded flow of all portions of the street system so that water does not accumulate
thereon, to intercept storm water runoff from the adjacent lots of the subdivision, and
to eliminate undesirable or unnatural accumulation of water on any portion of the
subdivision or surrounding property, and to be completely compatible with the
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 37
Amended through August 18, 2014
existing town municipal services and waterways. Those conditions which result from
a ten (10) year storm shall be assumed as a basis for the design of the street drains.
Twenty five (25) year conditions shall be the basis for design of stream culverts
passing beneath roadways. Stormwater connections from abutting property into
roadway drain systems is prohibited. The storm drain system shall include berms,
gutters, catch basins, manholes, culverts, drain lines, concrete headwalls, detention
areas and such other items as may be required to complete the system to the
satisfaction of the Board.
(a) Catch basins shall be used exclusively for the roadway drain system's
intake of surface storm water and shall be located in pairs, one on each
side of the roadway, at all low points or sag curves in the roadway, at
intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet on continuous grades
of the roadway, not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet to either side of
a low point, at or near the corners of the roadway at intersecting streets,
and at the end of turnarounds pitched toward the dead end or at the neck if
pitched toward the open end of road. Invert and rim elevations shall be
shown on both plan and profile.
(b) Manholes shall be located at all changes in direction of a drain line, either
horizontally or vertically, or at the intersection of two (2) or more drain
lines, or so located that no drain line greater than three hundred (300) feet
in length would exist without a manhole. Manhole inlet and outlet inverts
shall be at the same elevation. Manholes shall not be used to slow the
flow of storm water. Invert and frame elevations shall be shown on both
plan and profile.
(c) Culverts shall be designed on the assumption that the entire drainage area
is built up to that density and in the manner which the applicable section
of the Zoning By-Law allows. All culverts shall have a standard concrete
or masonry headwall at each end, and any culvert over thirty (30) inches in
diameter shall have standard concrete wing walls. Culverts having inside
diameters of eighteen (18) inches or greater shall be enclosed at each end
with a secure metal grille.
(d) All the drains shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches in diameter and
shall be laid on a slope of not less than one-half of one (0.5) percent. The
designed maximum velocity shall not exceed twelve (12) feet per second,
and the minimum velocity designed for shall not be less than two (2) feet
per second. All outfalls shall extend to, and be compatible with, either a
natural waterway or an existing drainage system. Where detention areas
are used to control storm water runoff, the detention area shall be
considered a part of the drainage system. Discharges into detention areas
shall be above the area's 10 year flood elevation. The ground elevation of
all outfall pipes, swales, channels or drainage ditches discharging to a
stream, brook, pond, marsh or other wetland shall be at or above the 10
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 38
Amended through August 18, 2014
year flood elevation; or at higher elevations if required by the Planning
Board because of special local situations based on consultation with the
Conservation Commission and others (see 3,C.,2,(j)). Provision shall be
made for the disposal of surface water intercepted or collected by the
system in such manner that no flow is conducted over Town ways, or over
the land of others unless a drainage easement is obtained. Where adjacent
property is not subdivided, provision shall be made for extensions of the
system by continuing appropriate drains to the boundary of the subdivision
at such size and grade as will allow their proper projection.
(e) A standard concrete or masonry headwall, with wing walls where
required, shall be provided at the outfall end of all drains.
(f) A tide gate shall be provided at the discharge end of all drainage outlets
into tidal waters.
(g) Proper connections shall be made with the existing public drainage
system. Where adjacent property is not subdivided or developed,
provision shall be made for extension of the system by continuing
appropriate drains to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision at such
size and grade as will allow for their proper projection. Where the
Planning Board determines that the public interest and the best interest of
the Town and the subdivision will be served by extension of the drainage
system outside the boundaries of the subdivision, the Planning Board may
require the Applicant, at his own expense, to continue the layout and
construction of the drainage system to a point outside the boundaries of
the subdivision where the drainage system may be connected to, and be
compatible with, either a natural waterway or an existing public drainage
system.
D. Open Drainage Systems
Open drainage systems of swales, ridges and slopes shall be designed to fit the natural
contour of the land as much as possible. Disturbed land shall be landscaped to
conform to the surrounding area and planted to eliminate the possibility of erosion
and siltation. In no case shall side slopes in disturbed areas be greater than
twenty-five (25) percent. Swales and drainage channels shall have a minimum grade
of one-half (0.5) percent and a maximum grade of four (4.0) percent, although for
small areas draining not more than one half acre, grades of up to ten (10) percent are
permissible. The ground shall be sloped so that there is no stagnant water or artificial
pools on the site attributable to the open drainage system. Drainage channels and
swales shall be provided with easements which shall also permit access by the Town
of Hingham for maintenance purposes. Easements shall conform to Section 4,E. of
these Rules and Regulations.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 39
Amended through August 18, 2014
Where the Planning Board determines that the public interest and the best interest of
the Town and the subdivision will be served by extension of the drainage system
outside the boundaries of the subdivision, the Planning Board may require the
Applicant, at his own expense, to continue the layout and construction of the drainage
system to a point outside the boundaries of the subdivision where the drainage system
may be connected to, and be compatible with, either a natural waterway or an existing
public drainage system.
E. Stormwater Management Structures
Storm water management structures for detention and/or retention of stormwater shall be
located on a separate lot which shall, in the case of accepted roadways be conveyed to the
Town and in the case of a private roadway be conveyed to a Homeowner’s Association.
Stormwater management structures for detention and/or retention of stormwater shall be open
basins constructed of natural earth material with loam and seed surface treatment and shall be
designed so as to blend into the existing topography. Side slopes shall not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) 4H:IV and shall be placed beyond the limit of wetland and flood plain resource
areas and above high ground water elevations. Groundwater separation shall comply with
Department of Environmental Protection requirements for infiltration systems and be a
minimum of 12 inches for detention systems. The lot in which stormwater structures are
located need not comply with zoning requirements for a buildable lot but shall have a
minimum of 20 feet of frontage for access and shall include the access, slopes necessary to
construct the basin and the outlet including erosion protection at the outlet and the path of
flow to the property line.
F. Easements
(1) Easements for municipal services shall be provided as required and shall
be at least twenty (20) feet wide (exclusive of underground services) and centered
on the lot line where practical.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel
or stream, the Board may require that there be provided a storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way of adequate width to conform substantially to the lines of
such water courses, drainage way, channel or stream, to provide for construction,
maintenance, or other necessary purposes.
G. Sidewalks
Sidewalks of adequate width (Figure 1) shall be constructed beside the roadway along
each way in a subdivision as follows:
Major Streets - both sides
Secondary Streets - one side
Limited Residential Streets - no sidewalks
Minor Streets - one side
Private Local – no sidewalks
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 40
Amended through August 18, 2014
H. Lots
All lots within a subdivision shall comply with the Zoning By-Law of the Town of
Hingham, or with the terms of any variance from such requirements which may have
been specifically granted by the Board of Appeals. Percolation tests shall be required
in accordance with the Supplementary Rules and Regulations for the Disposal of
Sanitary Sewage of the Hingham Board of Health.
I. Open Space
Before approval of a plan the Board may also, in proper cases, require the plan to
show a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes, or for
providing light and air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation
to the land being subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The Board
may, by appropriate endorsement on the plan, require that no building be erected upon
such park or parks for a period of not more than three years without its approval.
J. Protection Of Natural Features
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as large trees, water courses,
scenic points, historic spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will
add attractiveness and value to the subdivision or to the Town.
K. Cases In Which Ways Are Not Adequate
In any case in which the Board deems that ways either within or outside of the
subdivision not adequate, it may approve the plan on conditions limiting the lots upon
which buildings may be erected and the number of buildings that may be erected on
particular lots without further consent by the Board to the access provided, and in
each such case shall endorse such conditions on the plan to which they relate, or set
them forth in a separate instrument attached thereto to which reference is made on the
plan and may require the applicant to record a covenant running with the land of the
subdivision and each lot thereof guaranteeing the limitations set as a condition of its
approval as set forth in this section. The Board may deem said ways to be not
adequate if such ways, either within or outside the subdivision, fail to meet the Design
Standards set forth in these Rules.
L. Municipal Services
(1) The Board will require that the plan show municipal services of the kinds
existing in the public ways nearest to the subdivision, or which in the opinion of
the Board are likely to
be laid in such public ways within the reasonably near future, and which will be
necessary
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 41
Amended through August 18, 2014
for the health, safety, or convenience of the prospective occupants of the
subdivision.
(2) The municipal services and sleeves for house connections shall be located as
shown on the "Typical Road Cross Sections". The number and type of sleeves
for house connections will be as directed by the Board.
(3) The design of the sewer system, if required, shall be as directed and approved by
the Sewer Commissioners.
(4) The design of the water system and provision for hydrant service shall be as
directed or approved by the Manager of the Massachusetts-American Water
Company. Where adjacent property is not subdivided or developed, provision
shall be made for proper projection of the sewer system, if required, by
continuing appropriate mains to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision at such
size and grade as will allow for the projection.
(5) The location and type of hydrants, and size of pipe serving the hydrants, shall be
as directed or approved by the Chief of the Fire Department. A minimum flow
of 1,000 gallons of water per minute shall be required at the hydrant. Proper and
compatible connections shall be made with the existing public water, and where
required, sewer systems. Where in the opinion of the Planning Board the
capacity of an existing public system is inadequate to accommodate the entire
subdivision, the Planning Board may, at its option, either (i) approve only that
portion of the subdivision which in its opinion can be adequately accommodated,
or (ii) require the Applicant to make arrangements satisfactory to the Board for
connecting the subdivision water pipes with a proper water supply.
(6) The location and type of the fire alarm boxes and point of entry into the
subdivision of the connecting fire alarm cable shall be as directed by the Fire
Chief. The applicant shall furnish and install the necessary ducts, fire alarm
boxes and electric cable.
(7) The design and location of the electric power system shall be as directed by the
Municipal Light Board, and the design and location of street lighting shall be as
agreed upon by the Municipal Light Board and the Planning Board.
(8) The applicant shall consult with the Telephone Company relative to the
installation of telephone service.
(9) All electrical, telephone and other utility wires shall be placed below ground in
every subdivision unless the Board determines that such placement is not feasible
or is not in the best interest of the Town.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 42
Amended through August 18, 2014
M. Soil Surveys
Where appropriate, the Planning Board may require soil surveys to establish the
suitability of the land for the proposed storm and sanitary drainage installations.
N. Foot Paths, Bridle and Bicycle Paths
The location and width of foot paths, bridle and bicycle paths will be designed to
maximize the safety of the path users and to minimize interference with public and
private ways.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 43
Amended through August 18, 2014
SECTION 5
SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A1. General
(1) All improvements specified or implied on the Definitive Plan shall be
constructed or installed by the applicant’s contractor (The Contractor) in
accordance with the provisions of this Section of the Rules and Regulations or
as directed by the Hingham Planning Board (The Board). The applicant, at
his own expense, shall furnish all necessary materials, labor and equipment
which may be required to complete the work called for or implied on the
Definitive Plan. Items not specifically mentioned herein shall be constructed
in accordance with the most recent version of the Massachusetts Highway
Department Standard Specifications (hereinafter referred to as MassDOT
Standard Specifications) unless specifically directed otherwise by the Board.
(2) All work performed by the applicant as a consequence of these Rules and
Regulations will be subject to the review and acceptance or approval of the
Board. Prior to the commencement of construction, including clearing of the
site, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Board to discuss construction
inspection procedures. The applicant shall present to the Board a construction
schedule which may be modified by written notice providing a minimum
seven calendar days to allow for proper inspections. Therefore, the Board will
employ a Registered Professional Engineer for purposes of inspecting the
work. In order that the Board's engineer may properly inspect the work as it
progresses, the applicant will keep the Planning Board informed of the
progress of the work on a timely basis and shall provide safe and convenient
access to all parts of the work for inspection by members of the Board or its
engineer or such persons as the Board may designate. No work will be
approved which has been covered prior to inspection by subsequent work.
Reference should be made to Section 6 for specific inspections required by the
Board. The Board’s Professional Engineer may also be referred to as the
Project Inspector in this document.
(3) Nothing in these specifications should be interpreted as placing the onus for
safety and quality onto the Town of Hingham, its employees or its
representatives. The Town will not be responsible for any cost implications
associated with remedial action that may be required as a result of the
inspections. The applicant/contractor is directly responsible for the overall
safety in accordance with state and federal standards and quality of the
project; and as such they shall indemnify the Town of Hingham, its employees
or its representatives (quality is defined by final acceptance by the Board).
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 44
Amended through August 18, 2014
B1. Subdivision Layout
(1) Prior to starting any land clearing activities, a registered land surveyor shall
stake the limit of work. The work may proceed in phases, in which the initial
clearing limits will be staked in a manner and frequency such that the
Planning Board, a Registered Professional Engineer employed by the Board
(The Project Inspector) or their representative can walk the clearing limits
prior to the commencement of work. A plan shall be submitted to the Board
that identifies the stake number and includes sufficient existing conditions
information to be able to identify the location of the stake on the ground
relative to other site features. All trees to be preserved shall be flagged. At
times it may be feasible to adjust clearing limits slightly to preserve
significant trees and other site features.
(2) Prior to the start of other construction activities, a registered land surveyor
shall set offset grade stakes along the roadway right-of-way, centerline,
sidelines, and sidewalks at fifty-foot (50’) intervals or at a frequency directed
by the Project Inspector. These horizontal and vertical control stakes must be
laid out to conform to the lines and grades shown on the approved Definitive
Plan or any approved amendment thereto.
(3) Further, permanent bounds as specified herein in Subsection 82 shall be
placed so as to delineate the boundary lines between the property to be
subdivided and adjacent Town property, including a Town right-of-way. All
required Permanent Monuments are to be set where the property abuts Town
property.
(4) Any work, which in the opinion of the Project Inspector has not been properly
laid out or does not conform to the Plans, may be checked by a Registered
Land Surveyor employed by Town. If it is determined that such work does
not conform to the Plan and that the Plan was based upon erroneous data or
calculations provided by the applicant, or which was correctly laid out upon
such erroneous data or calculations, the applicant shall pay all costs which the
Town incurs as a consequence of checking the work. The Project Inspector or
the Board may require the removal and correct replacement of any work
which has been incorrectly laid out.
C1. Clearing, Grubbing and Excavation
(1) Land shall be cleared and developed in increments of workable size which can
be completed during a single construction season. Erosion and sediment
control measures shall be coordinated with the sequence of grading,
development, and construction operations. Control measures such as
hydroseeding, berms, interceptor ditches, mulching, temporary sodding,
terraces, and sediments traps shall be put into effect prior to the
commencement of each increment of the development/construction.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 45
Amended through August 18, 2014
(2) The entire area of each way within its exterior lines shall be cleared of all
trees not intended for preservation, stumps, brush, roots, rocks or boulders and
all perishable or unsuitable material.
(3) Trees intended to be preserved shall be protected from injury by suitable
fencing at or beyond the drip line or by wells if in fill. The Project Inspector
will make an inspection when this phase of the work is completed.
(4) The contractor shall satisfactorily dispose of all trees, stumps, shrubs, roots,
branches, dead wood and other litter in areas outside of the right-of-way or
outside the subdivision and at approved disposal facilities when required. If
requested by the Planning Board or the Board’s Engineer, the disposal
location shall be provided to the Board for approval. Reuse of processed
vegetation on-site may be allowed subject to approval by the Planning Board
or their Engineer.
D1. Excavation/Backfill
(1) The entire area to be occupied by the roadway plus an additional four (4) feet
or extending outward to the toe of slopes in fill areas, whichever is greater,
shall be excavated a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches below finished
grade, or as necessary to remove the topsoil and subsoil, or to such greater
depth as may be required by the Project Inspector if soft or yielding material,
clay, peat, silt, sand pockets, boulders or rocks, organic material, or other
material detrimental to the subgrade is encountered In cut sections excavation
shall be to suitable depth to remove the topsoil and subsoil or to such greater
depth as may be required by the Project Inspector if soft or yielding material,
clay, peat, silt, sand pockets, boulders or rocks, organic material, or other
material detrimental to the subgrade is encountered. Unless otherwise
approved “detrimental subgrade” shall be defined as material with more than
10% passing the #200 sieve or material containing more than 1% organics.
Materials encountered may be subject to in-situ sieve testing as directed by the
Planning Board’s Engineer.
(2) All excavation will be to such width and depth as shown on the drawings,
specified herein, or ordered by the Project Inspector. Such excavation may be
for the laying of pipes or appurtenances, the removal of pipes or
appurtenances, the capping or plugging of pipes to be abandoned, test pits to
locate existing utilities, or any other purpose for which excavation may be
needed.
(3) Wherever a percentage of compaction for backfill is indicated or specified, it
shall be the percent of maximum density at optimum moisture as determined
by method D of ASTM Standard Methods of Test for Moisture - Density
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 46
Amended through August 18, 2014
Relations of Soils Using 10-lb. rammer and 18-inch Drop, Designation D
1557-78.
(4) No backfilling of pipes, culverts or appurtenances shall be done until the
installation has been inspected and approved by the Project Inspector.
Backfilling shall be in layers not exceeding eight (8) inches, with each layer
compacted by an appropriately sized plate vibrator, regardless of the method
of final compaction at the sub-base or gravel base level. The minimum cover
will be that specified on the plans and approved by the Project Inspector. The
backfill fill material will be subject to compaction testing.
(5) All excavations shall be sheathed or braced to the satisfaction of the Project
Inspector for construction adequacy and not safety. All excavations shall be
kept free of all water entering by dewatering. The Contractor shall submit the
method for dewatering at the pre-construction meeting for approval by the
Board and its Project Inspector. Flowable (CLSM) fill may be required for
backfill if satisfactory compaction cannot be attained do to the limits of the
work area.
(6) The contractor shall conform to those requirements of the Department of
Public Safety and OSHA. The contractor will be required to obtain a
Trenching Permit under “Jackie’s Law” at the Hingham Department of Public
Works prior to commencing work.
(7) As excavation approaches known underground structures, the structure should
be exposed by means of hand tools as a normal part of trench excavation.
(8) All existing gas pipe, electric conduit, telephone conduit, cable TV conduit,
water, sewer or drain lines and any other structures, which are uncovered by
the excavation, shall be carefully supported and protected from injury by the
Contractor. The Contractor shall restore any items damaged by him to as good
a condition as they were found and or to the satisfaction of the Project
Inspector or respective utility purveyor, and they shall be kept in repair during
the life of this contract. The restoration of existing utility lines shall be done
as promptly as practical and shall not be left until the end of the construction.
(9) Where determination of the exact location or elevation of a pipe or other
structure is necessary, the Contractor shall excavate test pits, as part of normal
trench excavation, to determine such locations far enough ahead of the work
so that the pipe alignment can be properly determined.
(10) Excavating equipment shall be operated with care to prevent damage to trees,
overhead branches and other structures. Wherever work will disturb existing
trees in the public right-of-way, the Contractor will notify the DPW before
cutting any roots or branches of existing trees. Branches and roots shall not be
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 47
Amended through August 18, 2014
cut except by permission of the Project Inspector. All cutting shall be done
neatly without splitting or crushing.
(11) Plantings and trees shall be adequately protected or removed and later reestablished
in their original position. Where injury is significant enough as to
diminish their beauty or usefulness, they shall be replaced by items of the
same kind and quality at least equal to the preexisting condition.
E1. Disposal of Surplus and Unsuitable Materials
(1) All suitable surplus excavated materials not required for immediate re-use on
the project shall remain on the property of the Owner and stockpiled by the
Contractor on the site at such location or locations as directed by the Project
Inspector or as specified by the SWPPP. Surplus material stockpiles shall be
protected from erosion with appropriate sedimentation barriers.
(2) All other unwanted materials not required or suitable for re-use shall be
disposed of in accordance with local rules governing such disposals. Should
unsatisfactory subgrade material be encountered, the Project Inspector may
direct that excavation be carried to satisfactory material and be backfilled with
gravel borrow or special borrow. The location of any off-site disposal shall be
reported to the Planning Board.
(3) The Contractor shall, periodically or as directed during the progress of the
work, remove and legally dispose of all surplus excavated materials and
debris, and keep the Project Area and public rights-of-way reasonably clean.
Upon completion of the work, he shall remove all temporary construction
facilities, debris and unused materials for the work, and re-establish the whole
site of the work and public rights-of-way in a neat and clean condition.
(4) The excavated topsoil shall be neatly stacked within the project limits at such
location or locations as directed by the Project Inspector and/or as indicated
on the SWPPP. Topsoil stockpiles shall be stabilized with a cover material as
soon as practicable. If the conditions are not suitable for establishing a
vegetative cover other means of stabilization will be required.
(5) All excavated rock shall be removed and disposed of unless otherwise
directed by the Project Inspector.
F1. Test Pits
(1) Test pits for the purpose of determining subgrade geo-technical conditions and
locating underground pipelines or structures in advance of construction shall
be excavated and backfilled by the Contractor prior to start of construction at
the locations of conflict shown on the Approved Plans or at the direction of
the Project Inspector. Geo-technical investigations shall be excavated only in
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 48
Amended through August 18, 2014
the presence of the Project Inspector. Test pits shall be backfilled
immediately after their purpose has been satisfied and maintained in a manner
satisfactory to the Project Inspector and as outlined in this document.
(2) Unsuitable foundation material in the opinion of the Project Inspector below
the normal depth of construction shown on the drawings for pipes, structures
or roadway sub-base shall be removed and disposed of at the Project
Inspector’s discretion.
G1. Excavation for Structures
(1) The Contractor shall furnish all materials and equipment and perform all work
required to install and maintain the dewatering and drainage systems he
proposes for handling groundwater or surface water encountered.
(2) If suitable material is encountered during excavation, estimated depths may
not be realized. However, if unsuitable materials are encountered during
excavation, depths may be greater than estimated. In all cases, excavation will
be performed only to the depths authorized by the Project Inspector.
(3) Any excavated or natural area below the subgrade shall be filled to the
subgrade with suitable granular material, to be approved by the Project
Inspector prior to its installation.
H1. Trench Excavation
(1) Prior to excavation of all trenches in paved areas, the Contractor shall cut
through the existing pavement and base course in neat straight lines with a
minimum amount of vibration. Pavement including sidewalks shall be cut
using a mechanical saw, or a machine mounted hydraulic or mechanical tool
fitted with a rotary-type blade, and shall result in sound vertical edges, thus
avoiding any damage to the pavement or base course to remain. Where the
contract requires a permanent trench repair, pavement shall be cut twelve’
(12) inches beyond the width of the trench along each side of the trench, or as
allowed in writing by the Project Inspector. Should these edges crack or
become damaged during excavation the contractor shall re-cut the edges to a
uniform and undisturbed line just prior to paving.
(2) Trench excavation shall be carried out to the lines and grades as specified
herein and shown on the plans. Trenches may be excavated to their full depth
by machinery if the material remaining at the bottom of the trench is no more
than slightly disturbed.
(3) The Contractor should anticipate that due to existing utility lines, hand
excavation might be required.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 49
Amended through August 18, 2014
(4) Trench excavation shall result in a flat or shaped trench bottom, true to grade
so that the pipe will have uniform and continuous bearing on a firm support.
Trenches shall be made as narrow as practicable within the limits specified
and required to lay all pipes and appurtenances as shown on the plans or
ordered by the Project Inspector, and every effort shall be made to keep the
sides of the trenches firm and undisturbed until backfilling and compaction
are completed.
(5) Normal depth of trench excavation shall be six inches (6”) below the bottom
of the pipe in earth.
(6) Normal width of trench excavation in sheathed trenches up to 12’ deep shall
be measured between vertical planes which are a distance apart equals to the
sum of the outside diameter of the pipe, the total width of the sheathing
including walers and 2 feet. Such trench width shall not be less than 4 feet 2
inches or 5 feet if walers are used as part of the sheathing system.
(7) Normal trench widths for trenches supported with approved trench boxes or
hydraulic shoring systems shall be the sum of the outside diameter of the pipe,
1 foot on either side of the pipe, the width of the wall shield (no greater than 8
inches), and 1 foot of additional space to allow for Installation of the trench
box.
(8) Such trench width shall not be less than 3 feet except trenches for building
services shall be a maximum of 2 feet 6 inches wide but always wide enough
for compaction equipment. However, excavate-able flow-able fill will/may be
used instead of compaction equipment, when the trench does not provide the
necessary width, work area or when directed by the Project Inspector.
(9) Trench widths for deeper excavations or special conditions may be specified
in the contract drawings and will supersede limits outlined here as required to
complete the work. The Contractor in all cases will include with his plans a
copy of trench support and maximum trench width, for approval by the
Project Inspector.
I1. Miscellaneous Trench Excavation
(1) This excavation shall be carried out in a similar manner to trench excavation,
but to limits beyond the established limits for normal trench excavation
including test pits ordered or approved by the Project Inspector.
J1. Below Grade Excavation
(1) This excavation shall be carried out in a similar manner to trench excavation,
but to depths below the established lower limit of trench excavation. All
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 50
Amended through August 18, 2014
unsuitable materials shall be removed from the job site and shall not be used
for any backfill purposes.
K1. Rock Excavation
(1) Rock in pipe trenches shall be excavated to be not less than 6 inches from the
pipe. Before the pipe is laid, the trench below the pipe, where rock excavation
has been made, shall be backfilled and compacted with suitable material
specified for bedding the pipe.
(2) The Contractor shall observe all state, federal and municipal laws, ordinances
and regulations relating to the transportation, storage, handling and use of
explosives. In the event that the regulations require a licensed blaster to
perform or supervise the work, said licensed blaster shall have his license at
the site and shall permit examination thereof by the Project Inspector.
L1. Drainage and Stormwater Management
(1) The Definitive Plan shall provide adequate drainage facilities within the
subdivision for collecting, conveying and disposing of storm water in a
manner, which will ensure proper protection of the roadway and the areas
adjacent thereto. The Definitive Plan shall provide for recharging groundwater
with pre-treated (if applicable) storm water in an amount equal to or
exceeding pre-development conditions.
(2) No catch-basin-to-catch-basin connections will be allowed, without the
written approval from the DPW and the Planning Board.
(3) The construction of the drainage system, including methods of construction
and quality of materials, shall conform to the applicable sections of the
Massachusetts Highway Department's Specifications except as modified
hereafter or as approved by the Planning Board as a waiver of its Rules and
Regulations.
(4) All storm drains shall be laid with a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2) feet
of cover. All joints shall be sealed by caulking and cement mortar, or by use
of approved rubber gaskets. Shop drawings for materials shall be supplied to
the Board for approval prior to any materials being delivered or installed onsite.
(5) All catch basins shall be constructed of precast concrete and shall have a
standard twenty-four (24) inch square frame and crossed grate cover
appropriate for the passage of bicycles. A MassDOT vaned grate may be used
on slopes over 3%. A granite gutter mouth curb shall be furnished and set
where vertical or sloped granite curbing is utilized. Where Cape Cod Berms
are used, the catch basin and cover shall be laid so as to be slightly below the
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 51
Amended through August 18, 2014
roadway pavement, which shall be suitably tapered toward the cover, and
direct surface water flow to the catch basin. Even with cape cod berm a gutter
mouth stone shall be used with two transitional sections of curb, from gutter
mouth to face of berm. When approved the omission of gutter mouth stone
shall be substituted by placement of catch basin frame and grate in
relationship to roadway gutter-lines six (6) inches into a Cape Cod berm.
(6) No pipe shall extend into a catch basin more than three (3) inches beyond the
inside face of the wall. Gas traps shall be utilized over outlet pipes within a
catch basin. All catch basins shall have an inside diameter of at least four (4)
feet, shall be constructed with a minimum depth of four (4) feet below the
invert of the outflow pipe, and as otherwise shown in accordance with the
Construction Standards of the Massachusetts Highway Department.
(7) All manholes shall be constructed of the same materials as permitted herein
for catch basins except that a standard heavy (LeBaron, Neenah or approved
equal) twenty-six (26) inch diameter cover and frame shall be furnished and
set, and all other details shall be as shown in the MHD Standards for
manholes.
(8) If required due to groundwater conditions, or as directed by the Board’
Engineer, a subdrain or system of subdrains for collection and removal of
groundwater from the roadway shall be installed. Such system, as shown on
the approved Definitive Plan, or as ordered by the Board during construction,
shall be constructed of not less than 6-inch diameter perforated Schedule 80
PVC pipe with all joints firmly clamped, perforations turned up, and laid to
line and grade. All subdrains shall be a minimum of four feet deep to the top
of the pipe and be installed in ¾ to 1 ½ inch crushed stone wrapped in filter
fabric. Note that a minimum of six (6) inches of topsoil is required for seeded
areas. (Details as per MHD Construction Standards 209.1.0)
(9) All drainage pipes shall end in a concrete or masonry headwall having
dimensions as specified in the Department's Standards and constructed in
accordance with the Department's Specifications. The concrete shall have a
minimum compressive strength of 3000 pounds per square inch after
twenty-eight days curing. Headwalls for pipes over 18” in diameter shall be
fitted with a stainless steel or aluminum grate. Shop drawing approval of
grates is required.
(10) All tide gates shall be of standard manufacture, of the same size as the outfall
pipe, cast-iron frame and flap each fitted with bronze seat and subject to the
approval of the Project Inspector.
(11) The Project Inspector will inspect the completed drainage system or sections
thereof prior to placing any backfill.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 52
Amended through August 18, 2014
(12) All trench backfill for the storm and subsurface drains and other backfill
within the limits of the way shall conform to the base course requirements and
shall be deposited to required subgrade in not more than six (6) inch layers
and compacted to 95% of the maximum dry density as determined by
modified Proctor Test, in accordance with ASTM D-1557-70, Method "D".
M1. Culvert Piping
(1) The drainage pipe shall be reinforced concrete or approved equal, with bell
and spigot gasket joints. The pipe shall be Class III in accordance with ASTM
C-76. The gaskets shall be O-ring type in accordance with ASTM C-443. The
minimum diameter shall be twelve (12) inches. The pipe shall be laid in
undisturbed trenches below the grade of pipes, starting with the downstream
end on firm bedding. All bells shall be facing upstream. Reference
benchmarks shall be clearly marked to enable the Project Inspector to check
the grade and invert elevations. The joints of all concrete pipes shall include a
pre-molded neoprene continuous O-ring flexible compression gasket. No
backfilling of pipes or culverts shall be done until the installation has been
inspected and approved by the Project Inspector or a Planning Board
Representative. Backfilling shall be in layers not exceeding eight (8) inches,
with each layer compacted by an appropriately sized plate vibrator, regardless
of the method of final compaction at the subbase or gravel base level. The
minimum cover is forty-two (42) inches above the top of the pipe.2. If
required by the Project Inspector, side under drains shall be installed on both
sides of all streets, except in Fill sections, and connected to the surface
drainage system. In circumstances where the groundwater table is not within
four (4) feet of the finished grade and each linear foot of under drain would
serve a surface drainage area of not more than twenty (20) square feet, or in
other circumstances which would render such under drains superfluous, the
Project Inspector may waive such requirement. The side drains shall be
shown in cross-section detail.
(2) At each outfall of a drain line, a winged headwall of reinforced concrete shall
be constructed according to the details shown in the plans.
N1. Stormwater Management Structures
(1) Stormwater Management structures used for treatment of runoff shall be
approved by the DPW. Structures shall be located in an accessible location
and be compatible with available maintenance equipment if the system is to be
accepted by the Town for maintenance.
(2) Shop drawings for all special stormwater structures, including outlet structures
for stormwater basins, etc. shall be provided to the Board for approval prior to
ordering the structures.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 53
Amended through August 18, 2014
O1. Fine Grading and Compacting Subgrade Area
(1) The contractor will be required to establish grade markers to the elevations
specified on the plans. Using the machinery designated for this type of work
and necessary to complete the task, such as a (Rubber Tired Excavator)
Gradall or a Road Grader, the contractor will create the required roadway
profiles for features specified such as drainage. The Contractor will be
required to compact these areas to 95% of Maximum Dry Density as
determined by ASTM D-1 557.
(2) Street grades shall be designed in relation to existing grades such that the
volume of cuts and fills made within the right-of-way approximately balances,
except to offset peat, boulders or other unusable materials to be removed.
(3) Final grading shall be inspected by pulling a string line from “finish grade”
grade stake to grade stake and measuring from the transverse line to the
prepared road-base. Grading shall be within plus or minus ½” of desired
overall pavement thickness. The contractor shall provide the necessary labor
to perform the aforementioned. The Project Inspector shall be present to
witness the measurements.
P1. Lot Grading/Drainage
(1) Lots shall be prepared and graded in such a manner that development of one
shall not cause detrimental drainage on another. If provision is necessary to
carry drainage to or across a lot, an easement or drainage right-of-way of a
minimum width of twenty (20) feet and proper side slope of at least three to
one (3:1) shall be provided. Storm drainage shall be designed in accordance
with these specifications. Where required by the Planning Board, the applicant
shall furnish evidence as to any lot or lots for which adequate provision has
been made for the proper drainage of surface and underground waters from
such lot or lots. Unless specifically approved private drainage shall not be
allowed to connect to the existing Town drainage structures. Unless
specifically approved, private drainage will not be allowed in the Town
R.O.W.
Q1. Catch Basin And Drain Manholes
(1) No more than four (4) pipe openings shall be allowed in any one (1) manhole.
Four-foot-diameter manholes will be used for drains up to thirty- (30") inches
in diameter. Five-foot-diameter manholes are necessary for pipe diameters
between thirty-six (36) and forty-eight (48) inches. All flows into a manhole
shall be in the same direction (no reverse flows or sumps allowed), with a
maximum angle between the main and any connecting line of ninety degrees
(90°). All connecting lines shall have bricked inverts rounded into the
direction of flow.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 54
Amended through August 18, 2014
(2) Manhole casting shall be set flush with the designed finish grade of the
pavement. Catch basin grates shall be set half (1/2) inch below the finished
gutter grade and shall be of the egg box variety (square openings). Manhole
castings and catch basin grates shall be raised at the earliest thirty days prior
to final paving. If paving does not occur within said thirty days, they shall be
lowered immediately. Ramping is prohibited.
(3) Pre-cast catch basin and manhole bases, risers, eccentric cones, and slab tops
shall conform to the latest requirements of ASTM Designation C 478. Where
the shallow grade will not allow for standard manhole and catch basin
installations, the construction including flat top slabs shall conform to the
detail drawings for shallow catch basins and manholes.
R1. Pre-Cast Manhole and Catch Basin Materials
(1) New manholes, catch basins and other structures shall be pre-cast concrete
unless approved as a change by the Planning Board and the DPW.
(2) Catch basins shall have a minimum sump of forty-eight (48) inches.
(3) Pre-cast concrete manholes and catch basins shall conform to the ASTM
Standard Specifications for pre-cast reinforced concrete manhole sections,
Designation C478-77 or latest version, except as modified herein.
(4) Type II cement shall be used unless specifically authorized in writing.
(5) Joints between pre-cast sections shall be sealed with a preformed flexible joint
sealant conforming to the requirements of ASTM Designation C990-92. The
manufacturer of the pre-cast units shall supply the joint sealant. The joint
sealant shall be produced from blends of butyl rubber, refined hydrocarbon,
resins; and. plasticizing compounds reinforced with inert mineral filler that are
solvent free. The sealant shall have an approximate cross section of 3/8-inch
by 3-1/2 inch’ for single strip application or 3/8-inch-by-3/8-inch square or
3/8-inch diameter cord for multiple cord usage application. Use six (6) cords
minimum for multiple cord applications.
(6) Manholes shall be four (4) feet in diameter (inside) unless otherwise noted on
the plans or in the Special Conditions. Catch basins shall be 5 feet in diameter
(inside) and 8 feet 6 inches deep as shown on the standard drawings. The
manhole base shall be pre-cast concrete and shaped to receive the pipe
sections and manhole sections.
(7) Catch basins shall have a pre-cast slot and opening suitable for mounting the
hood and discharge pipe.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 55
Amended through August 18, 2014
(8) Manhole sections shall contain manhole steps accurately positioned and
imbedded in the concrete when the section is cast.
(9) No more than two lift holes will be cast or drilled in each section.
(10) The date of manufacturer and the name or trademark of the manufacturer shall
be clearly marked on the inside of the barrel.
(11) Brick shall be sound, hard and uniformly burned, regular and uniform in shape
and size, of compact texture, and satisfactory to the Project Inspector. Brick
shall comply with the ASTM Standard Specification for Sewer and Manhole
Brick (made from clay or shale), Designation C32-73. Grade SS brick shall be
used for paved inverts and shelves, and grade MS shall be used for walls.
Concrete brick will not be allowed.
(12) Concrete masonry block shall be machine-made, solid, pre-cast concrete
masonry units. Block shall comply with the ASTM Standard Specification for
Concrete Masonry, Units for Construction of Catch Basins and Manholes,
Designation C139-73, except as modified herein.
(13) The width of the units shall be six (6) inches. The inside and outside surfaces
of the units shall be curved to the necessary radius (5 foot inside diameter) and
so designed that the interior surfaces shall be cylindrical, except the top batter
courses shall be designed to reduce uniformly the inside section of the
structure to the required size and shape at the top.
(14) Blocks shall be designed so that only full-sized units are required to lay any
one course.
(15) Type II cement shall be used unless otherwise authorized in writing.
(16) Sand shall be well graded and with no grain larger than will pass a No. 8
sieve.
(17) Hydrated lime shall form type M mortar (2500 psi) conforming to the ASTM
Standard Specification for Hydrated Lime for Masonry Purposes, Designation
C207-79.
(18) The mortar shall be composed of Portland cement, hydrated lime, sand and
water in which the volume of sand shall not exceed three times the sum of the
volumes of cement and lime. In general, mortar for Grade SS brick shall be
mixed in the proportions of 1:1/2:41/2 (Cement: Lime: Sand).
(19) Drain manholes shall have rung manhole steps fifteen (15) inches on center
built into the vertical side.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 56
Amended through August 18, 2014
(20) Steps for manholes shall be non-skid raised edge-front steel reinforced
polypropylene plastic type, with at least a 14-inch wide stepping surface, and
grade-60 steel. Placement into pre-cast walls shall be by a method
recommended by the ‘supplier of the pre-cast manhole sections. Steps shall
protrude no less than 6-inches from the wall and are to be installed per the
manufacturer’s specifications. Details of the steps and methods of placement
shall be submitted for approval.
(21) Steps shall not be mortared into place after the concrete has set.
(22) All new catch basins shall be constructed with a new section of granite curb
with a gutter mouth as shown on the standard details.
(23) Any concrete block or brick used shall be skim coated with Type M mortar.
S1. Catch Basins (Built)
(1) Details of standard manhole, catch basin, frame and grate and curb inlet
should be shown in the plans.
(2) Unless specifically noted otherwise, or approved by the Project Inspector, all
catch basins shall be as shown on the standard drawings. Basins that cannot be
built due to conflicts with existing structures shall be reevaluated by the
project Inspector and approved by the Board.
(3) Concrete-block-masonry may be used in lieu of pre-cast catch basins and
manholes structures only when approved by the Project Inspector, catch
basins may be constructed with brick or concrete masonry blocks, and
reinforced concrete base, as an alternative to pre-cast concrete units.
(4) Catch basins and drain manholes shall be constructed of concrete-block
masonry eight (8) inches in thickness with an inside diameter of four (4) feet
or more. They shall be built with horizontal and vertical mortared joints. The
arch or cone section shall be twenty-four (24) inches in height consisting of a
first row, second row, third row and a ring row (either round or square as
appropriate). The cone section shall be mortared on the exterior and interior.
The faces of all pipes shall be flush with or extend not more than three (3)
inches into the basin or manhole. Flat-topped structures are not allowed,
unless approved by the Project Inspector.
(5) Drain manholes shall have a four-inch-thick concrete base. At least one (1)
row of blocks shall be set on the base to allow the construction of a brick table
within the manhole. Arched inverts of one-half (1/2) the pipe diameter shall
be sloped upward to the sides of the manhole. The elevations of the main
drain lines entering and leaving a manhole shall be matched.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 57
Amended through August 18, 2014
T1. Manhole Construction Methods
(1) Barrel sections (walls) shall be set to be vertical, with steps in alignment.
(2) For Sewer Manholes the invert channel within the structure shall be an
inverted arch with bricks laid as stretchers and on edge and constructed as to
conform in shape to the lower half of the pipe. In addition, in these structures
an arch shall be constructed over inlet and outlet pipes with bricks laid as
headers and on edge. The shelf in manholes shall consist of bricks laid flat and
the top of the shelf shall be at the elevation of the top of the pipe, as indicated
on the drawings, and shall be sloped to drain toward the channel.
(3) An approved grade ring shall be placed between the cone section and the cast’
iron frame for purposes of setting the frame to match the roadway grade. More
than one ring may be necessary to match the required grade but in no case
shall the rings exceed 16” in height.
(4) Special manholes for 36 inch pipe and larger shall have reinforced concrete
bases and pre-cast concrete or brick chimneys as detailed on the drawings.
(5) Manhole stubs, where indicated on the drawings, shall be short pieces
(maximum length 3.5 feet) cut from the bell ends (retaining bell end) of the
appropriate size and class of pipe. PVC stubs shall be plugged with a PVC
stopper and RCP stubs shall be plugged with brick masonry or approved plug.
(6) Inverts shall conform accurately to size of the adjoining pipe. Side inverts and
main inverts where the direction changes shall be laid out in smooth curves of
‘the longest possible radius which is tangent, within the manhole, to the
centerline of the adjoining pipelines.
(7) Preformed flexible joint sealant shall be placed over the entire horizontalmating
surface of adjoining pre-cast section, and installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s recommendations.
(8) All holes in sections used for their handling shall be thoroughly plugged with
rubber plugs made specifically for this purpose or hydraulic grout.
(9) For Sewer manholes, the exterior surfaces of pre-cast manholes shall be given
two heavy coats of bituminous waterproofing material. The waterproofing
material shall be applied by brush or spray and in accordance with the
instructions of the manufacturer. Time shall be allowed between coats to
permit sufficient drying so that the application of the’ second coat has no
effect ‘on the first coat.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 58
Amended through August 18, 2014
(10) All connections between pipe and manholes shall be made with a positive seal
connector manufactured for this purpose. The type of connector proposed
shall be subject to review and. approval by the Project Inspector.
(11) Openings for pipe and materials to be embedded in the walls of the manhole
for those joints shall be cast in the barrel sections or base at the required
locations during the manufacturing process. Only with approval from the
DPW will any modifications to the structure be allowed, and if so, only by
coring. Chipping an opening into the structure will not be allowed.
(12) All materials, accessories, and construction methods used in making the joints
shall be supplied or approved by the manufacturer of the pre-molded
elastomeric-sealed joint.
U1. Drop Inlets
(1) Drop Inlets shall be pre-cast or where approved, constructed with brick or
concrete masonry block walls and poured concrete bases as detailed on the
standard drawings.
(2) When concrete masonry units are used 1) each block shall be dry and laid in a
full bed of mortar; 2) vertical keyways shall be completely filled with mortar;
3) catch basins shall be fitted with a standard hood and a 12-inch outlet pipe;
4) the connection between the pipe and catch basin or drop inlet shall be made
with an approved positive seal flexible connector.
V1. Dry Wells /Leaching
(1) Drywells shall be pre-cast concrete with dimensions and details as shown on
the Contract plans; Drywells shall be constructed using 5,000 psi concrete and
ASTM GR.60 steel reinforcement and shall be manufactured to support
AASHTO HS2O-44 live load.
(2) The installation of a dry well will require the Contractor to excavate a square
hole, which will be four (4) feet wider than the outside dimension of the dry
well and two (2) feet deeper than the proposed bottom of the Dry Well. The
excavation shall be lined with geo textile fabric and a two (2) foot layer of
crushed stone shall be placed as bedding surface. An adequate length of 12”
RCP pipe shall connect the proposed catch basin to the dry well. The space
between the dry well and the sides of the excavation shall be backfilled with
the crushed stone placed and compacted in 6” lifts. The crushed stone shall be
placed flush with the top of the structure and the filter fabric shall be folded
over to the center of the structure. A standard frame and cover shall be placed
over the structure to the proposed roadway grade and profile. (See adjusting
structures and frames)
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 59
Amended through August 18, 2014
(3) All holes shall be cored and connections shall be made in accordance with the
specifications for manholes. Frames and covers shall be the specified standard
and set in accordance with the plans and these specifications.
W1. Raising Casting Construction
(1) The contractor shall locate with a metal detector each buried casting. After
receiving permission to excavate, the contractor will expose the casting to
determine whether the existing casting is useable. If not, the contractor must
install a new frame and cover.
(2) The Contractor will adjust to grade any service box, gate box, or meter box, as
shown on plans, or where directed by the Project Inspector. Any service box,
gate box, meter box, and/or covers damaged due to the Contractor’s
operations will be replaced by the Contractor at his own expense.
X1. Construction Method for Frame and Cover Construction
(1) Catch basins and drain manholes shall be constructed with cast-iron frames
and covers or grates. Frames must be set in a full bed of cement mortar.
Bricks shall be used between the frame and top course for grade adjustment.
They shall be laid in a radial fashion with full bearing on the ring row. A
maximum of four (4) and a minimum of two (2) brick courses will be allowed.
Frames shall be at least two hundred sixty-five (265) pounds and shall be of
North American manufacture. Covers or grates shall be no less than two
hundred ten (210) pounds, in accordance with the Standard Specifications and
shall be of North American manufacture. The word “drain” shall be cast into
the solid cover in letters at least three (3) inches in height.
(2) The frame and grate shall first be set to binder grade using a bituminous
concrete collar as soon as possible after the roadway binder course has been
placed. No sooner than one week prior to final paving, the frame and grate
shall be reset to proposed finished grade using a concrete collar flush to the
binder grade.
(3) All mortar used shall be mixed only in such quantity as required for
immediate use and shall be used before the initial set has taken place. Mortar
shall not be retained for more than one and one-half hours and shall be
constantly worked over with a shovel until used. Anti-freeze mixtures will not
be allowed. No masonry shall be laid when the outside temperature is below
40°F unless special provisions are made and accepted by the Project
Inspector.
(4) All mortar used shall be mixed only in such quantity as required for
immediate use and shall be used before the initial set has taken place. Mortar
shall not be retained for more than one and one-half hours and shall be
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 60
Amended through August 18, 2014
constantly worked over with a shovel until used. Anti-freeze mixtures will not
be allowed. No masonry shall be laid when the outside temperature is below
40°F unless special provisions are made and accepted by the Project
Inspector.
(5) Each frame and cover shall be Le-Baron Foundry Model No. LK1 10, or equal
and shall have a clear opening of 24-inches and the word, “SEWER” or
“DRAIN” cast in 3-inch letters on the surface. Double grate catch basins shall
be cascade-type grates, LeBaron Foundry Model LK 120-A, or equal.
(6) Bricks for building up and leveling manhole and catch basin frames shall
conform to ASTM C32, Grade MS.
(7) Mortar used in the brickwork shall be composed of one part Type Il Portland
Cement conforming to ASTM C150 to two parts sand to which a small
amount of Hydrated Lime conforming to ASTM C207, mortar proportions
will be mix so as to produce type M (2500 psi mortar).
(8) Sand used shall be washed, cleaned, screened, sharp and well graded with no
grain larger than will pass a No. 4 sieve. It shall be free of all foreign matter as
to render it unsatisfactory.
Y1. Concrete Materials for Adjusting Sewer or Drain Castings Collars
(1) Cement shall be American made Portland Cement conforming to ASTM
Standard Specification for Portland Cement, Designation C 150. Where
concrete is used for sewerage works, Type II cement shall be used.
(2) Aggregates for concrete shall conform to ASTM Standard Specifications for
Concrete Aggregates, Designation C33 and the additional requirements
specified herein.
(3) Fine aggregate shall be clean screened sand with not less than 15 percent nor
more than 30 percent, by weight, passing the No. 50 sieve and shall not
contain more than 2 percent silt with an F.M. of 2.5 to 3.0.
(4) Coarse aggregate shall be washed screened gravel or crushed stone having not
more than 5 percent, by weight of deleterious and soft substances, well graded
for nominal size 1 inch to No. 4 aggregate and shall not contain more than 1
percent of silt.
(5) Concrete shall have a minimum 28-day compressive strength of 4000 psi shall
be used unless otherwise specified or indicated on the drawings.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 61
Amended through August 18, 2014
(6) Materials for concrete shall be proportioned to produce a workable mixture
resulting in a dense watertight concrete. S1umps shall generally not exceed 4
inches, and air contents of 4-7 percent. Mixtures must be from a MHD
approved production facility and an approved MHD mix design.
Z1. Construction Methods for Concrete Placement
(1) Small Quantity batcher mixed concrete shall be mixed in a suitable batch
mixer except for small quantities that, by permission, may be hand mixed. The
minimum mixing time shall be (1 ½) one and a half minutes for mixers of 1
cubic yard or less and the time shall be increased by 30 seconds for each
additional half cubic yard. The entire batch shall be discharged before the
mixer is recharged.
(2) If the concrete is mixed by hand, it shall be done on a flat nonporous surface,
the cement and aggregate being mixed dry until an even and uniform color has
been attained. The proper quantity of clean water shall then be added and the
entire mass turned until it has become intimately mixed.
(3) When using larger quantity ready-mixed, at the time of delivery of each load
of concrete, the Project Inspector shall be given a slip stating the actual
quantity of each ingredient of that load and the design strength. The work
shall be planned such that the concrete is discharged at the site within 1 ½
hours after water was first added to the mix and shall be mixed at least 5
minutes after all water has been added. Each batch shall be air entrained with
a minimum air content of 5 to 7 percent when used where there are exposed
surfaces to prevent spelling. (Concrete may be subject to testing as outlined in
this document)
(4) No concrete shall be placed on frozen subgrade or in water. Concrete shall be
deposited in layers, one quickly following another, until placement is
complete, while avoiding cold joints. While being installed, the concrete shall
be thoroughly compacted by rodding, spading or by mechanical vibration. The
concrete will be placed within the target slump +/- 1”and air +/- 1.5 %. Loads
not within these limits will be rejected at the owner’s expense. It will be the
owner’s responsibility to determine how much water will be added on site to
achieve the required workability without exceeding the slump and air
tolerances.
(5) Water shall not be permitted to rise on concrete within 24 hours after it is
placed, nor shall running water be allowed to flow over it within 24 hours. All
concrete shall be protected for at least 7 days such that the temperature at the
surface does not fall below 40 Degrees F.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 62
Amended through August 18, 2014
(6) Manhole tables and all surfaces shaped without forms and over which liquids
will flow, shall be smoothly finished by means of a steel trowel without
additional water or cement.
A2. Reinforced Concrete Pipe
(1) Reinforced concrete pipe shall be manufactured in a plant adapted to meet the
design requirements of the pipe.
(2) Each unit of pipe shall have an interior surface, which is free from roughness,
projections, indentations, offsets, or irregularities of any kind. The pipe units
shall be Class III unless otherwise indicated on the drawings and shall
conform to ASTM Standard Specifications for Reinforced Concrete Culvert,
Storm Drain, Designation C76-12 or the latest revision with the following
exceptions and additions
(3) Pipe units shall have a minimum laying length of 8 feet, except as otherwise
indicated or permitted by the Project Inspector.
(4) The date of manufacture, class of pipe unit, size of pipe unit, and. trademark
of the manufacturer shall be clearly and permanently marked on the outside at
one end of each pipe unit.
B2. Joints on RCP
(1) Pipe joints for all reinforced concrete pipes shall be of the rubber gasket type
in which the gaskets are in compression and which will permit both
longitudinal and angular movement. Each unit of pipe shall be provided with
proper ends made of concrete formed true to size and formed on machined
rings to ensure accurate joint surfaces. Joints and gaskets for pipe 36 inches or
less in diameter shall be the O-ring gasket type and shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM Standard Specifications for Reinforced Concrete Low-
Head Pressure Pipe, Designation C 361-11 and the additional requirements
specified. Joints and gaskets for pipe larger than 36 inches in diameter shall be
O-ring or ribbed gasket type and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
Standard. Specifications for joints for Circular Concrete and Culvert Pipe,
Using Rubber Gaskets, Designation C 443-11 and the additional requirements
specified. The DPW will consider other types of gaskets that conform to
ASTM C 443-11.
(2) Joints shall be of such design that when tested under an average internal
hydrostatic pressure of 10 p.s.i. (ASTM C 76 & C 361) no visible leakage will
result. The diameters of the joint surfaces which compress the gasket shall not
vary from the true diameters by more than 1/16 inch or the amount permitted
by the appropriate above-mentioned ASTM Standard Specifications,
whichever is less.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 63
Amended through August 18, 2014
(3) Gaskets shall be of a composition and texture which is resistant to common
ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes, and groundwater, and which will
endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this service.
Gaskets shall be the, product of a manufacturer regularly engaged in the
manufacture of rubber gaskets for pipe joints.
(4) The interior joints of all reinforced concrete storm drains in sizes 24 inches
and over shall be filled with an approved non-shrinking grout and smooth
finished after partial backfilling. The grout shall be a specially prepared, premixed,
ready for use formulation, which eliminates settlement shrinkage, and
driving shrinkage and. when mixed with water forms a grout of plastic
consistency to develop a good bond to the concrete. Joints to be filled shall be
dry, clean and completely free of all foreign matter. After the pipe joints, have
been made and the interior surface properly prepared, the joints and adjacent
areas and any damaged portion of the previously applied protective coating
shall be brought to a continuous surface of coating by means of at least two
brush coats of epoxy compound. The thickness of brush coats shall be
equivalent to those previously applied by spray. In 24-inch pipe, the
Contractor may, if he so elects, incorporate the epoxy compound with the nonshrinking
grout prior to filling the pipe joint with the grout rather than epoxy
coating the joint after the joint has been grouted. Exterior joints are not to be
filled or treated unless directed by the Project Inspector.
C2. Pipe Manufacture Inspection and Acceptance
(1) When deemed applicable by the Project Inspector, acceptance will be based
on material tests on cement, reinforcement and aggregates, absorption tests,
crushing tests on pipe and its material.
(2) Tests and certified copies in triplicate of test results will be required for the
materials as described herein. If less than 100 units of a given size and class of
pipe are required, the Contractor may submit certified copies of tests made on
identical pipe units made by the same manufacturer within the past year. The
Project Inspector reserves the right to have any or all pipe units inspected or
tested, or both, by an independent testing ‘laboratory at either the
manufacturer’s plant or elsewhere. Such additional inspection and/or tests
shall be the test results of record. All tests shall be made in accordance with
the above-mentioned applicable ASTM specifications, and acceptance or
rejection shall be based on the test results.
(3) Where required for more than 100 units, concrete cylinder compression tests
shall be made on standard concrete cylinders for the first or test pipe unit and
then for every 100 cubic yard of concrete used in pipe manufacture, or for
each additional 200 units of pipe, whichever represents the lesser amount of
concrete. Four cylinders shall be made for each test, and they shall be broken
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 64
Amended through August 18, 2014
at 7,14 and 28 days with one cylinder as a spare to be used in the event of an
unsatisfactory break. The reports shall be submitted within three days after
each of the compression tests.
D2. Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe for Drain
(1) Polyvinyl chloride pipe and composite polyvinyl chloride pipe and fittings
shall conform to ASTM Standard Specification for Type PSM polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings, Designation D3034-08. The pipe shall have
a pipe diameter to wall thickness ratio (SDR) of a maximum of 35.
(2) Branches shall conform to the specifications referenced above for pipe
material. Saddle branches are prohibited.
(3) Pipe and fittings shall have bell and spigot (push-on) joints using
electrometric ring gaskets. Gaskets shall be made of a composition and texture
which is resistant to common ingredients and industrial wastes, including oils
and ground water, and which will endure permanently under the conditions of
its proposed use.
(4) Joints shall conform to ASTM Standard Specifications of Joints for Drain
Plastic Pipe using Flexible Electrometric Seals.
(5) All pipe and fittings delivered to the job site shall be accompanied by test
reports certifying that the pipe and fittings conform to the above-mentioned
ASTM specifications.
(6) The Contractor shall furnish all labor necessary to assist the Project Inspector
inspecting the pipe and fittings. The pipe and fittings shall be inspected upon
delivery and any which does not conform to the above specifications shall be
rejected and immediately removed from the site by the Contractor.
E2. Construction Methods for Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe
(1) The Contractor’s attention is called to the fact that the pipe and fittings are
slightly brittle. Care shall be taken in handling and laying to avoid damaging
the pipe and fittings. Extra care will be necessary during cold weather
construction.
(2) Any fitting showing a crack, and any fitting or pipe which has received a blow
that may have caused an incipient fracture, even though no such fracture can
be seen, shall be marked as rejected and removed at once from the work.
(3) All pipe ends must be square after cutting.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 65
Amended through August 18, 2014
(4) While stored, all pipes shall be adequately supported from below, in at least 3-
foot intervals, to prevent deformation prior to installation. Pipe shall be
stacked to a height not exceeding six feet. Pipe shall be stored in a manner,
which will keep the pipe at ambient outdoor temperature. Temporary shading
as required to meet this requirement shall be provided. Simple covering of the
pipe that allows temperature buildup, when exposed to direct sunlight will not
be permitted.
(5) Pipe and fittings shall be installed in accordance with the latest instructions of
the manufacturer, ASTM 2321, as specified herein and as directed.
(6) When moveable trench bracing such as trench boxes, moveable sheeting,
shoring or plates are used to support the sides of the trench, care shall be taken
in placing and moving the boxes or supporting bracing to prevent movement
of the pipe, or disturbance of the pipe bedding and surrounding backfill.
Trench boxes, moveable sheeting, shoring or plates shall not be allowed to
extend below mid-diameter of the pipe. As trench boxes, moveable sheeting,
shoring or plates are moved, material shall be placed to fill any voids created
and the material shall be re-compacted to provide uniform side support for the
pipe.
(7) All concrete for encasements, cradles and saddles shall conform to the detail
drawings and as directed.
(8) All pipes where concrete is required shall be securely braced both vertically
and horizontally to restrain it against flotation while pouring concrete. Holes
left in the concrete by cross braces during the pouring shall be completely
filled with concrete in a manner approved by the Project Inspector.
F2. Construction Methods for Handling and Placing Reinforced Concrete Pipe
(1) Each pipe unit shall be handled into its position in the trench only in such
manner, and. by such means as acceptable to the Project Inspector. Care shall
be taken to avoid damaging the pipe and fittings.
(2) Drainpipe shall be laid at the lines and grades as shown on the plans and
specified herein. Whenever encountered within the trench, existing
sewer/drain lines shall be removed unless otherwise noted. All existing
sewer/drain lines, which are to be abandoned in place, shall be plugged at all
open ends.
(3) Each pipe and/or fitting to be installed shall be subjected to a careful
inspection just prior to installation. Each straight length of pipe shall be
generally straight. Centerline deviation of more than 1/16 inch per foot of
length shall be deemed unacceptable and such pipe shall immediately be
removed from the site.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 66
Amended through August 18, 2014
(4) Pipe shall be supported by compacted-screened gravel. No pipe or fitting units
shall be supported on saddles, blocking or stones. Suitable bell holes shall be
provided so that after installation only the barrel of the pipe receives bearing
pressure from the supporting material.
(5) All pipe and fittings shall be cleaned of all debris, dirt or other foreign
substances prior to being installed and shall be kept clean until accepted.
(6) Before any joint is made, the previously installed unit shall be checked to
insure that a closed joint with the adjoining unit has been maintained and that
the inverts are matched and conform to the required grade. Pipe shall not be
driven down to the required grade by striking with an unyielding object.
(7) Immediately before joining the pipe, all joint surfaces shall be cleaned and the
bell or groove shall be lubricated in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Each pipe unit shall be pushed into place without damage
to the pipe or gasket.
(8) All open ends of pipe and branches shall be closed with stopper’s secured in
place in an acceptable manner.
(9) After each pipe has been properly bedded, enough screened gravel shall be
placed between the pipe and the sides of the trench, and. thoroughly
compacted, to hold the pipe in ‘correct alignment. Bell holes shall be filled
with screened gravel and compacted, and then screened gravel shall be placed
and compacted to complete the pipe bedding’ as indicated on the drawings.
(10) At all times pipe installation is not in progress, the open ends of ‘the pipe shall
be closed with temporary watertight plugs, or by other acceptable means.
(11) If water is in the trench when work is to be resumed, the plug shall not be
removed until suitable provisions have been made to prevent water, earth, or
other substances from entering the pipe.
(12) Pipelines shall not be used as conductors for trench drainage during
construction.
(13) All manhole connections shall be as shown on the drawings except that
concrete and mortared connections shall be equipped within integral O-ring or
other sealant such that a positive watertight seal is established.
G2. Ductile Iron Pipe
(1) Ductile iron pipe shall be designed in accordance with general specifications
(Ductile iron pipe shall be at least thickness Class 52). It must be installed in
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 67
Amended through August 18, 2014
accordance with the Local Water Company requirements, and the Planning
Board Rules and Regulations for backfilling pipe.
(2) Push-on joints shall be made up by first inserting the, gasket into the groove
of the bell and applying a thin film of non-toxic gasket lubricant uniformly
over the inner surface. The chamfered end of the plain pipe shall be inserted
into the gasket and forced past it until it seats against the bottom of the socket.
H2. 4” Corrugated High Density Polyethylene Pipe (Slotted)
(1) This consists of furnishing and placing 4” Corrugated High Density
Polyethylene Pipe for a drainage application.
I2. Corrugated Hdpe Materials
(1) High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Corrugated and Smooth-Lined Pipe and /
or materials for constructing of culverts, side road pipes, storm sewers, stubs,
and all related connections and fittings, all of shall conform to ASTM F 2306,
latest edition. The pipes shall be of the sizes, types, and dimensions shown on
the plans, and contained in this specification. In addition, it shall include a
- 67 -ll connections and joints to new or existing pipes, storm sewer
manholes, inlets, headwalls, and other appurtenances as may be required to
complete the work.
(2) High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Corrugated and Smooth Lined Pipe &
Fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with requirements of ASTM F
2306, latest edition. Type S: This pipe shall have a full circular cross section,
with an outer corrugated pipe wall and a smooth inner wall.
(3) High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) Corrugated and Smooth Lined Pipe shall
be manufactured from virgin PE compounds which conform to the
requirements of cell class 435400C as defined and described in ASTM D
3350.
(4) Minimum Pipe Stiffness (PS) at five percent deflection shall be as described
in ASTM F 2306, Section 6.3 when tested in accordance with ASTM D 2412.
(5) All HDPE Corrugated and Smooth Lined Pipe shall be certified through the
AASHTO National Transportation Product Evaluation Program (NTPEP) 3
rd
Party Certification program.
(6) Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2321, “Standard Practice for
Underground Installation of Pipe and Other Gravity Flow Applications”.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 68
Amended through August 18, 2014
(7) The pipe shall be unloaded and handled with reasonable care. Pipe shall be
placed in the bed starting at the downstream end. Trenches shall be excavated
in such a manner as to insure that the trench sidewalls will be stable under all
working conditions. Trenches with pipe in place shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable, but no later than the end of each working day. Trench details,
including foundation, bedding, hunching, initial backfill, final backfill, pipe
zone, and trench width are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 69
Amended through August 18, 2014
(8) Trench width shall be in accordance with ASTM D2321 and shall be
sufficient to ensure working room to properly and safely place and compact
haunching and other backfill materials. Minimum trench width shall not be
less than 1.25 times the pipe outside diameter plus 12 inches, (1.25 x O.D. +
12”). On multiple pipe barrel runs the clear distance between pipes shall be
0.50 times the pipe diameter, (½ x Diameter).
(9) Bedding material shall meet the requirements of ASTM D2321 material. A
minimum of 6” of bedding shall be provided prior to placement and shall be
loosely compacted. Bedding material size shall be 1½” maximum granular
material. Initial backfill material shall meet the same requirements as the
bedding material and shall extend to 8 inches above the top of the pipe. Final
backfill material shall meet the requirements in these specifications. All initial
and final backfill material shall be placed in 8 inch lifts and compacted to a
minimum 95% Proctor Density Method "D" of the ASTM D-1557-70,. The
contractor shall provide density reports and a Proctor on materials as
requested by the project inspector.
(10) The minimum cover is 18 inches below the bottom of stabilized subgrade for
HS-25 Live Loads (from 18” to 42” Pipe Diameters) and 24 inches below the
bottom of stabilized subgrade for larger diameter structures (from 48” to 60”
Pipe Diameters). It is recommended that all pipes shall be placed a minimum
of 24 inches below the bottom of stabilized Subgrade in order to reduce the
potential for conflicts with other utility systems. Variances from the minimum
cover requirement must be submitted in writing to the Board and approved by
the Projects Engineer prior to commencing construction. Extreme care should
be taken when heavy construction equipment loads cross the pipe trench
during construction. If the passage of construction equipment over an installed
pipeline is necessary during construction, compacted fill in the form of a ramp
shall be constructed to a minimum elevation of three (3.0’) feet over the top of
the pipe. Any damaged pipe shall be replaced.
(11) At the Boards discretion, all pipe exceeding 7.5% deflection (as per AASHTO
Section 30) may require replacement or re-compaction at the contractor’s
expense when measured or inspected not less than 30 days following
completion of installation. Deflection is defined per ASTM D 2321. The
Contractor shall provide Video Camera (CCTV) inspection on 100% of the
pipelines installed. The test shall be conducted at least 30 days after the
installation of the pipeline. Mandreling of the pipe may be accepted as a
suitable alternative for pipeline inspection and deflection testing, in lieu of
CCTV inspection.
(12) Joints shall be installed such that the connection of pipe sections will form a
continuous line free from irregularities in the flow line. All installations shall
require watertight joints that meet a 74kPa (10.8 psi) laboratory test per
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 70
Amended through August 18, 2014
ASTM D3212 and utilize a bell and spigot design with a gasket meeting
ASTM F477.
(13) In installations where high groundwater is encountered, a soil filter fabric
shall be installed, as per manufacturer’s recommendations, around the initial
backfill material unless sufficient fill cover can be provided over the pipe. In
flowable fill or high groundwater installations, pipe shall be restrained as per
manufacturer’s recommendations to prevent floating of pipe.
J2. Fill
(1) All fill material which may be required within the exterior lines of the
roadway foundation shall be of clean gravel material or other suitable material
as approved by the Project Inspector and compacted to 95% of the maximum
dry density as determined by modified Proctor Test, in accordance with
ASTM D-1557-70, Method "D".
(2) All municipal services including but not limited to storm drains, sub-drains
and drainage structures and sewers if required within the way lines shall be
installed after sufficient lifts of fill have been placed and compacted to
provide support for trench excavations to install utilities. Utilities are to be
installed in trench excavations at least one pipe diameter over the top of the
pipe. This shall include the installation of each service pipe, sleeve or conduit
to the front lot line of each lot in the subdivision.
(3) Upon the completion of the fill and the backfill of all service trenches, the
work will be inspected by the Board's Project Inspector. Subsequent work
shall not be commenced until the Project Inspector has approved the fill as
acceptable for the application of the roadway foundation material.
K2. Filter Fabric
(1) Filter fabric shall be installed where indicated on the trench details and shall
be polyester, polyvinyl chloride or polyamide fibers, either woven or nonwoven.
Filter fabric shall meet the following minimum requirements:
a) Weight - 4 ounces per square, yard
b) Thickness - 15 mils.
c) Puncture strength - 70 pounds
d) Bursting strength - 210 psi. Elongation - 50 percent
e) Permeability - 300 gallons per minute per square foot at four inches
of head
f) Equivalent opening size shall be no greater than No. 70 U.S standard sieve
(2) The drainage filter fabric shall be placed in the manner and at the locations
shown in the Contract Drawings. Sharp objects shall be removed from the
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 71
Amended through August 18, 2014
area before placing fabric to avoid fabric punctures. The fabric shall not be
laid in a stretched condition, but laid loosely. The panels shall be overlapped
by a length of three feet. Filter fabric damaged or displaced before or during
placement of overlying layers shall be replaced or repaired at no additional
expense to the Planning Board.
L2. Gravel Material for Backfill or Road Base
(1) Gravel material shall be placed, spread and compacted as set forth in this
document.
(2) The entire roadway width then shall be rolled with a roller having an effective
force of twelve (12) tons, forming the subgrade with a one-quarter-inch-perfoot
crown, or as required on the cross-section plan.
(3) The gravel base of the roadway and sidewalks shall consist of unfrozen, hard,
durable stone and coarse sand, free from loam and clay, uniformly graded to
the specified tolerances listed in the Massachusetts Highway Department
Standard Specifications for each respective gravel type.
(4) Gradation tests (sieve analysis) shall be performed by an independent testing
laboratory on the material to be utilized as gravel backfill and roadway
foundation and shall be submitted to the Department of Public Works and
Planning Board for review. This analysis, to be done at the expense of the
Developer in advance of applying or grading the material, shall certify that it
falls within the allowable limits for gravel borrow in accordance with the
Standard Specifications. The Project Inspector or DPW Director may, at any
time during the roadway construction, require additional in-situ tests including
a sieve analyses after each layer of roadway foundation is placed. Test may
also be required of backfill material at the discretion of the DPW or Project
Inspector.
(5) The Developer must demonstrate to the Project Inspector that he has sufficient
suitable material on site, or he shall have to haul in gravel conforming to the
Standard Specifications. His intent shall be made clear to the Director.
(6) Before the roadway foundation gravel is spread, the roadbed shall be sloped to
a true surface, conforming to the proposed cross section of the road, and no
gravel is to be spread until this sub-grade is approved by the Department of
Public Works Director.
(7) Gravel for base shall be spread in eight (3) layers of equal thickness, each
thoroughly rolled true to lines and grades with a roller having an effective
force of at least twelve (12) tons so as to yield a total depth of twenty four
(24) inches after thorough compaction. Any depression or soft spots that
appear during or after rolling shall be filled with crushed processed gravel and
be re-rolled until the surface is true and even. Gradation and compaction tests
shall performed and submitted to the Department of Public Works for review.
Testing results should be satisfactory to the Department of Public Works prior
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 72
Amended through August 18, 2014
to placement of base course of pavement.
(8) All sidewalk areas shall be provided with a gravel base foundation consistent
with that required for roadways, except that the compacted depth shall be
twelve (12) inches. The slope of the base shall be to the maximum allowable
by ADA requirements (see sidewalks and crosswalks requirements contained
in this document) sloping from the back of the sidewalk towards the curb,
unless otherwise requested by the Project Inspector. Gradation and
compaction tests shall be performed and submitted to the Department of
Public Works for review at the expense of the developer. Each layer shall be
compacted to not less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the maximum dry
density of the material, as provided in the Standard Specifications.
(9) Before pavement is placed, the rolled gravel base and sidewalk base shall be
surveyed by a registered professional land surveyor. As-built plans with an
accuracy of one-tenth foot vertical at every 50-foot station along the
centerline, sidelines and sidewalks shall be submitted to the Department of
Public Works for review. However, depending on the topography of the work
area the Planning Board and its Project Inspector may request an as built
frequency at every 25-foot station. They shall also include water, sewer, and
storm drainage systems, invert, services and service stubs. In addition, the
topography of drainage facilities shall be provided at one-foot accuracy. All
shall be approved by the Department of Public Works Director prior to
paving. Weight slips may be requested by the Project Inspector to verify the
source of the Gravel. Such slips shall bear’ the name of the supplier, date
purchased and the weight of the gravel.
M2.
(1) Processed Gravel shall be used as refill material in all trench excavations, rock
excavations, miscellaneous trench excavations and any other location where
specified herein, shown on the plans or ordered by the Project Inspector. It
shall conform to Section M1.03.1 of the Massachusetts Highway Department
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and be free of pavement,
trash, loam, ice, snow, tree stumps, roots and other deleterious or organic
matter.
Processed Gravel
(2) Processed Gravel shall consist of inert material that is hard (L.A of not more
than 50), durable stone and coarse sand free from loam and clay surface
coatings, be well graded and contain no stone having any dimension greater
than three (3) inches. Gravel shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Passing 3 inch sieve 100%
2. Passing 1 ½ inch sieve 70-100%
3. Passing 3/4 inch sieve 50-85%
4. Passing No. 4 sieve 30-60%
5. Passing No. 200 sieve 0-10%
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 73
Amended through August 18, 2014
(3) New bank run is acceptable but must meet the above requirements. All
processed gravel shall come from an approved stockpile. The equipment
producing the processed gravel shall be of adequate size and with sufficient
adjustments to produce the desired materials. The processed material shall be
stockpiled in such a manner to minimize segregation of particle sizes.
N2.
(1) Screened Gravel shall be placed, spread and compacted as set forth in
Excavation and Backfill, except that Screened Gravel shall be spread in
uniform layers of not more than eight (8) inches.
Screened Gravel Construction Methods
O2. Screened Gravel
(1) Screened Gravel shall be used as backfill material in all locations and depths
as called for in the appropriate pipe specification, as shown on the plans or as
ordered by the Project Inspector.
(2) Screened Gravel shall be uniformly graded with the maximum size of a
particle between 3/8 inch and ¾ inch or such other size as may be approved by
the Project Inspector. Screened Gravel shall consist of clean, hard and durable
particles free from an excess of soft, thin and disintegrated pieces. Crushed
rock of suitable size and grading maybe used in place of Screened Gravel at
the option of the Project Inspector.
P2. Special Borrow
(1) Special borrow for subgrade stabilization or in other locations when, in the
opinion of the Project Inspector, special borrow is necessary for completion of
the work, shall conform to Section M1.02.0 of the Massachusetts Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and be free of
pavement, trash, loam, ice, snow, tree stumps, roots and other deleterious or
organic matter.
Q2. Gravel Borrow
(1) Gravel Borrow for roadway sub-base pavement installation and repair shall
conform to Section M1.0.3.0, Type B of the Massachusetts Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges and be free of
pavement, trash, loam, ice, snow, tree stumps, roots and other deleterious or
organic matter.
(2) Gravel Borrow for reinforced concrete pipe bedding shall conform to Section
Ml .03.0, Type C of the Massachusetts Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges and be free of pavement, trash,
loam, ice, snow, tree stumps, roots and other deleterious or organic matter.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 74
Amended through August 18, 2014
R2. Sand Borrow
(1) Sand Borrow shall conform to Section M.l.04.0 Type A of the 1998
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways
and Bridges.
(2) Sand Borrow shall be used for backfilling around water mains or other utilities
as shown on the plans and as directed.
S2.
(1) Crushed stone shall conform to Section M2.01.5 of the Massachusetts
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges.
Stone shall be washed and free from water, ice and snow, stone, dust, sand,
clay, loam or other deleterious or organic matter.
Crushed Stone
(2) Crushed stone shall be furnished, installed and compacted in areas where the
Project Inspector has determined its use necessary for completion of the work.
T2. Concrete Sand General
(1) The Contractor shall furnish Concrete Sand to be used as backfill material for
all locations shown on the plans, specified herein or ordered by the Project
Inspector.
(2) Concrete Sand shall conform to ASTM Designation C33, Standard
Specification for Concrete Aggregates. The gradation shall conform to ASTM
C33 for Fine Aggregates, which is as follows:
3/8”
Sieve Size Percent Finer by Weight
100
No. 4 95-100
No. 8 80-100
No. 16 50-85
No. 30 25-30
No. 50 10-30
No. 200 2-10
Concrete Sand shall be free of deleterious, including organic impurities.
U2.
(1) Concrete Sand shall be placed in layers not exceeding twelve (12) inches
and adequately compacted.
Concrete Sand Construction Methods
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 75
Amended through August 18, 2014
V2.
(1) Wherever a percentage of compaction for is indicated or specified, it shall
be the percentage of the Maximum Density at Optimum moisture as
determined by ASTM 1557-78 Method D of the Standard Methods of Test
and Moisture –Density Relations of Soils using a 10 – Ib. rammer and an
18 inch drop.
Backfilling and Compacting
(2) All excavations will be kept free of all water entering by dewatering, the
developer shall submit for approval by the Board the method for
dewatering.
(3) As soon as practical the after installing the utility the contractor shall
backfill the trench with the specified material to a density of 95% of the
proctor value for the specific material used.
(4) If the material is found to be too wet the contractor shall bring in dry
material, however compaction cannot be performed on wet material
behaving plastic regardless of compaction test value.
(5) Backfill shall not be placed on frozen material.
(6) The trench one foot above level over the top of the pipe shall be backfilled
and compacted by mechanical tamping or rolling (maximum weight of
roller 1 ton within 3 feet of pipe) in accordance with the nature of the
material and as approved by the Project Inspector. Compaction areas that
are unattainable by conventional compaction equipment do to the
restrictions of a confined space, excavate able Flow-able Fill (CLSM) will
be used as back fill in its place.
(7) Backfilling of the entire trench before the pipeline has successfully passed
any specified tests required shall be at the Contractor’s option and risk. The
Contractor shall be responsible for removing and later replacing such
backfill, at his own expense, should be ordered to do so in order to locate
and repair or replace leakage or defective joints or pipe.
(8) The material shall be deposited in layers of not more than 8 inches in depth
before compaction. Each layer shall be tampered or rolled as required to
obtain a thoroughly compacted mass. Care shall be taken that the material
shall first be wet by sprinkling as directed or approved to achieve
approximate optimum moisture. However, no compaction shall be done
when the material is too wet, where to wet is described as the material
behaving spongy deflecting and rebounding under the weight of the
compaction equipment, regardless of compaction test results. If this
condition develops, compaction will cease and the wet material will be
allowed to dry otherwise removed so that dry material will be installed in
its place prior to re-restarting compaction.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 76
Amended through August 18, 2014
(9) Common fill shown on the drawings shall be selected from excavated
materials. Material for backfill in trench shall be as shown on drawings or
as directed.
(10) Puddling or Water Jetting of trench material will not be allowed. Hand
tamping or compaction by mechanical means must be used. Any areas not
attainable do to working area restraints, excavate able Flow-able fill (CLSM)
will be used.
(11) If the compaction requirements are not met, the Contractor shall excavate and
re-compact the material at his expense.
W2.
(1) When establishing the roadway subgrade, all existing material shall be
removed to the subgrade plane as defined by the typical cross-section for the
entire width of the finished roadway. If, however, the soil is soft and spongy
or contains undesirable material such as clay, sand pockets, tree stumps,
stones over six (6) inches in diameter or any other material detrimental to the
subgrade, a deeper excavation below the subgrade shall be made as required
by the Project Inspector.
Subgrade
(2) All utilities, including drainage, water, sanitary sewer and gas (where
applicable), shall be installed and brought to the property line in accordance
with these regulations while sub base is exposed, prior to the installation of
road base.
(3) Excavation shal1 be carried out to the lines and grades as set forth above as
shown on the plans as ordered by the Project Inspector. Furnishing, placing
and compacting suitable backfill material for such over-excavation as directed
by the Project Inspector shall be at the Contractors/Developers expense.
X2. Utilities/Municipal Services
(1) The applicant shall provide and install all necessary materials, appurtenances
and equipment to complete the municipal services as may be required by the
Definitive Plan in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board and the officials
or agency having jurisdiction of each service as previously mentioned herein.
All costs incurred by the applicant as a con- sequence of installing and
maintaining such municipal services as the Board requires shall be paid by the
applicant, including all costs which may be incurred for any reasons
whatsoever until such time as the Town assumes the responsibility for such
service. The Board will not take any action to have the applicant reimbursed
for any costs so incurred.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 77
Amended through August 18, 2014
(2) All underground utilities shall be installed prior to application of the gravel
base.
(3) All underground utilities shall be installed in a parallel fashion. The sewer
line shall be in the center of the road and drainage and water on either side,
with at least ten (10) feet separating the water and sewer lines or as deemed by
the Planning Board.
(4) All work in connection with the municipal services shall be left uncovered
until such time as the Project Inspector the backfill to be placed. The
applicant shall notify all utility companies, with municipal services installed
or to be installed within the ways, as to the date and time he intends to place
the gravel base course and the paving so that such utility company may
properly record the location of pertinent features of the system so that they
will not be covered or lost as a result of the paving operation.
(5) All trench backfill material for the municipal services within the way limits
shall conform to the base course requirements and shall be deposited to
required subgrade in not more than 6 inch layers and compacted to 95% of the
dry density as determined by modified Proctor Test, in accordance with
ASTM D-1557-70, Method "D".
Y2.
(1) All water systems work shall be performed in accordance with the applicable
provisions of supplemented and amended to conform with the DPW and
Water Company Specifications latest edition and all amendments thereto. In
the event of any discrepancy between the aforementioned specifications and
the Contract Documents, the Water Company specifications shall govern,
unless ordered otherwise by the Water Company Division Superintendent.
Water Systems
(2) The Contractors attention is directed to the following conditions, which apply
to all projects, related water systems work.
(3) Prior to beginning the water systems work, the Contractor shall notify the
Water Company
(4) The size and location of all water mains, valves, hydrants, services and
appurtenances are subject to final approval by the Water Company and the
Planning Board.
(5) At the completion of construction and prior to final acceptance, the
Contractor shall submit to the Water Company and the Hingham Planning
Board a set of as-built record drawings showing the location of all water
mains, valves, hydrants, and services.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 78
Amended through August 18, 2014
Z2.
(1) The Contractor is advised that there may exist active water system mains
that are located within the limits of the project construction site. This water
supply system must be maintained at all times during the project
construction, and provisions for the maintenance of this service should
been incorporated into the scope of any proposed water system work.
Should water service be disrupted through the fault of the Contractor at any
time during work on this project, the Contractor will be required to work
around the clock as necessary to restore service at no cost.All water system
work shall be subject to the approval of the Water Company and the
HDPW in addition to the Project Inspector.
Maintaining Water Service During Construction
A3.
(1) Excavation for pipes and underground structures shall be done in
accordance with Sections in this document and the Massachusetts Highway
Department Standard Specifications or as directed by the Project Inspector.
Water Installation Methods
(2) The bedding for ductile iron pipe shall be shaped to conform reasonably
close to the lower 10 percent of the pipe. All pipes shall be laid true to the
specified line and grade, with a firm bearing throughout each length.
B3.
(1) Connection to existing water mains shall be the developer’s responsibility
but shall be made only under the direction of a Department of Public
Works Director and the Water Company. A road opening and water permit
must be obtained from the respective entities prior to tapping any main.
Construction of Water Supply
(2) Water mains shall be laid in a dry trench on a twelve-inch bed of sand or
approved material. Construction pipe shall be manually tamped with sand
the full length of the pipe up to one-half (1/2) the diameter of the pipe to
eliminate any voids under the pipe.
(3) Water mains shall be laid to provide a minimum cover of five (5) feet
below the finished grade and a maximum of seven (7) feet.
(4) The installation of water pipes or related equipment shall not be backfilled
until inspected by the Department of Public Works and The Water
Company. Backfilling and compaction techniques are the same as those for
drainage (See Backfilling).
C3.
(1) Valves, valve boxes and appurtenances shall be set in general as indicated
by the Drawings. The exact location, however, will be determined in the
Installation of Valve Box Construction Methods
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 79
Amended through August 18, 2014
field by the Project Inspector and the respective Utility.
(2) Valve boxes shall be set plumb and aligned vertically centered on the
operating nut. Valve boxes shall support adequately during backfilling to
prevent lateral movement, care will be implemented not to allow soil to fall
into the box. The bases will rest on cushions of well-compacted earth
placed around the valve or valve gearing and shall not rest upon any part of
the valve or pipe.
D3.
(1) The buried casting will be located, excavating down to the casting and raising
the casting to grade.
Raise Water/Gas Castings
(2) Covers or sleeves found to be cracked or defective will be replaced by the
contractor at his own expense and supplied by the respective Utility.
(3) Concrete for setting castings shall not be leaner than 1- part cement, 2- parts
sand and 4-1/2 parts stone and shall have a minimum compressive strength of
3000 psi.
(4) Finish grade of casting elevations shall be determined by utilizing an 8’
straight edge extended over the existing road profile both longitudinally and
horizontally, and then measuring down from the edge to establish grade.
E3.
(1) Where natural gas service is available, a gas main may be installed in the
grass plot, two (2) feet inside the traveled way or at the location approved by
the DPW. The depth of the gas main is to be determined by the utility owning
the service installed.
Gas
F3. Fire Service
(1) The fire alarm system connection will be made by the Hingham Fire
Department using materials which shall be furnished by the applicant as
specified by the Fire Chief.
(2) The type of hydrants and type and size of pipe serving the hydrants shall be as
directed or approved by the Fire Chief.
G3. Sewers
(1) All materials and work in connection with the sewer system shall be as
directed and approved by the Hingham Sewer Commissioners or authorized
agents.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 80
Amended through August 18, 2014
H3. Electrical Service
(1) All materials and work in connection with the street lights and electric power
service shall be as directed and approved by the Hingham Municipal Light
Board.
I3.
(1) Wiring, Electrical, telephone and television community cable conduits shall
be placed underground. Size, depth, materials and lateral spacing between
conduits shall meet the requirements of the respective utility company and the
DPW. The final locations of the utilities shall be approved by the Planning
board and the DPW. Poles and any associated overhead structures, of a design
approved by the Planning Board, shall be provided for use for police and fire
alarm boxes and any similar municipal equipment and for use for street
lighting.
Other Utilities
(2) Pull Boxes and Conduit (Hand Holes) will be installed when and where
deemed necessary by the Planning Board for future work.
J3.
(1) A minimum of twenty-four (24) inches of clean gravel, as approved by the
Project Inspector, shall be deposited in not more than eight (8) inch layers for
the full width of the way so as to form a roadway foundation which shall be at
all points parallel to the finished grade of the roadway surface. Each layer of
gravel shall be compacted to 95% of the maximum dry density as determined
by the modified Proctor Test, in accordance with ASTM D-1557-70, Method
"D". The gravel shall conform to the following gradation:
Roadway Foundation
Sieve Size
3”
% of Passing By Weight
100
2 95-100
1 60-100
3/4 55-95
1/2 48-85
3/8 44-80
#4 33-68
10 23-55
20 15-43
40 8-34
80 2-22
200 0-10
.02 mm 0-3
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 81
Amended through August 18, 2014
The Planning Board’s Engineer will inspect the roadway foundation after the completion
of each eight (8) inch layer.
K3.
(1) All Hot Mix Asphalt must meet the MassDOT requirements for each mix, as
submitted and approved.
Pavement Material
(2) The Developer/Contractor will submit to the DPW and the Planning Board for
approval, the intended Job Mix formula from the proposed production facility.
The Job Mix formula and the Plant must be currently (annually) approved by
the MHD.
L3.
(1) A two-course bituminous concrete surface shall be applied to residential
streets. A three-course bituminous concrete shall be applied to commercial
and industrial streets. The first course for residential streets shall be a binder
course as defined by the Standard Specifications, which, after compaction is
two and one half (2 ½) inches thick. The first course for commercial and
industrial streets shall be a base course as defined by the Massachusetts
Highway Department Standard Specifications, which, after compaction, is
four (4) inches thick. The second course for commercial and industrial streets
shall be a binder course as defined by MHD Standard Specifications, which,
after compaction is two and one half (2 ½) inches thick. For all roadways that
are to remain in binder course over a winter season Massachusetts Dense
Binder is required. Gradation (sieve analysis) and asphalt content tests shall be
performed on the material utilized as base course and/or binder course after it
has been placed, and submitted to the Department of Public Works for review.
All pavements shall be machine placed and rolled with a tandem roller having
an effective force of not less than twelve (12) tons. An additional finish roller
of less weight will be utilized during the installation of the Top Course
(wearing surface) to remove all roller marks produced by the intermediate
roller and the break down roller.
Pavement
(2) If requested by the Department of Public Works Director, compaction and
plane of finished surface tests shall be performed on the Base, Binder and/or
Top course during installation or once in place. All requested testing should
be performed by an independent testing laboratory at the expense of the
Developer.
(3) Prior to the finished course of pavement being applied, the binder course shall
be approved by the Department of Public Works Director. Paving will not be
allowed if it is raining or the roadway is wet, if frost is present, or when the air
temperature is below forty degrees Fahrenheit (40° F.) and falling. The
temperature of the bituminous concrete mixture shall be a minimum of 280° F
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 82
Amended through August 18, 2014
and a maximum of 320 ° F prior to being placed and a minimum of 170° after
intermediate rolling, all in accordance with standard Specifications.
(4) All frames, grates, manhole covers and water gates shall be adjusted to the
proper finished grade by setting in a concrete bed. Only with the approval of
the DPW and the Project Inspector, any depressions or irregularities in the
binder pavement are to be saw cut out to a depth of twenty-four (24) inches
and replaced with compacted Processed Gravel and hot binder at least one (1)
week before final paving.
(5) The base binder course pavement must be
(6) A tack coat of emulsified asphalt shall be applied with a pressure distributor at
a rate of five-hundredths (0.05) of a gallon per square yard, immediately
preceding the binder and top course paving. All longitudinal and Transverse
joints will also be tack coated; inaccessible areas to pressure distributors shall
be applied by hand held brushes. An environmentally safe synthetic mat
specifically designed for the purpose may be substituted for the tack coat of
emulsified asphalt.
swept clean by a Street Sweeper of
all loose material prior to being paved. Any areas not accessible by the Street
Sweeper will be swept by hand.
(7) The finished course of Massachusetts Highway Department bituminous
concrete top course shall be applied to a one and one half (1-½) inch thickness
after compaction on residential, commercial and industrial streets, with a
roller having an effective force of not less than twelve (12) tons.
(8) The developer shall make and maintain all subdivision roadways so that all
occupied dwelling units within the subdivision are easily accessible to all
municipal and emergency services to the satisfaction of the Hingham DPW,
Hingham Fire Department and the Hingham Police Dept.
(9) All roadways shall be prepared in such a manner that all manholes catch
basins, valve gates or other structures in the roadway are installed with
bituminous paving around the perimeter of each such structure such that a
smooth transition is maintained between the top of each structure and the road
surface. The elevation of these structures shall be established by running a
eight (8’) foot straight edge over the top of structure both longitudinally and
transversely to the roadway to a finished height along the straight edge equal
to that of the compacted pavement thickness.
(10) At the discretion of the Project Inspector, temporary installation of catch basin
gates may be required at levels lower than the base coat elevation to make
them functional prior to application on the finish coat.
(11) If requested by the Department of Public Works Director, compaction and
plane of finished surface tests shall be performed on the top course paving
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 83
Amended through August 18, 2014
once in place. All requested testing should be performed by an independent
testing laboratory at the expense of the Developer. The Director of Public
Works may request remedial repairs or replacement of any portion of the
pavement system if it fails to meet these and/or the Massachusetts Highway
Department Standard Specifications Latest Edition and the requirements listed
in this document.
(12) Handwork will be kept at an absolute minimum. The paver will pinch the
longitudinal joint as tightly as possible to avoid excessive luting, and
segregation.
(13) Care will be taken to avoid end of load segregation by not closing the wings
on the hopper excessively and not running out each truck into the paver until
empty.
M3.
(1) The Developer will provide at their expense an Independent Pavement
Inspector that will be responsible for testing compaction, temperature,
thickness and overall placement techniques.
Pavement Compaction & Testing
(2) If a plant inspection has not taken place during the installation, then the
paving inspector will obtain a field sample at a minimum frequency of one
sample per 750 tons. At the Developer’s expense, the sample obtained will be
set aside, and subject to testing at the Project Inspectors discretion.
(3) The placement contractor will be responsible for proper installation
equipment, which will include pavers that are in good operating order,
compaction equipment of suitable size and type, and a sufficient number of
trucks so as not to cause major delays between loads that will result in cold
joints.
(4) Roadway will be compacted to 92-97% of the Maximum Theoretical
Density. Prior to paving the independent pavement installation inspector will
be provided with the Maximum Theoretical Density by the production facility,
the pavement surfaced will be tested using a density gauge (nuclear gauge).
During the installation, the paving inspector will check to assure the proper
thickness and temperature is being provided, he or she will notify the paving
contractor and the developers representative of any deficiencies during the
installation. He or she will also notify the Town Project Inspector of any
problematic issues.
(5) At the Developer’s expense the town may request that the pavement be cored
and the Mix be analyzed for verification of compaction and mix composition
which would include the following tests:
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 84
Amended through August 18, 2014
-Extraction
-Bulk Density of the Core
-Maximum Theoretical Density of the Core
-Density of the core
-Core Thickness
N3.
(1) Driveway cuts shall not be allowed within sixty- (60) feet of the intersection
of the centerline of intersecting streets. In no instances shall catch basins be
located along a driveway curb opening. Driveway openings shall be shown on
the definitive plan.
Driveway Installations (Pavement)
(2) Driveways shall be paved from the curb to the property line. That portion of
all driveways within the street right-of-way limits shall be constructed to the
same specifications as the roadway: twelve-inch gravel base binder at two and
one half (2 ½) inches after compaction and top coat at one and one half (1 ½)
inches after compaction. Sidewalk grades shall be continuous across driveway
openings. Transition in grade of no more than two inches will be allowed.
(3) Driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide and shall have an opening of
at least sixteen (16) feet in the curb at the gutter line.
(4) At all driveways, the grade at the back of the sidewalk shall be at least six
(6) inches higher than the grade at the gutter line.
(5) The junction of sidewalks, driveways and roadways shall be constructed in
such a manner as to prevent recessed areas where puddling may form.
Driveways serving the premises shall provide access through the required frontage of the
serviced lot, except in the case of a common driveway.
O3.
In residential areas, sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide. In commercial and industrial
areas, sidewalks shall be six (6) feet wide. A minimum of five-foot-wide traveled way
shall be maintained at all times. In all areas, all materials shall be removed or filled to
a depth of twenty-seven (27) inches below the finished design grade. Any soft spots of
undesirable materials shall be removed and replaced with gravel. The sidewalk area
shall be filled with gravel and rolled or compacted with a vibratory plate of a suitable
size to a compacted depth of eight (8) inches at a time with a slope of 1.5% (maximum
of 2%) per the most recent MHD American Disability Act specifications pitched
toward the street whenever possible. In areas of high groundwater as previously
determined by soil borings or test pits, the compacted depth of gravel shall be
increased to twelve (12) inches.
Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall extend to the paved roadway at intersections to provide convenient
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 85
Amended through August 18, 2014
walk-off for crossings and shall be ramped for the handicap accessibility to the gutter
with no curb at threshold unless otherwise noted. Handicap ramps shall be shown on
the plan and shall be constructed in accordance with the latest revision of the MHD
American Disability Act specifications and architectural access codes.
(1) Sidewalk materials shall be subject to testing as listed in Pavement
Compaction & Testing, Backfill, and Compaction for Gravel.
P3. Paved Sidewalks
(1) Sidewalks shall have a finished grade in relation to the roadway as shown on
the "Typical Road Cross Sections" and shall be constructed of Bituminous
Concrete in accordance with the Department's Specifications subject to the
approval of the Project Inspector.
(2) The gravel foundation shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in
compacted thickness and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of the
roadway foundation. Sidewalk paving to consist of 2" binder course and 1
1/2" finish course, for a total of 3 1/2".
Q3.
(1) A five-inch-thick Class A [four thousand (4,000) pounds per square inch (psi)]
concrete shall be applied to the prepared gravel base. A slump test shall be
performed by an independent testing lab for every other truck. The slump
shall vary between two and four inches. Department of Public Works
personnel shall observe and accept or reject the concrete delivery based on test
results.
Concrete Sidewalks
(2) Sidewalk grade shall be continuous across driveways openings. Transition in
grade will not be allowed. Four-by-four-inch welded wire mesh or equal shall
be installed at all driveway aprons. The welded wire mesh or equal shall be
supported in place such that a minimum two-inch concrete coverage is
maintained in all locations. The concrete shall be a plant mix, placed, floated,
trowled and then finished with a broom. Curing and sealing compound shall
be applied. Preformed expansion joints shall be installed fifteen (15) feet on
center for five-foot-wide sidewalks and eighteen (18) feet on center for sixfoot-
wide sidewalks.
(3) Finished sidewalks shall be sloped as specified in this document. Trowled
joints shall be installed five (5) feet on center in residential areas and six (6)
feet on center in commercial and industrial areas. Plant mix design data and
delivery slips shall be submitted to the Planning Board and Department of
Public Works for review. All construction and concrete repair (if necessary)
shall be in accordance with MassDOT Standards. Finished concrete sidewalks
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 86
Amended through August 18, 2014
shall be inspected by the Project Inspector and will not be accepted until the
surface is uniform and contains no defects.
R3.
(1) The Planning Board shall approve layout of crosswalks prior to the
installation.
Crosswalks
(2) All twelve-inch (12”) thermo-plastic lines or reflective paint shall be applied
in one (1) application; no combination of lines (i.e. two 6” lines) will be
accepted.
(3) All crosswalks shall conform to latest revisions of the Massachusetts Highway
Department “Standard Specifications for Highway and Bridges” for
reflectorized lines (thermo plastic/paint) and material M7.01.20.
(4) Any installation of Reflectorized Paint or Thermo Plastic will be contingent
upon allowable weather conditions, which will facilitate proper bond.
S3.
(1) Pedestrian (wheelchair) ramps shown on plans will conform to Massachusetts
Highway Department “Wheel Chair Ramp Standards” revised October 8,
1997 (or latest revision).
Pedestrian Wheel Chair Ramps & Crosswalks
(2) Wheelchair ramps shall be concrete.
(3) Wheelchair ramps shall contain a detectable tactile “warning strip” installed in
the concrete wheelchair ramp. Detectable warnings shall consist of a surface
of truncated domes aligned in a square or radial grid pattern and shall comply
with R304.
(4) Manufacturer should be Massachusetts approved. Domes should be set flush
with the finish grade of the concrete. Ramp should be constructed so as not to
hold water. Utilizing an edger the concrete should be scored allowing water to
drain the ramp.
(5) Detectable tactiles shall be red in color, unless otherwise approved.
(6) The contractor shall exercise extreme care to construct the ramps with proper
sidewalk cross slopes, wheelchair ramp slope, and clearances.
(7) The Project Inspector must approve any modification to the proposed ramp
designs.
T3.
(1) Except as otherwise required in this section, bituminous concrete curbing
Curbing
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 87
Amended through August 18, 2014
(Cape Cod berms), vertical granite, sloped granite, or granite curbing shall be
provided along both sides of the roadway.
(2) Where verticle granite curbing meets bituminous Cape Cod berms, suitable
granite transitions shall be constructed.
(3) Care will be taken when moving curb so as not to damage the curb, any
chipped or broken curbing will not be used.
(4) Concrete shall have a minimum strength of 3000 psi for setting curb.
(5) Curbing or any other material shall not be left in the roadway(s) without the
approval from the DPW.
(6) Gutter mouth curb will be used at all drainage inlets.
(7) 1/2” curb joints will be provided
(8) Type M mortar will be used at all curb joints once the curb has been set in
concrete.
(9) Curb will be set so the concrete flows under the middle of each section of
curbing by 3”, so that curb does not shift after construction or during plowing.
(10) The back of the curb will be backfilled with gravel and compacted as
described in “Sidewalks” once the concrete used for setting the curb has been
allowed to set for 24 hours.
(11) Radius curb will be ordered and installed to the length of radius and size of
radius specified in the drawings at the specific location, any substitutions that
may be considered will be made only with the approval of the Project
Inspector.
U3.
(1) Vertical Curbing shall be VB (Massachusetts Highway Department and
Department of Public Works Specifications M9 & Section 500) vertical
granite where high-frequency parking is anticipated, such as where
multifamily units are to be near the street or at drop-off points in
nonresidential development or such curbing is necessary to control surface
run-off, or prevent serious erosion, or for safety or other similar purposes.
Vertical Curbing
(2) Where vertical granite curbing is installed, all curb inlets for catch basins shall
be granite mouth curbing.
(3) Vertical granite curbing shall be upright four-foot-minimum lengths, finished
side facing the traveled way, with a finished reveal of seven (7) inches plus or
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 88
Amended through August 18, 2014
minus ¾”. It shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of the
Massachusetts Highway Department Standard Specification.
(4) Curb will be installed so that the face of the curb tilts very slightly (1/8 of an
inch from top to bottom) backward toward the sidewalk minimizing damage
to tires and damage to curb edge from plows.
V3.
(1) Sloped granite curb, Type SB, is to be used on all grades of approximately
seven percent (7%) or greater.
Sloped (Slant) Granite
(2) Slant granite curbing shall be of lengths determined by the Department of
Public Works to be adequate to serve the situation (Massachusetts Department
of Public Works Specification M9 & Section 500). It shall be set on
compacted gravel at some angle not less than forty five degrees (45o) and not
greater than sixty degrees (60o). In addition, it shall have a reveal of seven (7)
inches plus or minus three quarters inches (3/4”) measured from the top of the
granite level to the finished grade. It shall be supported in place by blocks or
undisturbed earth. The granite shall be set in a concrete base approximately
six (6) inches square, which shall abut against the binder course. The concrete
shall be placed in front and under the granite during an initial pour up to ½”
below the binder grade. The concrete shall be placed in back and under the
granite during a second pour, half way up the back of the curb. The top course
of paving will cover the concrete and key the granite in place. Joints on the
face and top of the granite curb shall be mortared. The angle, alignment and
reveal shall be uniformly maintained.
(3) The back of the curb will be backfilled with gravel and compacted as
described in “Sidewalks” once the concrete used for setting the curb has been
allowed to set for 24 hours.
W3.
(1) Two foot vertical granite radius corner pieces may be required at all driveway
openings along vertical granite curbing.
Curb at Driveways
(2) Transition pieces may be required at all driveway openings along slant granite
curbing and vertical curbing. The transition shall be a piece of granite curbing
(minimum length seven feet) that starts with proper reveal and transitions
downward to be just higher than flush (finish grade elevation plus ½”) with
finish grade at the driveway opening to avoid puddling at driveway opening.
All other requirements listed in Curbing apply during the installation.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 89
Amended through August 18, 2014
X3. Street Lighting
(1) It is the responsibility of the developer of any subdivision within the Town
of Hingham to provide for the installation of sodium vapor street lighting
within that subdivision in accordance with Hingham Lighting standard
specifications with The Planning Board approval.
(2) The developer may be required to install all roadway lighting in those
designated locations along the roadway that would be considered the normal
path of ingress and egress to that dwelling.
(3) When required, street lighting shall be installed as follows: within a
subdivision each intersection, intersecting way, cul-de-sac, curve with a
radius of sixty degrees (60°) or greater over a linear distance of two hundred
(200) feet or other road hazard shall be illuminated by a lighting fixture(s)
which is to be installed on a structure(s) (pole, post, etc.) nearest the road
hazard identified.
(4) The quantity, type and location of lights within a proposed subdivision shall
be subject to Planning Board approval and shown on the definitive plan. The
lighting fixture and structure specification is as follows:
(5) Fixture lumen rating: four thousand (4,000).
(6) Nominal structure mounting height above street grade: twenty-five (25) feet.
Y3. Unaccepted Street Lighting
(1) Where the town has not agreed or is likely not to accept future payment for
street lighting, the developer, contractor or association of customers shall:
Provide, install and retain ownership of all street lighting equipment,
including underground conductors, conduits, foundations, poles and
luminaries; and Contract directly with the Hingham Municipal Light
Company to provide electricity for light operation and to service and maintain
all equipment on a long-term basis.
Z3.
(1) Where the town has accepted a roadway or is likely to accept street lighting,
or itself owns a parking lot or other way, or has otherwise agreed to supply
streetlight service to a private way, the developer, contractor or association of
customers, or the town in the case of a municipal facility, shall provide and
install all street lighting including underground conductors, conduit and
foundations on which poles and luminaries are set. In case of accepted street
lighting, the town shall contract with the Hingham Municipal Light Company
Accepted Street Lighting
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 90
Amended through August 18, 2014
to provide electricity for light operation and to service and maintain all
equipment.
A4. Landscaping (Grass Plot, Side Slopes, Street Trees)
(1) Planting areas and shoulders shall pitch toward the traveled way not less than
one-fourth (1/4) inch nor greater than two (2) inches to the foot.
(2) Grass seed shall be spread during the growing season at the rate of four (4)
pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet. It shall be a mixture of creeping
red fescue and perennial rye grass. It shall be properly fertilized, limed and
watered. A guaranty period of one (1) year from full growth and final bond
release shall be honored by the Developer.
(3) All disturbed unpaved areas within the street right-of-way shall be loamed to a
minimum of six-inch thickness and seeded.
(4) A grass plot shall be provided on each side of all roadways between the edge
of the roadway and the sidewalk. The finished grade of the grass plot in
relation to the finished grade of the roadway shall be as shown on the "Typical
Road Cross Sections".
(5) The area between the sidewalk and traveled way shall have six (6) inches of
loam which, when rolled, shall match with the top course of the sidewalk and
the top of the front face of the curb.
X3.
(1) As part of design, the area behind the sidewalk or shoulder shall be sloped at
not more than the ratio of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical to a
point where it precisely coincides with the surrounding ground or abutter’s
lawn. Side slopes shall be loamed and seeded or retained in existing
vegetation the same as grass strips.
Side Slopes
(2) Terracing and/or sloping of grades to the roadway will be required when the
normal runoff from a lot onto another has been made greater by new
construction or by man-made land changes.
(3) Terracing shall be done with earthen embankments, and each terrace shall
have no more than a three-foot vertical drop. Natural slopes or terraces will be
no greater than one (1) foot horizontal to one (1) foot vertical, although no
slopes greater than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical shall be
allowed within ten (10) feet of the lot line. “Terrace” shall mean a raised flat
mound of earth with sloping sides.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 91
Amended through August 18, 2014
(4) The areas of cut or fill outside the traveled way shall be sloped as follows
until it intersects the finished grade of the abutting lots, except as may be
required for sidewalks and except where, in the opinion of the Board, slopes
in excess of the following are warranted to mitigate impact upon wetlands or
other natural features:
Depth/height of cut/fill slope
Less than 4 feet
Maximum permissible rate of
6 to 1
feet to 10 feet 4 to 1
More than 10 feet 2 to 1
(5) Where fill slopes equal or are greater than 3 to 1, a guardrail shall be placed at
a distance no less than four (4) feet from the edge of traveled way. The detail
should include rail, posts and cable. The guardrail section shall include a 16'
approach to begin 16' prior to the 3 to 1 slope. An example of an appropriate
guardrail is shown in Figure 4.
B4. Street Trees
(1) Street trees, not less than twelve (12) feet in height and of a species approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works, shall be planted on each side of every
street in the subdivision wherever, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
existing woodlands or individual trees are not retained. Trees shall be located
on private property and planted a minimum of (10) feet outside the right of
way. Spacing shall be 50’ on-center. Upon acceptance, these trees shall be
considered privately owned trees by the respective property owner.
C4. Bounds/Monuments
(1) Granite monuments with the letters HHB (Hingham Highway Bound)
engraved into the top shall be set at all street intersections, at all points of
change in direction or curvature of streets, and at other points where, in the
opinion of the Board, permanent monuments are necessary.
(2) Bounds shall be installed at all street intersections, at all points of change in
direction or curvature of street side lines, arcs on curves at intervals of 300
feet, all easement boundaries, and at other points where, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, permanent bounds are necessary. Such bounds shall be precast
reinforced concrete not less than thirty-six (36) inches in length and six
(6) inches square. Other than bounds that exist, bounds shall be installed at all
turning points for parcels designated as open space.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 92
Amended through August 18, 2014
(3) Each lot shall have at least one (1) sideline marked by a bound.
(4) Bounds shall be set to the finish grade. A registered land surveyor shall certify
to the Planning Board that the location of such bounds has been verified by
him, following all earthwork and paving and shown on as-built plans.
(5) Monuments shall be at least four (4) by four (4) inches and shall extend a
minimum of three and one-half (3 1/2) feet below finished grade to not more
than six (6) inches above finished grade, except that bounds located in lawns
shall be of materials approved by the Planning Board, and shall be set with the
top flush or slightly below finished grade and except that bounds set in
driveways, sidewalks or other paved areas shall be constructed of a 2" brass
rod extending 3' into the ground and shall be set flush to finished grade.
D4.
(1) Street signs of the type commonly used on public ways of the Town and
bearing the names of the intersecting streets as indicated on the Definitive
Plan shall be erected at all intersections of streets in the subdivision. Such
signs shall be subject to the approval of the Board.
Street Signs
(2) Street signposts shall be ten (10) feet in length, three (3) feet of which shall be
buried in the ground. An anchor shall be installed with the underground
portion to prevent turning or removal.
(3) The Developer shall furnish and install double-faced extruded-aluminum
street signs, mounted on two-inch-diameter posts equal to those in use by the
Hingham Department of Public Works.
E4.
(1) Transformers and junction boxes for underground wiring and telephone shall
be located outside of the right of way in easements permitting access for
maintenance purposes.
Transformers, Fire Alarm Boxes, Mailboxes
(2) Fire alarm boxes and hydrants shall be located according to the specifications
of the Hingham Fire Department either in the grass strip or in easements
outside of the right of way.
(3) Personal mailboxes shall not be located in the Town right of way.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 93
Amended through August 18, 2014
F4.
(1) The entire area of the subdivision shall be cleaned up so as to leave, in the
opinion of the Board, a neat and orderly appearance free from debris and other
objectionable materials. All catch basins and manholes shall be cleaned out.
Cleaning Up
(2) The Developer shall remove from the street and adjoining property all
temporary structures, debris, tree stumps, loose rocks and surplus materials
which may have accumulated during the prosecution of the work, leaving the
subdivision in a neat and orderly condition. Prior to completion of work, the
applicant shall clean the entire stormwater management system, both on-site
and off-site to its point of discharge.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 94
Amended through August 18, 2014
SECTION 6
INSPECTION
A. General
(1) All work performed as a consequence of these Rules and Regulations shall be
subject to the review of the Board which shall approve and accept or disapprove
and reject each phase or portion of such work and at completion shall recommend
the acceptance of all work or disapproval of the work with reasons therefore.
The Board will employ a Registered Professional Engineer in the inspection of the
work to insure compliance with these Rules and Regulations and to report to the
Board his recommendations as to approval or disapproval of the work. Such
engineer will make certain inspections as prescribed herein in order to check the
adequacy of the work at various stages prior to such work being covered by
subsequent work. However, the Board, its engineer, and such other persons as the
Board may designate shall have the right to inspect the work any time. Therefore,
the applicant shall at any time provide safe and convenient access to all parts of
the work for inspection by the Board or its engineer.
Inspection by the Board's engineer does not in any way limit the right of the
Board to require or direct the applicant to rectify, correct or alter any portion of
the work, deemed in the opinion of the Board, upon receipt of evidence or facts
leading the Board to conclude as such, that further work is necessary to
satisfactorily complete and satisfy the plan as approved by the Board.
(2) All work which has been disapproved or is not acceptable to the Board shall be
removed and replaced or otherwise corrected to the point of complying with the
requirements of the Board for acceptance. Any work which has been covered by
subsequent work prior to acceptance, or is otherwise not available or obscured to
the point of rendering inspection of the work difficult, shall be considered to be
not acceptable to the Board. Such subsequent work shall be removed as directed
by the Planning Board to insure availability of the work to be inspected as
required herein. The release of the performance guarantee shall depend upon the
acceptance of all work prescribed herein and on the Definitive Plan and as
directed by the Board.
(3) At points indicated in Section 5 and as further described hereinafter, the
construction of the required improvements shall be inspected by the Board's
engineer, and unless approval of the work completed, including approval of
materials used, to each such point has been given in writing, no further work shall
be commenced. Such inspections may include the taking of certain samples for
laboratory analysis or testing, in such cases, the applicant shall insure that the
engineer is in no way hindered or obstructed in the course of obtaining such
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 95
Amended through August 18, 2014
samples. Where such samples are removed from the completed work, the
applicant shall replace and restore such work, to the satisfaction of the engineer,
to its condition prior to the taking of the sample.
The Planning Board or its engineer may require certified copies of delivery
receipts or bills of lading or other certification as to the description of materials
used or incorporated in the work. The Planning Board or its engineer may also
require a sample of any materials or supplies, which may be incorporated in the
work; such samples shall be furnished at the expense of the applicant, and the
applicant shall be liable for all costs and fees incurred by the Board as a result of
testing such materials.
B. Preconstruction Requirements
At least seven days prior to the proposed construction start date and before the preconstruction
meeting takes place, an Applicant shall provide the Planning Board, the
Planning Board’s Engineer with the following information:
(1) An affidavit certifying that the Applicant is the owner of record of all of the
property shown on the endorsed definitive plan or documentation signed by the
owner(s) of record that the Applicant has authorization to act on all matters
pertaining to the construction of the development.
(2) An affidavit certifying that the Applicant has reviewed all of the conditions of
subdivision approval and has taken all of the required steps to satisfy the
conditions.
(3) An affidavit certifying that all required federal, state and local permits have
been obtained and providing a list, with the dates of issuance of each permit and
the permit identification number.
(4) A letter identifying the persons or entities responsible for completion of any
portion of the project including the name, address, telephone number and e-mail
address of each such person or entity.
(5) A letter that identifies (name, business address, telephone and facsimile
numbers and e-mail) for the following:
*The official representative of the Applicant and owners.
*The engineering and surveying firm to be used during construction.
*The general contractor.
*The soils testing firm to be used during construction.
(6) Shop drawings and/or catalog cuts of all structures/materials to be used to
construct the approved definitive subdivision. All catalog cuts shall be hilighted
as to product submitted for approval.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 96
Amended through August 18, 2014
(7) Certification by a Land Surveyor that the site control data including
benchmarks, limits of work and horizontal control has been properly staked.
(8) The location of the disposal site for all solid waste and surplus material must be
supplied and approved.
(9) Any changes to previously submitted information contained above must receive
approval of the Planning Board.
(10) Preconstruction Meeting. At least 48 hours prior to the beginning of
construction, the Applicant shall arrange and participate in a pre-construction
meeting with the Planning Board’s Engineer to review all construction
requirements. (See Appendix -Preconstruction checklist)
C. Notification to the Engineer
(1) After approval of the Definitive Plan and subsequent to the receipt by the Board
of the fee required under these Regulations, the Board will notify the applicant
of the name and address of the engineer designated to perform the inspections as
required herein. The applicant shall keep the Planning Board and a
representative of the Hingham Department of Public Works fully informed as to
the status and progress of the work and shall notify the engineer, through the
Planning Administrator, (by mail or in-person telephone) at least two (2)
business days in advance, that the work has progressed to a stage that an
inspection is required, unless other arrangements acceptable to the parties
concerned have been made.
(2) In the event that the engineer is unavailable to provide inspection services
within two business days of the applicant's request, the Planning Board may
designate a substitute engineer.
(3) In the event the engineer makes an inspection of the work at the time designated
and finds that such work is not at the proper stage of completion or that the
work has been covered or otherwise obscured, the engineer shall notify the
applicant and the Board as to the additional steps the applicant shall take to
complete the work to the point required or to the extent the work shall be
uncovered or exposed to full view. The applicant shall notify the Board again
when the work is ready as prescribed in Section 6,B.,(1).
(4) The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining sufficient escrow balance to
pay for all costs and fees incurred by the Board as a result of requests by the
applicant for any inspection of the work.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 97
Amended through August 18, 2014
D. Lines and Grades
(1) Prior to the inspection of any phase of the work, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to provide sufficient line stakes and grade stakes to insure that a
proper inspection may be made. These horizontal and vertical control stakes
must be laid out to conform to the lines and grades shown on the approved
Definitive Plan or any approved amendment thereto. A licensed land surveyor,
retained by the Applicant, shall establish control for all stakeout on the property
including the limit of work, project boundaries and both vertical and horizontal
benchmarks. If requested by the Board a copy of the control plan in both paper
and digital formats shall be provided for reference.
(2) The engineer will advise the Board at any time during the construction if, in his
opinion, he believes that the work has not been laid out to the lines and grades
as shown on the Definitive Plan. In such cases, the Board will proceed as
described as described elsewhere in these Regulations.
(3) Any costs which, in the opinion of the Board, is the responsibility of the
applicant as noted in these Regulations shall be in addition to the fees required
elsewhere herein.
E. Inspection of Required Improvements
It is typical practice for construction to be a fluid process with one phase leading to
another in a continuous manner. The Board and their representative will work to
maintain the proposed construction schedule subject to proper notification and quality of
work. The following inspections of the required improvements will be made by the
Board's engineer. These inspections are the minimum required. In addition, random site
visits to observe site conditions and inspections after rain or other weather events will be
performed. The Board may also request, or require other inspections at their discretion.
Although the order of the inspections follows general construction practice, certain
inspections may be required at
(1) The first inspection will be made to observe site control staking, clearing limits
and erosion controls. The surveyor shall provide the Board with a certification
statement that all control has been installed and complies with the requirements
of the Board. For multi-phase projects, there may be limits to initial staking,
erosion controls etc. The control staking and certification is required for each
phase as applicable.
No clearing or cutting shall commence for any phase of the project until the
inspection above has been performed to the satisfaction of the Board or their
representative. An inspection will be made of the work upon completion of all
clearing, grubbing and excavation of unsuitable soils including top and subsoil
within the roadway and other areas to be cleared for the project, with exception
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 98
Amended through August 18, 2014
to individual house lots as applicable as may be required or implied by these
Regulations. No fill shall have been placed at the time of this inspection.
(2) An inspection will be made of the compacted fill consistent with the
requirements for various fill materials in these Regulations and as may be
required to bring the roadways to their proposed grades. The applicant shall
notify the engineer as to his source of gravel for fill as soon as such information
is known, so that samples may be taken and analyzed by the engineer. The
applicant shall not proceed with the filling operation until such time as the
engineer notifies the applicant that the gravel proposed for the fill is acceptable.
The applicant shall not use a gravel source other than the one designated
without prior notice to the engineer. The Planning Board’s representative will
require in-situ testing of the gravel material to assure consistency from the
source. Test locations and frequency are at the discretion of the Town’s
representative.
(3) An inspection will be made of the drainage outfall(s), which shall be laid as the
first part of the drainage system, and which shall be placed at the elevations
required under the Definitive Subdivision Plans as approved by the Board. The
engineer shall be satisfied that the placement of the outfall is consistent with the
requirements of these Regulations, the Definitive Plan and the existing
conditions of the site. Upon approval, the engineer shall require that the outfall
be permanently set to the line and grade approved and shall require that the
applicant submit certification of the final invert elevation at the outfall.
(4) The drainage system shall not be covered until such time as the Planning
Board’s representative has inspected the installed drainage system. It is
anticipated that drainage system installation would occur on a continuous basis
with inspection of the portion completed prior to backfill. No components are to
be covered without inspection.
At the same time, or such other time as the work may be available, inspections
will be made of the completed municipal services (without back fill) as required
on the Definitive Plan. The inspection of the required municipal services will
be made by the agency responsible for the particular service. Each agency so
involved will notify the Board's engineer of the approval of such work. The
Board’s representative may also inspect portions of the installation of other
municipal services and or private utilities to ensure that materials and
installation is consistent with the plans.
(5) An inspection will be made of each six (6) inch layer of compacted roadway
foundation as specified the Construction Specifications. In-situ gravel sample
or samples will be taken at random locations at the direction of the Planning
Board’s representative,
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 99
Amended through August 18, 2014
(6) An inspection will be made of the final six (6) inch layer of compacted roadway
foundation. Where precast concrete or granite curb is to be used, it shall be
installed prior to this inspection.
After this inspection the Applicant shall set roadway and easement bounds and
prepare an interim as-built plan, indicating the location of all improvements,
utilities, easements, right-of-way lines, drainage inverts, etc. The interim asbuilt
shall be prepared at the same scale as the Definitive Plan and be provided
in both paper and digital form for review and approval prior to any lot release.
(7) An inspection shall be made of the bituminous concrete base course as it is
installed. The Applicant shall provide at least 48 hours notice for the Town to
procure the services of a certified testing company to inspect the pavement.
This includes the services of a Certified testing lab for certification of the mix at
the plant prior to delivery to the site, and for testing of temperature, compaction,
etc. on site. The Applicant is responsible for the costs of the testing lab and
inspector. The coordination of the testing will be performed by the Town’s
representative.
(8) Permanent monuments for the roadway, easements, etc. shall be set and
protected from damage prior to paving.
(9) An inspection will be made of the completed Class I Bituminous Concrete
Pavement Type I-1 for the roadway surface as it is installed. The Applicant
shall provide at least 48 hours notice for the Town to procure the services of a
certified testing company to inspect the pavement. This includes the services of
a Certified testing lab for certification of the mix at the plant prior to delivery to
the site, and for testing of temperature, compaction, etc. on site. The Applicant
is responsible for the costs of the testing lab and inspector. The coordination of
the testing will be performed by the Town’s representative.
(10) An inspection will be made of all work as required on sidewalks, grass plots,
side slopes, street signs, plantings, etc. The timing of these inspections is
dependent on the installation of said improvements.
(11) A Final inspection will be made of all subsequent work as required herein or on
the Definitive Plan to include the final clean-up.
(12) Annual Inspection November/December An annual inspection, if required,
prior to project closeout for winter shall be performed. The Board’s
representative will inspect the site with the project superintendent to determine
work to be done to stabilize and protect the site during the winter.
(13) Annual Inspection April An annual inspection, if required, prior to project
restart in the spring shall be performed. The Board’s representative will inspect
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 100
Amended through August 18, 2014
the site with the project superintendent to determine work to be done to repair
winter damage and to stabilize and protect the site relative to proposed work
scheduled to be performed.
F. Engineer's Report
(1) The engineer will submit weekly reports as necessary during the progress of the
work. If no work or inspections occur during specific weeks a report will not be
prepared. A sample weekly report is attached in the Appendix.
(2) At the completion of the work and in association with any surety reduction
request(s), the engineer will report to the Board that in his or her opinion the
work has been performed in accordance with these Rules and Regulations and
the Definitive Plan, or the engineer will advise the Board that the work is not
acceptable with the reasons therefore. Notwithstanding such an opinion by the
engineer, the Planning Board is the final authority as to the sufficiency of the
work done.
(3) At any time during the progress of the work, the engineer will advise the Board,
immediately, of any factors which may adversely affect the progress of the
work.
(4) The engineer's inspection report will be submitted to the Board as shown on
Form R1 (See Appendix).
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Preconstruction Checklist - 101
Amended through August 18, 2014
HINGHAM PLANNING BOARD
Preconstruction Checklist
Subdivision Name:
Applicant: Phone:
Road Contractor:
Name of Street: From Station: To Station:
(1) An affidavit certifying that the Applicant is the owner of record of all of the property
shown on the endorsed definitive plan or documentation signed by the owner(s) of record that the
Applicant has authorization to act on all matters pertaining to the construction of the
development.
(2) An affidavit certifying that the Applicant has reviewed all of the conditions of
subdivision approval and has taken all of the required steps to satisfy the conditions.
(3) An affidavit certifying that all required federal, state and local permits have been
obtained and providing a list, with the dates of issuance of each permit and the permit
identification number.
(4) A letter identifying the persons or entities responsible for completion of any portion of
the project including the name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of each such person
or entity.
(5) A letter that identifies (name, business address, telephone and facsimile numbers and email)
for the following:
*The official representative of the Applicant and owners.
*The engineering and surveying firm to be used during construction.
*The general contractor.
*The soils testing firm to be used during construction.
(6) Shop drawings and/or catalog cuts of all structures/materials to be used to construct the
approved definitive subdivision. All catalog cuts shall be hi-lighted as to product submitted for
approval.
(7) Certification by a Land Surveyor that the site control data including benchmarks, limits
of work and horizontal control has been properly staked.
(8) The location of the disposal site for all solid waste and surplus material must be supplied
and approved.
(9) Any changes to previously submitted information contained above must receive approval
of the Planning Board.
(10) Preconstruction Meeting. At least 48 hours prior to the beginning of construction, the
Applicant shall arrange and participate in a pre-construction meeting with the Planning Board’s
Engineer to review all construction requirements.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form R1 – 102
Amended through August 18, 2014
HINGHAM PLANNING BOARD
R1 - Report of Inspection for Construction of Required Improvements
Subdivision Name:
Applicant: Phone:
Road Contractor:
Name of Street: From Station: To Station:
Engineer's signature on each line is a certification of compliance with the Definitive Plan and
Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
# Date Inspection Engineer’s Signature
1 Clearing, Grubbing and Excavation
2 Drainage Outfall Permanently Set
3 Total Drainage System and
Municipal Services
4 Compacted Fill
5 First Foundation Layer
6 Second Foundation Layer
7 Bituminous Concrete Base Course
8 Bituminous Concrete Base Class I Surface
Course
9 Sidewalks, Curbing, Monuments, Grass, Etc.
10 Final Inspection, Clean-up, Etc.
The Following Tests were Performed (Report Attached Hereto):
Date of Test Type of Test Signature Certifying Acceptance of Results
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form R2 - 103
Amended through August 18, 2014
HINGHAM PLANNING BOARD
R2 - Certificate of Construction and Performance
Subdivision Name:
Applicant: Phone:
Engineer: Phone:
Name of Street:
(The engineer responsible for inspecting the work will make one of the two alternative
certifications below, with appropriate entries and deletions, upon completion of all required
inspections and re-inspections):
I, ______________________________, certify that the Subdivision described above has (has
not) been constructed in conformance with the Definitive Plan and all amendments, and the
Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board (and that the ways, utilities, drainage and municipal
services have been installed to line and grade as shown in the Definitive Plan so that a waiver of
"as-built" plans is recommended).
Professional Engineer's Stamp Date _______ Signature ______________________
I, _____________________________, certify that with the exception of minor changes shown
on the attached plans, the line and grade of ways, utilities, drainage and municipal services is as
shown on the Definitive Plan, so that, with the attached drawings, a complete record is available
and "as-built" drawings may be waived.
Professional Engineer's Stamp Date _______ Signature ______________________
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form A – 104
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM A
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT
OF PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
Hingham, MA, ______________, 20___
To the Hingham Planning Board:
The undersigned, believing that the accompanying plan of his property in the Town of Hingham
does not constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, herewith
submits said plan for a determination and endorsement that Planning Board approval under the
Subdivision Control Law is not required. For the following reasons:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________ ____________
1. Name of Applicant:
Address:
Telephone#: Work#:
2. Name of Engineer or Surveyor:
Address:
3. Deed of Property recorded in Registry of Deed Book Page
(county)
4. Location and Description of Property:
5. Date of Filing of this Application with the Town Clerk:
Signature of record owner(s):
Print name of record owner(s):
Address: Telephone#:
Note: The Applicant must submit with this application all of the data and documentation
required by Section 3A of the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board. The application
needs to be stamped by the Town Clerk before submitting to the Planning Board.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations 105
Amended through August 18, 2014
CHECKLIST FOR FORM A APPLICATIONS
The following checklist shall be completed in its entirety and be submitted with the Form A
as a part of an Approval Not Required Subdivision Application:
PERMIT TYPE P E R M IT FILING FEE NUMBER OF PLAN COPIES
REQUIRED
APPROVAL NOT REQUIRED
(ANR / FORM A) $250 plus $250 per buildable lot 1 Mylar
5 Copies
______ Application fee and submittal requirements (See table above)
______ Scale: 1" = 40'
______ Date of plan
______ North point
______ Reference to Assessor's plan number
______ Reference to recently recorded plans for the parcel
______ Name of the person for whom the plan is prepared or name of the applicant
______ Name of engineer or surveyor preparing the plan:
______ Seal
______ Signature
______ Flood Plain and Watershed Protection District
______ Area of flood plain included within each lot
______ All other wetlands and flood plain
______ Lots: area, frontage and dimensions of all whose dimensions are altered by the plan
______ Area, frontage dimensions and bearings of all proposed lots
______ Contiguous lots in common beneficial ownership with land that is the subject of the plan
______ Locus plan at a scale of at least 1" = 800'
______ Streets bounding or near the property
______ For a compiled plan:
______ Identity of plans from which compiled
______ Identity of each plan referenced or relied upon by the plan
______ title
______ date
______ person who prepared the plan
______ date of preparation
______ approval by Planning Board
______ recorded reference to the plan in the Registry of Deeds or Land Court
______ Circle for frontage
______ Upland area for all lots
______ Setbacks for all existing structures
______ Zoning District
The plan should include the following note: ENDORSEMENT OF THIS PLAN DOES NOT
CONSTITUTE AN INTERPRETATION OF ZONING.
If applicable the plan should also include the following language:
THE WETLANDS DELINEATION LINE AS DEFINED BY THE WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT,
CHAPTER 131, SECTION 40, AND THE TOWN OF HINGHAM CONSERVATION COMMISSION
BY-LAWS HAS NOT BEEN VERIFIED BY THE HINGHAM CONSERVATION COMMISSION OR
APPROVED BY THIS ENDORSEMENT.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form B – 106
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM B
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
Hingham, MA, ______________, 20___
To the Hingham Planning Board:
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Preliminary Plan of property located in the
Town of Hingham for consideration as a subdivision under the requirements of the Subdivision
Control Law and the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land of the Planning
Board in the Town of Hingham.
1. Name of Subdivider:
Address: Telephone#:
2. Name of Engineer or Surveyor:
Address: Telephone#:
3. Deed of Property recorded in Registry of Deed Book Page
(county)
4. Location and Description of Property:
5. Date of Filing of this Application with the Town Clerk:
Signature of record owner(s):
Print name of record owner(s):
Address: Telephone#:
Note: File one completed form with the Planning Board and one copy with the Town Clerk.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014 107
FORM C
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE PLAN
To the Planning Board of the Town of Hingham:
The undersigned applicant(s) being the owner(s) of all land included within the proposed
subdivision shown on the accompanying plan desire(s) to subdivide such land, and submit(s)
such plan as a definitive plan for approval as a subdivision under the requirements of the
Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land of the
Planning Board of the Town of Hingham.
(a) Name of Subdivider:
Address: Telephone#:
(b) Name of Engineer or Surveyor:
Address: Telephone#:
(c) Deed of Property recorded in Registry of Deed Book Page
(county)
(d) Said land is described as follows:
(e) The following are all the mortgages, liens, easements, restrictions and other encumbrances on
the whole or any part of said land:
(f) The following are the easements and restrictions appurtenant to said land over the land of
others:
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014 108
(g) The applicant(s) covenant(s) and agree(s) for himself (themselves) (itself) and his (their) (its)
heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns:
(1) To construct and complete the proposed ways and all improvements shown on said
plan as approved by the Board and to install the drainage system, water pipes, gas pipes
and electric lines, and all other municipal services therein required by the Board, within
_______________ months from the date of this application.
(2) To construct and complete said ways and improvements and to install said municipal
services, in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Board in force at the date
of this agreement and in accordance with the specifications set forth in Section 5 of
these Rules and Regulations.
(3) That before the approval of the plan to which this application relates becomes effective
he (they) (it) will cause to be filed with the Board a duly executed bond or deposit or
Letter of Credit in a form satisfactory to the Board, to secure performance of and
compliance with all agreements, conditions and requirements contained in his (their)
(its) application, or imposed by the Board, in accordance with law and the Rules and
Regulations of the Board, in a sum equal to the full cost of constructing said ways and
all improvements and installing said services, as estimated by a person satisfactory to
the Board, and secured by an irrevocable Letter of Credit drawn upon a Massachusetts
lending institution in an amount sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure
performance.
- OR THIS -
(4) The applicant(s) request(s) that the Board approve the plan to which this application
relates without requiring a bond, on condition that no lot in the subdivision shall be sold
and no building shall be erected or placed on any lot therein until said ways and all
improvements are completed and said municipal services are installed, in accordance
with the specifications laid down by the Board, so as adequately to serve such lot, and
he (they) (it) agree(s) that in the event of such approval, he (they) (it) will obey and
comply with such condition until performance with the requirements thereof is
evidenced by a certificate of the Board.
(5) That if this application is approved, he (they) (it) will cause the plan to which it relates
to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds of Plymouth County or filed with the Recorder
of the Land Court within thirty (30) days after such approval and that he (they) (it)
will not sell or offer to sell any of the lots within the subdivision until such plan is so
recorded or filed.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014 109
(h) This application is accompanied by an original drawing of the definitive plan and all other
data, plans, and maps required, and fourteen print copies of each, all on the forms or in the
manner prescribed by the Board and a fee of _______________________(as per Section
2(c)).
Witness the signature(s) and seal(s) of the undersigned this ________ day of
________________, 20____.
________________________________________
_________________________________________
Assented to:
___________________________
___________________________ Mortgagees
___________________________
110
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM C-1
APPLICATION FOR MODIFICATION, RESCISSION OR AMENDMENT OF
DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
Subdivision: ______________________ Date:
To the Planning Board of the Town of Hingham:
The undersigned authorized applicant(s) or owner(s) of all the land shown on the accompanying
approved Definitive Subdivision plan located and described as follows:
Plan Title:
Plan Date: Revised Through:
Drawn By: ___________________________________________ Number of Pages:
Date of Planning Board Approval: ______________________ Endorsed:
Assessor’s Map and Lot Numbers(s):
Zoning: Total Acreage: __________ Number of Lots:
hereby submits this Application for a Modification _____ Rescission _____ or Amendment
of an Approved Definitive Subdivision Plan.
The Modification is described as follows:
All prior conditions of approval shall remain in full force and effect until such time as they are
met. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81-W, this
Modification/Rescission/Amendment shall take effect when: (1) the plan as originally approved
or a copy thereof, and a certified copy of the vote of the planning board making such
Modification/Rescission/Amendment or change, and any additional plan referred to in such vote,
have been recorded, (2) an endorsement has been made on the plan originally approved as such
vote is indexed in the grantor index under the names of the owners of record of the land affected.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations
Amended through August 18, 2014 111
If a proposed Modification will result in changes to the Definitive Plan, the plan submission
requirements for a Definitive Plan shall be followed.
List all mortgage holders of the land: _____________________________________
Permission of the owners affected by any change to the subdivision plan and of the mortgage
holders must be obtained.
*Attach a list of lot owners and their addresses.
To the best of my knowledge the information submitted herewith is complete and accurate.
Signature of Owner Address Telephone
Signature of Address Telephone
Authorized Applicant
The cost of recording shall be at the expense of the applicant in the case of Amendment or
Modification.
The Amendment/Modification/Rescission of the approval of this plan shall not affect the lots in
the subdivision which have been sold or mortgaged in good faith and for valuable consideration
or any rights appurtenant thereto, without the consent of the owner of such lots, and of the holder
of the mortgage or mortgages, if any, thereon. Written consent from said owners and mortgages,
if any, is attached hereto.
___________________ _________
Hingham Planning Board Chairman
Submittal requirements:
1. Completed application
2. Application Fee
3. Twelve copies of proposed plan (one - full set and eleven - 11”x 17” sets)
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form D - 112
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM D
PERFORMANCE BOND - SECURED BY DEPOSIT
Know all men by these presents that_______________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
of _____________________________________, ____________________________
hereby binds and obligates himself/itself and his/its executors, administrators, devises,
heirs, successors and assigns to the Town of Hingham, a Massachusetts municipal
corporation, in the sum of ________________________________dollars, and has
secured this obligation by the deposit with the Treasurer of said Town of Hingham of
said sum in money or negotiable securities.
The condition of this obligation is that if the undersigned or his/its executors,
administrators, devises, heirs, successors and assigns shall fully and satisfactorily observe
and perform in the manner and in the time therein specified, all of the covenants,
conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the application signed by the
undersigned and dated _______________, 20___, under which approval of a definitive
plan of a certain subdivision, entitled ______________________________________and
dated _______________________________, 20 ___, has been or is hereafter granted by
the Hingham Planning Board, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain
in full force and effect and the aforesaid security for said sum shall become and be the
sole property of said Town of Hingham as liquidated damage.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned has hereunto set his hand and seal this
___________ day of __________________________, 20___.
________________________________
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form E - 113
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM E
COVENANT
THE
UNDERSIGNED________________________________________________________
of , County, Massachusetts, hereinafter called the
"Covenantor", having submitted to the Hingham Planning Board a Definitive Plan of a
subdivision, entitled
dated made by does
hereby, in consideration of the approval of said plan by said Planning Board and the
successors in office of said Board, pursuant to G.L. (Ter. Ed.) C., 41, Sec. 81U, as
amended, that:
1. The covenantor is the owner of record of the premises included in the
subdivision shown on said plan, and there are no mortgages of record or
otherwise on said premises except such as are described below and are
subordinated to this covenant.
2. This covenant shall run with the land included in said subdivision and be
binding upon the executors, administrators, heirs and as signs of the
covenantor, and their successors in title to the premises shown on said plan;
3. The construction of ways and the installation of municipal services shall be
provided to serve any lot in accordance with said plan as approved by said
Board and the applicable Rules and Regulations of said Board before such lot
may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed; provided that a
mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or
otherwise and any succeeding owner of the mortgaged premises or part
thereof may sell any such lot, subject only to that portion of this Covenant
which provides that no lot so sold shall be built upon until such ways and
services have been provided to serve such lot;
4. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance subject to this
covenant by a single deed of the entire parcel of land shown on the
subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the Planning Board
without first providing such ways and services;
5. This covenant shall take effect upon the approval of said plan;
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form E - 114
Amended through August 18, 2014
6. Reference to this covenant shall be entered upon said plan and this covenant
shall be recorded when said plan is recorded.
7. It is understood that lots within said subdivision shall, respectively, be
released from the foregoing conditions upon recording of a Certificate of
Performance signed by a majority of said Planning Board and enumerating
the specific lots released.
The undersigned ______________________________________________________wife,
husband, of the covenantor hereby agree that such interest as I, we, may have in said
premises shall be subject to the provisions of this covenant and insofar as is necessary
release all rights of tenancy by the courtesy, dower, homestead and other interest therein.
EXECUTED as a sealed instrument this ____ __ day of , 20___.
Description of Mortgages: ______________________________________________ ______
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
Each of the undersigned hereby agrees that the mortgages held by it (him) on said premises
shall be subordinate to the above covenant.
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
______________________________, ss. ____________________________ 20 ___.
Then personally appeared ____________________________________ and acknowledged
the foregoing instrument to be __________ free act and deed, before him.
______________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires:
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form F – 115
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM F
AGREEMENT
This agreement made this day of , 20 ,
By and between the Planning Board of the Town of Hingham, Plymouth County,
Massachusetts, hereinafter called the Board: of
, hereinafter called the Applicant; and
, having its usual place of business in
, County, Massachusetts,
hereinafter called the Lender.
WHEREAS by a covenant between the Board and the Applicant, dated
duly recorded by the Applicant, in Plymouth County Registry of Deeds, Book
Page , running with the land, Lot Nos. , as shown on a plan,
approved by the Board on , 20 , entitled “
,” dated ,
and being filed as Plan Nos. in Plan Book , in the Plymouth County
Registry of Deeds, cannot be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed, until
completion of the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services serving
such lots, in accordance with said plan and the Rules and Regulations of the Board.
WHEREAS the Applicant, as security for monetary advances to be made to the Applicant
by the Lender, has given a first mortgage dated , recorded in
the Plymouth County Registry of Deeds, Book , Page , to the Lender
covering (all of the premises or Lots Nos. ) as
shown on said plan.
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties hereby agree, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 41, section 81U of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as
follows:
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form F – 116
Amended through August 18, 2014
1. The Board agrees with the Applicant to release, by a separate document to be
recorded, Lots , as shown on said plan, from the operation
of said covenant.
2. The lender agrees with the Board that it tenders an Irrevocable Letter of Credit
Number in the sum of .
3. The lender further agrees, that in the event all of said work is not completed
within 24 months from and after the date thereof, all of the said sum shall be
applied for completion of said work (to the full extent required for such
completion) in such manner as the Board shall direct.
4. The Applicant agrees that the construction of said ways and the installation of
said municipal services shall be done in accordance with the Rules and
Regulations of the Board and with the requirements of said plan as approved by
the Board.
Hingham Planning Board Rules & Regulations Form G – 117
Amended through August 18, 2014
FORM G
CERTIFICATE OF PERFORMANCE
(Covenant Approval Release) Hingham, Massachusetts, , 20___
The undersigned, being a majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Hingham,
Massachusetts, hereby certify that the requirements for work on the ground called for by
the Covenant dated _________________, 20 ____, and recorded in Plymouth District
Deeds, Book ________, Page _______, (or registered in Plymouth Land Registry District
as Document No. ________, and noted on Certificate of Title No. ______, in Registration
Book _______, Page _______) have been completed to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board as to the following enumerated lots shown on Plan entitled-
_____________________________________, recorded with said Deeds, Plan Book
_______, Plan ________, (or registered in said Land Registry District, Plan Book
_______, Plan _______) and said lots are hereby released from the restrictions as to sale
and building specified thereon.
Lots designated on said Plan as follows:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Majority of the Hingham Planning Board:
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
______________________________, ss. _______________________, 20___
Then personally appeared ___________________________________, one of the above
named members of the Planning Board of the Town of Hingham, Massachusetts and
acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of said Planning
Board, before me.
____________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires: _______________________________
G:\Form Letters\Master Forms and Policies\C-Form D4_pbond_lender_proceeds.doc
FORM D4
PERFORMANCE SECURED BY FUNDS RETAINED BY LENDER
MORTGAGE PROCEEDS
This is a sample form. The form submitted to the Planning Board shall be prepared as an
original document. The Developer should not attempt to "fill in the blanks" on this copy.
, 20__
, Massachusetts
AGREEMENT made this date between the Planning Board of the Town of Lexington, hereinafter referred
to as "the Board"; hereinafter referred to as "the applicant" of (name of
applicant)
and
(address of applicant)
, hereinafter referred to as "the lender" of (name of bank that has
first mortgage)
, to secure construction of ways and (address of
lender) installation of municipal services in the subdivision of land shown on a plan entitled
by: dated: , 20__
and showing proposed lots, hereinafter referred to as the "definitive plan."
WHEREAS, the applicant and the Board have executed a covenant, dated , 20 , recorded in
the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds, Book , Page ; and
WHEREAS, the applicant has recorded a first mortgage with the lender dated , 20__,
recorded in the Middlesex County Registry Deeds, Book , Page , covering
as shown on the above-referenced plan as security for the payment of a certain
note in the principal sum of dollars; and
WHEREAS, there is now due and available to the applicant on account of said loan a sum not less than
dollars; and
WHEREAS, the Board is in receipt of a recommendation of the Town Engineer, dated 20__,
and has determined the amount of surety needed for the construction of ways and installation of utilities;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants herein contained, the parties hereto agree
as follows:
1. The applicant and the lender warrant and represent that they are the only parties having any interest
in lots numbered through inclusive shown on the definitive plan and that they are duly
authorized and empowered to enter into this agreement upon the terms and conditions herein set forth.
2. The lender hereby acknowledges that it has retained and set aside from said loan the sum of
dollars ($ ) to secure performance of the work, which sum shall not be released except
in accordance with the provisions of this agreement.
3. The applicant and lender hereby bind and obligate themselves, their executors, administrators,
devisees, heirs, successors and assigns, jointly and severally to the Board, in the sum of
FORM D4, PERFORMANCE SECURED BY FUNDS 2
RETAINED BY LENDER, MORTGAGE PROCEEDS
AS OF (date)
G:\Form Letters\Master Forms and Policies\C-Form D4_pbond_lender_proceeds.doc
dollars, and have secured this obligation by the lender retaining said sum of money of said principal
sum otherwise due the applicant to insure the performance by the applicant of all covenants,
conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the following:
a. Conditions included in the Certificate of Action issued by the Planning Board and dated
.
(date of vote to approve);
b. The definitive plan as qualified by the Certificate of Action; and
c. The subdivision control law and the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations governing this
subdivision and dated ;
(date of Rules and Regulations which govern plan)
d. A covenant, dated , 20__, recorded in the Middlesex Registry of Deeds, Book
, Page ; and
e. Other document(s) specifying construction or installation to be completed, namely: specify
other documents, if any, and list lots secured if only a part of the subdivision is secured by a
lender's agreement .
4. The applicant that it shall expeditiously undertake to perform the work and that in all events the
work shall be performed no later than , unless such date is extended by written
agreement of the parties hereto. The Board shall be under no obligation to extend such date and
may condition any such extension upon reasonable further conditions, including a condition that
additional sums be held pursuant to this agreement on account of increased costs.
5. The parties agree that the work is of such a nature that provision may be made for a release in
stages of the sum held pursuant to this agreement. Accordingly, such sum be released from time to
time by the lender to the applicant upon receipt by the lender of a certificate from the Board that a
specified amount of the work has been performed to the satisfaction of the Board and that the
Board has voted to release a specified sum, and in accordance with the following schedule:
SUM TO BE STAGE OF CONSTRUCTION DATE WHEN CONSTRUCTION
RETAINED AND OR INSTALLATION TO BE INSTALLATION IS TO BE
BY LENDER COMPLETED COMPLETED
1. $ Installation of all utilities
2. $ Installation of "binder" course of street
3. $ Installation of surface course of street, final grading, loaming and seeding
If the Board shall not provide a final certificate prior to the Completion Date because of the failure of the
applicant to perform its obligations hereunder, then, upon notice from the Board to the lender of such fact,
such (or such portion thereof as the Board may determine to be appropriate in the circumstances) shall be
made available to the Town of Lexington (without, however, intending hereby to require Town Meeting
action on account thereof) to enable it to cause the applicant's obligations hereunder to be performed. The
FORM D4, PERFORMANCE SECURED BY FUNDS 3
RETAINED BY LENDER, MORTGAGE PROCEEDS
AS OF (date)
G:\Form Letters\Master Forms and Policies\C-Form D4_pbond_lender_proceeds.doc
lender shall have no obligation to inquire into the validity of any such notice and shall be fully protected
in relying upon the terms set forth therein.
The applicant hereby expressly assents to release of sums hereunder in accordance with the foregoing
procedures and agrees that any such release shall be considered as properly made in accordance with the
terms hereof except for actions taken by the lender or the Board in bad faith. Any unused portion of such
funds will be released by the Planning Board and may be disbursed by the lender to the applicant upon
completion of the work by said Town.
6. In consideration of the foregoing, the Board hereby releases lots numbered through
inclusive as shown on the definitive plan from the provisions of the covenant and the conditions
therein imposed. Except to the extent herein expressly set forth, the Board does not waive any rights
it may have on account of the definitive plan or the covenant or under the Massachusetts Subdivision
Control Law and the Board's Rules and Regulations adopted there under. The lender hereby assents to
any and all changes and modifications which may be made by the Board and the applicant with
respect to the definitive plan, said certificate of action, this agreement and other relevant documents.
7. This agreement shall be binding upon the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands and seals as of the day and
year first above written.
_____________________________
Signature of Applicant
Applicant's Name Typed _____________
Address ______________________________________________
_____________________________________
Signature of Authorized Representative of the Lender
Name of Authorized Representative Typed_____________________
Signatures of a Majority of the Lexington Planning Board






