1
TOWN OF MONSON BY-LAWS
MONSON, MASSACHUSETTS
INDEX
Page
Article 1 Records and Reports 5
Section 1-Annual Town Report
Section 2-Annual Town Report of Boards/Committees
Section 3-Annual Town Report
Section 4-Assessors Valuation List
Section 5-Committees Records
Article 2 Finance Committee 5
Section 1-Appointments
Section 2-Appointments by Moderator
Section 3-Vacancies
Section 4-Financial Budgets
Section 5-Recommendation of Annual Report
Section 6-Reports/recommendation of Committees
Article 3 Town Meeting 6
Section 1-Hours of Polls
Section 2-Town Meeting Posting
Section 3-Quorum
Section 4-Copies of Warrant
Section 5-Moderator
Section 6-Reading of Articles
Section 7-Expenditure of Monies
Section 8-Divided Motion
Section 9-Proposed Amendments of Monies
Section 10-Attorney Disclosure
Section 11-Yearly Committees report
Section 12-Dissolution of Meeting
Section 13-Annual Town Election Date
Article 4 Financial Affairs 7
Section 1-Audit of Accounts
Section 2-Payments from Treasurer
Section 3-Outstanding Bills
Section 4-Payments to Treasurer
Section 5-Methods of Accounting
Section 6-Outstanding Trash Bill
Section 7-Outstanding Water Bill
Section 8-Outstanding Sewer Bill
2
Article 5 Contracts by Town Officers 8
Section 1-Personal Financial Interest
Section 2-Contracts in Excess of $200.00
Section 3-Contracts Beyond One Year
Section 4-Contracts Exceeding $5000.00-Bonds
Section 5-Receiving Compensation or Commission
Article 6 Legal Affairs 8
Section 1-Appointment of Town Counsel
Section 2-Selectmen as Agents of All Claims
Section 3-Duties of Town Counsel
Section 4-Settlements Less Than $1000.00
Section 5-Requirements of Annual Report
Article 7 Numbering of Buildings 9
Section 1-Duties of Selectmen
Section 2-Requirements
Article 8 Penalty 9
Section 1-Violation
Section 2-Board of Health Tobacco Regulations
-Enforcement
-Fines
Section 3-Regulation Affecting Youth Access to Tobacco
-Enforcement
-Fines
Article 9 Temporary Repairs to Private Ways 10
Article 10 False Alarms 10
Article 11 Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances 10
Article 12 Election of Water and Sewer Commissioners 11
Article 13 Dog Regulations 11
Section 1-Regulations
Section 2-Penalties
Section 3-Leash Requirements
Section 4-Temporary Licensing
Article 14 Public Safety 12
Section 1-Possession of Leaded Firearms
Section 2-Removal of Vehicle from Public Way
Article 15 Board of Appeals 12
Article 16 Town Treasurer 12
Section 1-Appointment
Section 2-Term
Section 3-Effective Date
Article 17 Low Level Waste and Hazardous Waste Dump 13
Article 18 Driveway, Private Way or Other Land Alterations 13
Article 19 Public Drinking 13
Article 20 Water Use Restriction 13
Section 1-Authority
3
Section 2-Purpose
Section 3-Definitions
Section 4-Declaration
Section 5-Restrictions
Section 6-Notification
Section 7-Termination
Section 8-State of Emergency
Section 9-Penalties
Section 10-Severability
Article 21 The Private Policy Protection Act of 2007 15
Article 22 Community Preservation Committee 15
Section 1-Establishment
Section 2-Duties
Section 3-Requirements
Section 4-Amendments
Section 5-Severability
Section 6-Effective Date
Article 23 Department of Municipal Finance 17
Section 1-Establishment
Section 2-Authority
Section 3-Responsibility
Section 4-Board of Assessors
Section 5-Estimates of Monies
Section 6-Reports
Section 7-Establishment
Section 8-Duties
Section 9-Contracts
Article 24 Trench Permitting 19
Article 25 Brush Fire Permits 19
Section 1-Authority
Section 2-Fees
Section 3-Responsibility
Section 4-Permits
Article 26 Council on Aging 19
Article 27 Recycling 20
Article 28 Right to Farm 20
Section 1-Legislative Purpose and Intent
Section 2-Definitions
Section 3-Declaration
Section 4-Effective Date
Section 5-Disclosure Notification to Real Estate Buyers
Section 6-Resolution of Disputes
Section 7-Severability
Article 29 Stretch Energy Code 22
Section 1-Definitions
Section 2-Purpose
Section 3-Abblicability
Section 4-Authority
Section 5-Enforcement
Article 30 Secondhand Articles, Pawn Shop, Dealers and Collectors 23
4
Article 31 Parking Ban 24
Article 32 No Snow/Debris Deposited In, On Or Across 24
Public Way
Article 33 Grant or Renewal of Licenses as affected by 26
Non-payment of Local Taxes, Fees, etc.
Article 34 DEPARTMENTAL REVOVLING FUND BYLAW 27
ARTICLE 1 – RECORDS AND REPORTS:
Section 1. The Selectmen shall cause to be printed (or otherwise reproduced) and made available to the legal voters of the Town, not less than ten days before the day fixed for the annual Town meeting for the election of Town Officers, such number of copies of the Annual Town Report as they shall determine to be sufficient for the use of such voters.
Section 2. All officers, boards, standing committees and special committees of the Town having charge of the expenditure of Town money shall annually report thereon in writing in such manner as to give the citizens a detailed and full understanding of the objects and methods of such expenditures, referring, however, to the
5
report of the Town Accountant for statements in detail of receipts and payments, and may make therein such recommendations as they deem proper. Such reports shall be submitted to the Selectmen for inclusion in the Annual Town Report on or before the 31st day of January each year or a date to be determined by the Selectmen.
Section 3. The Annual Town Report shall contain, in addition to the reports of officers, boards and committees as hereinbefore provided, a detailed report of all monies received into and paid out of the Town treasury in the financial year next preceding, showing separately payments made from the proceeds of loans as capital outlays for permanent improvements; the report of the collector of taxes, of receipts, payments and abatements; statements of all funds belonging to the Town or held for the benefit of its inhabitants; a statement of the liabilities of the Town on bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, or otherwise, and of indebtedness authorized but not incurred, and the purpose thereof; a statement of transfers made to or from any appropriation; abstracts of the records of the meetings of the Town held since publication of the last Annual Report; and such other matters as the said report is required by law to contain, or as may be inserted by the Selectmen under the discretion granted them by law.
Section 4. The Selectmen shall direct that the assessors’ valuation list and the by-laws be printed as a part of the Annual Town Report at least once in 5 years and that the personal property tax list and the real estate tax list be recorded in separate items therein.
Section 5. The officers, boards and committees of the Town shall cause records of their doings and accounts to be kept in suitable books. Said books shall be kept in their respective places in the Town offices and shall not be removed there from and shall remain the property of the Town under the supervision of the Town Clerk. Said books shall, unless otherwise provided by law, be open to the inspection of citizens of the Town at any reasonable time but shall remain during such inspection under the supervision of the officer, board or committee having custody thereof.
ARTICLE 2 – FINANCE COMMITTEE:
Section 1. There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of 13 legal voters of the Town who shall be appointed by the Moderator as hereinafter provided. No elected Town Officer or paid regular employee shall be eligible for appointment to the Finance Committee. An appointed Town Officer shall be eligible for appointment to the Finance Committee with the following restrictions:
1. Only one member of each of the appointed committees of the Town may serve on the
Finance Committee at any given time.
2. In any year in which the proposed budget or recommendation of the appointed
Committee exceeds $10,000, any representative of such committee must relinquish
the Finance Committee appointment for that year.
No restriction as described in this by-law shall apply to Finance Committee members serving on the
Long-Range Capital Planning Committee. Finance Committee members shall in no way be prohibited from serving as members on the Long-Range Capital Planning Committee.
Section 2. The Moderator of the Town Meeting when this by-law is adopted shall, within thirty days after such by-law becomes effective, appoint five members of said committee for the term of one year, four members for terms of two years, and four members for terms of three years. At each annual Town meeting thereafter the Moderator thereof shall appoint members of said committee for terms of three years. The terms of office of said members shall commence immediately upon qualification and shall expire at the close of final adjournment of the Annual Town meeting at which their successors are appointed. Said committee shall choose its own officers and shall serve without pay (excepting, however, the secretary thereof.). Said committee shall cause to be kept a true record of its proceedings.
6
Section 3. The said committee shall fill any vacancy which may occur in its membership by vote, attested copy of which shall be sent by the secretary to the Town Clerk. If any member is absent from five consecutive meetings of said committee, except in cases of illness, his position shall be deemed to be vacant and shall be filled as herein provided. The term of office of any person so chosen to fill a vacancy shall expire at the final adjournment of the next succeeding annual Town meeting, and the Moderator thereof shall appoint his successor to complete the unexpired term of the member in whose office such vacancy originally occurred.
Section 4. It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee annually to consider the expenditures in previous years and the estimated requirements for the ensuing year of the several boards, officers and committees of the Town, as prepared by them (or by the Town Accountant) in such form and detail as may be prescribed by said committee. The said committee shall add to such statement of expenditures and estimates another column, giving the amounts which in its opinion shall be appropriated for the ensuing year, and shall further add thereto such explanations and suggestions relating to the proposed appropriations as it may deem expedient.
Section 5. It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee to make an annual report of its doings, with recommendations relative to financial matters and the conduct of Town business, to be contained in the Annual Town Report. “Whenever a two-thirds vote is required on any matter and whether such quantum
of vote is required by state statute, town bylaw, or otherwise, the Moderator may, without an actual count, declare that such matter has been adopted by a vote of 2/3of the number of persons present and voting, and such declaration shall stand as final unless such declaration is immediately challenged by seven (7) or more voters rising in their place to so indicate. If such challenge is made a count of the vote to verify, or to overturn, the declaration of the Moderator shall be conducted, forthwith.”
Section 6. It shall be the duty of the Finance Committee to consider all municipal questions for the purpose of making reports and/or recommendations to the Town.
ARTICLE 3 – TOWN MEETING:
Section 1. The polls shall be open at 8:00 in the a.m. and shall remain open until 8:00 in the p.m.
Section 2. Notice of every Town meeting shall be given by posting attested copies of the warrant therefore in at least two (2) public places in the Town, not less than seven (7) days before the annual or special election and not less than fourteen (14) days before any special town meeting. The date of the Annual Town Meeting shall be the second Monday in May of each year.
Section 3. The number of voters necessary to constitute a quorum at any Town meeting shall be 50; provided, however, that a number less than 50 votes may from time to time adjourn the same to a stated time and place.
Section 4. Printed copies of the warrant shall be furnished the voters at or before all Town meetings.
Section 5. The Moderator shall preside and regulate the proceedings, decide all questions of order, and make public declaration of all votes. Whenever a two-thirds vote is required on any matter and whether such quantum of vote is required by state statute, town bylaw, or otherwise, the Moderator may, without an actual count, declare that such matter has been adopted by a vote of 2/3 of the number of persons present and voting, and such declaration shall stand as final unless such declaration is immediately challenged by seven (7) or more voters rising in their place to so indicate. If such challenge is made a count of the vote to verify, or to overturn, the declaration of the Moderator shall be conducted,
forthwith. (Amended STM May 14, 2018)
Section 6. Articles of the warrant shall be acted upon in the order in which they appear, unless otherwise determined by majority vote of the meeting.
7
Section 7. All motions having to do with the expenditure of money shall be presented in writing; other motions shall be in writing if so directed by the Moderator.
Section 8. If a motion is susceptible of division, it shall be divided; and the question shall be put separately upon each part thereof, if 10 voters so request.
Section 9. On proposed amendments involving sums of money, the larger or largest amount shall be put to the question first; and an affirmative vote thereon shall be a negative vote on any smaller amount.
Section 10. Any person who is employed as an attorney by another interested in any matter under discussion at a Town meeting shall disclose the fact of his employment before speaking thereon.
Section 11. All committees shall report as directed by the Town. If no report is made within a year after its appointment, a committee shall be discharged unless, in the meantime, the Town shall have granted an extension of time.
Section 12. No motion, the effect of which would be to dissolve the meeting, shall be in order until every article in the warrant therefore has been duly considered and acted upon; but this shall not preclude the postponement of consideration of any article to an adjournment of the meeting at a stated time and place.
Section 13. The Annual Town Election will be held on the second Tuesday in June.
ARTICLE 4 – FINANCIAL AFFAIRS:
Section 1. An audit of the accounts of the Town shall be made as prescribed by and under the supervision of the Department of Revenue Bureau of Accounts.
Section 2. The Town Treasurer shall pay no money from the treasury except upon warrant or order signed by a majority of the Selectmen and by the Town Accountant.
Section 3. Each officer, board or committee authorized to expend money shall, on or before June twentieth of each year, transmit to the Town Accountant all unpaid bills outstanding as of that date. (Books of the Town shall be closed as of the thirtieth of June of each year.)
Section 4. Every officer shall pay into the treasury of the Town all amounts received by him on behalf of the Town (except as otherwise provided by law) and shall make a true return thereof to the Town Accountant, stating the accounts upon which such amounts were received.
Section 5. The Town Accountant shall prescribe the methods of accounting and the forms to be used by the several officers, boards and committees of the Town pertaining to their receipts and disbursements and shall provide that such methods and forms shall conform to the requirements prescribed by law or any rules or regulations made thereunder.
Section 6. Whenever a trash bill remains outstanding after thirty (30) days from the billing date, interest at the rate of 14% per annum, computed from said billing date shall be charged and added to said trash bill.
Section 7. Whenever a water bill remains outstanding after 30 days from the billing date, interest at the rate of 14% per annum computed from said billing date shall be charged and added to said water bill.
Section 8. Whenever a sewer bill remains outstanding for 30 days from the billing date, interest at the rate of 14% per annum computed from said billing date shall be charged and added to said sewer bill.
ARTICLE 5 – CONTRACTS BY TOWN OFFICERS:
8
Section 1. No officer of the Town shall in his official capacity make or pass upon or participate in the making or passing upon, any sale, contract or agreement or the terms or amount of any payment in which the Town is interested and in which such officer has any personal financial interest.
Section 2. No contract involving an obligation of the Town in excess of $200 shall be binding upon the Town unless it is in writing and is signed by at least a majority of the Board or Committee duly authorized or having control of the appropriation against which such obligation is incurred; and such board or committee shall make a record of every such contract in a book which shall be the property of the Town.
Section 3. No board or officer shall make any contract in behalf of the Town, the execution of which shall necessarily extend beyond one year from the date thereof, unless specific authority to do so has been given by vote of the Town, except as otherwise provided by law.
Section 4. Every contract exceeding $5,000 shall be accompanied by a suitable bond for the performance of the same or by deposit of money or security to the amount of such bond if so required by the officers or board authorized to make the contract.
Section 5. No Town officer and no salaried employee of the Town, or any agent of any such officer or employee, shall receive any compensation or commission for work done by him for the Town, except his official salary and fees allowed by law, without the permission of the Selectmen expressed in a vote which shall appear on their records with the reasons therefore.
ARTICLE 6 – LEGAL AFFAIRS:
Section 1. The Selectmen shall annually, in the month in which the Annual Town Meeting is held and after the adjournment thereof, appoint a citizen who is a member of the bar in good standing to serve as Town Counsel for the term of one year from the first day of the month following said adjournment and until his successor is appointed and enters upon the performance of his duties. They shall likewise fill any vacancy in said office for the unexpired term and may employ special counsel to assist the Town Counsel whenever, in their judgment, necessity therefore arises.
Section 2. The Selectmen shall be the agents of the Town to institute, prosecute, and defend any and all claims, actions and proceedings to which the Town is a party or in which the interests of the Town are or may be involved.
Section 3. It shall be the duty of the Town Counsel to appear in and conduct the prosecution, defense or compromise of said claims, actions, and proceedings by or on behalf of any Town officer, board or committee as such; to conduct the defense of any action or proceedings brought against any Town officer, board or committee as such when the Selectmen, having determined that any right or interests of the Town are or may be involved therein, shall so request; to conduct proceedings brought by or against the Assessors before the Board of Tax Appeals; to assist in the prosecution of complaints for violation of any by-law of the Town when requested so to do by any board or officer enforcing the same; to examine and report upon titles to all land to be acquired by the Town; to prepare or approve contracts, bonds, deeds and other legal instruments in which the Town is a part or in which any right or interest of the Town is involved.
Section 4. The Selectmen may, at their discretion, compromise or settle any claim or suit to which the Town is a party, which does not require the payment by the Town of an amount in excess of one thousand dollars. No settlement of a claim or suit obligating the Town in an amount in excess of one thousand dollars shall be made, except as authorized by law, without the consent of the Town expressed by vote at a Town meeting.
9
Section 5. The Selectmen in the annual report shall state what actions have been brought against and on behalf of the Town, what cases have been compromised or settled, and the current standing of all suits at law involving the Town or any of its interests.
ARTICLE 7 – NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS:
Section 1. The Selectmen shall have the duty of numbering buildings on or near the line of public or private ways within the confines of the Town served by the postal delivery carriers.
Section 2. Every building, including but not limited to, dwellings, apartment buildings, condominiums and business establishments shall have affixed thereto a number representing the address of such building. Said numbers shall be four (4”) inch minimum height, of high contrast and affixed in a location to be readily readable by public safety officials from the private or public way on which said buildings are located. If the address number cannot be read, as located above, in addition such number shall be affixed to a sign (less than one (1) square foot) so as to be visible from both sides and said sign shall be placed on the property so as to be readily visible from the private or public way. Four (4”) inch numbers attached to both sides of a mailbox shall be considered an acceptable alternative to a sign, when said mailbox is located on the same side of the private or public way as the building. The placement of said address number shall be complete at the time of the issuance of an occupancy permit for any new construction in the Town of Monson.
ARTICLE 8 – PENALTY:
Section 1. Any person violating the provisions of these by-laws shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $20.00 for each offense.
Section 2. (Added May 8, 2000, to provide the permissive use of Non-criminal Disposition pursuant to the provisions of MGL c 40, Sec. 21d)
Board of Health Regulations: Environmental Tobacco Smoke Regulations (Smoking in enclosed public places, including but not limited to: restaurants, retail stores, supermarkets, grocery stores, health care facilities, polling places, enclosed sports arenas, public transportation vehicles)
Enforcing Person: Designated agents of the Monson Board of Health
Fines: Any permit holder (person who operates establishments within the provisions of this regulation: see above) or his/her “person in charge” who fails to enforce or ensure that his/her employee enforces the prohibition of smoking in public places or hinders or fails to ensure that his/her employee does not hinder the authorized agent of the Monson Board of Health in the performance of his duties is subject to a fine:
First Offense: One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
Second Offense: Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00)
Third Offense: Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00)
Section 3. (Added May 8, 2000, to provide the permissive use of Non-criminal Disposition pursuant to the provisions of MGL, C 40, Sec. 21d)
Board of Health Regulations: Regulation Affecting Youth Access to Tobacco
Enforcing Person: Designated agents of the Monson Board of Health
Fines: No person shall sell a cigarette(s), chewing tobacco, snuff, tobacco in any of its forms or tobacco-related products, including rolling papers, to any person under the age of eighteen (18). Any permit holder found to be in violation of these provisions of the regulation shall be subject to a fine:
10
Second violation: The permit holder shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00)
Third violation: The permit holder shall be fined three hundred dollars ($300.00)
A copy of MGL, C 270, Sec. 6, shall be posted conspicuously in all retail stores selling tobacco products. It shall be unlawful for a retailer to sell cigarettes or other tobacco products unless that retailer holds and maintains a valid permit from the Board of Health of the Town of Monson for each location in which tobacco products are sold. A tobacco retail permit is non-transferable to another party. The use of cigarette vending machines or any other device for the sale or distribution of tobacco products shall be allowed in adults only establishments. Sale or distribution of any cigarette package that contains fewer than twenty (20) cigarettes is prohibited. Distribution of free samples of tobacco products is prohibited. Self-service displays are prohibited. Any permit holder found to be violation of these provisions of the regulation shall be subject to a fine:
Each violation: The permit holder shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation.
ARTICLE 9 – TEMPORARY REPAIRS TO PRIVATE WAYS:
The Town of Monson may make temporary repairs on private ways which have been open to public use for a period of thirty (30) years or more, provided the repairs are for the protection of the health and safety of the general public using such roads and the Town must be petitioned by seventy-five (75%) percent of the abutters of the private way for such repairs.
Such repairs shall only include the filling in of holes and depressions with sand, gravel, or other suitable materials similar to those used for the existing surfaces of such ways and shall not include drainage, resurfacing or permanent construction in said ways.
The Town may, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen and based on an advisory report from the Highway Surveyor, make temporary repairs to a private way not to exceed Five Hundred ($500.) Dollars in total provided the private way has been open to public use for a period of thirty (30) years or more. The repair shall be limited to minor work such as filling, patching and grading or scraping.
The Town shall not be liable on account of any damage whatsoever caused by such repairs and Section 15 of Chapter 84 shall not apply.
If the repairs in this by-law are complied with, no cash deposit shall be required nor shall there be a betterment charge assessed. The cost of such repairs shall be funded by the Town through the “Private Road Account.”
ARTICLE 10-FALSE ALARMS
A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be assessed against any person, firm or corporation for each false alarm after the third false alarm in any one calendar year brought about by the triggering of a burglar alarm system which results in a police officers visit to the home, office, or structure where the alarm system is located. For purposes of this by-law, “false alarm” shall mean the triggering of the alarm other than by a burglar or other person not invited upon the protected premises. Upon failure to pay said fee within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a bill therefore, the Town may require the disconnection of said burglar alarm system so that said system no longer gives notice to the police department upon being triggered.
ARTICLE 11 – INSPECTOR OF GAS PIPING AND GAS APPLIANCES:
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to appoint an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances in Buildings who shall be a licensed plumber or licensed gas fitter. Said Inspector shall enforce the Rules and Regulations adopted by the Board established under Sec. 12-H of Chap. 25 M.G.L.A. Failure to comply with the by-law shall be punished by a fine not to exceed twenty dollars for each offense.
11
ARTICLE 12-ELECTION OF SEWER AND WATER COMMISSIONERS:
To enable the Town to elect three sewer and water commissioners, who shall be elected by ballot at the Annual Town Meeting and who shall have the powers and duties of both water commissioners and sewer commissioners under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 65, 69A and 69B. Three such commissioners shall be elected by ballot to hold office, one for one year, another for two years, and the third for three years; and, after the first year, each expiring term shall be filled by election of a term of three years. In all other respects the said commissioners shall be governed by said Sections 69A and 69B, of Chapter of the General Laws. The question whether the powers of the sewer commissioners and water commissioners shall be so combined shall be placed upon the ballot for the next Annual Town Meeting after the General Court approves this by-law or a bill substantially similar hereto.
ARTICLE 13 – DOG REGULATIONS:
Section 1. No person shall own, keep, harbor, or have control over any dog in the Town of Monson, nor obtain a license from the Town Clerk or a temporary license from the dog officer for any dog over the age of six months, unless such dog shall have been vaccinated within thirty-six months of the first day of April next prior thereto with an anti-rabies vaccine approved by the Monson Board of Health and administered by a duly-licensed veterinarian. An unlicensed dog shall be dealt with according to Chapter 140, Sec. 151-A of the Massachusetts General Laws. The provision of the regulation shall not apply to any person not a resident of Monson who remains in Monson less than thirty days.
Section 2. The Board of Selectmen may order the owner or keeper of a dog that has bitten any person to impound the dog, at the owner or keeper’s expense, at a Veterinary Clinic or Hospital for a period not exceeding ten days to determine whether the dog has any communicable disease. The refusal or failure of an owner or keeper of such dog to impound such dog shall be punishable by a fine of Ten Dollars. Each day of continued refusal or failure shall be punishable as a separate offense. (M.G.L. Ch. 140, Sec. 173).
Section 3. No person owning or keeping a dog in the Town shall allow such dog to roam at large upon the land of another, except on the premises of another person with the actual knowledge and permission of such other person. All dogs not on the premises of the owner or keeper or upon the premises of another person with the knowledge and permission of such person shall be restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length. The presence of any dog on the land of any person other than the owner or keeper of such dog when such dog is not restrained as above mentioned shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of the by-law.
A. Violation of this section may be punishable by a fine of Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each offense, subject to the provisions of Chap. 140, Sec. 173A.
B. If any person shall make a complaint in writing to the Board of Selectmen that any
dog owned or harbored within the Town is a nuisance by reason of vicious disposition
or excessive barking or other disturbance, the Board shall take action as provided in
General Laws, Chap. 140, Sec. 157, and any amendments thereto. Such other
disturbances causing a nuisance shall include but not be limited to the following:
1. Chasing cars.
2. Running in packs.
3. Breaking or damaging shrubbery.
4. Damaging gardens.
5. Biting of persons.
6. Running at large in violation of this by-law.
Said written complaint to the Board of Selectmen shall include the name and address
of the owner or keeper of said dog. A fine for each violation of Sec. B, Nos. 1-5 of
this by-law of Ten Dollars ($10.00) may be assessed against the owner or keeper of
said dog under the provisions of Chap. 140, Sec. 157.
12
C. No fee shall be charged for a license issued under this section for a service animal as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or regulations promulgated thereunder. No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog owned by a person aged 70 years or over in a city or town that accepts this provision. No license fee or portion thereof shall be refunded because of the subsequent death, loss, spaying or removal from the commonwealth or other disposal of the dog, nor shall a license fee or portion thereof paid by mistake be paid or recovered after it has been paid over to a city or town under section 147. (Amended ATM May 14, 2018)
Section 4. The Town Dog Officer is hereby authorized to issue a temporary dog license valid for a period of one week from the time of issue, only during non-business hours of the Town Clerk’s office, only to allow release of the dog from the custody of said officer, only if proof of ownership and rabies vaccination within the prior thirty-six (36) months is submitted to said officer and only upon payment of a fee pursuant to the following schedule:
Male/Female - $15.00
Neutered/Spayed - $ 5.00
ARTICLE 14 – PUBLIC SAFETY:
Section 1. In the interests of public safety, practice shooting and the possession of leaded firearms in the out-of-doors, except by police officers and persons authorized by the Police Department, is expressly forbidden in the following described area of the Town of Monson: the area bounded:
On the east by Bethany Road and Toby Road.
On the west by Main Street and Route 32.
On the south by State Street.
Any person violating this by-law shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $20.00 for each offense in accordance with Monson by-law provisions.
Section 2. Any member of the police department may remove or cause to be removed to a convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle from any public way parked in violation of any parking ban, rule or regulation adopted by the Selectmen, the cost of such removal and storage charges, if any to be assessed to the owner of the vehicle.
ARTICLE 15 – BOARD OF APPEALS:
The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Monson is hereby authorized, pursuant to Chap. 41, Sec. 81-Z of the General Laws of Massachusetts, or any amendment thereto or substitution therefore, to appoint a Board of Appeals or at least three members for terms of such length and so arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year. The Board of Selectmen is also authorized to appoint in like manner associate members of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE 16-TOWN TREASURER:
Section 1. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, the Town Treasurer of the Town of Monson shall be appointed by and serve at the will of the Board of Selectmen. The provisions of the law relative to treasurers shall, except insofar as the same may be inconsistent with the provisions of this act, apply to such Town Treasurer.
Section 2 Notwithstanding the provisions of section one, the incumbent in the office of Town Treasurer upon the effective date of this act shall continue to hold said office and to perform the duties thereof until the
13
expiration of the term for which he was elected and the appointment and qualification of such Town Treasurer.
Section 3 This act shall take effect upon its acceptance by the Town of Monson at the next Town Meeting.
ARTICLE 17-LOW LEVEL WASTE AND HAZARDOUS WASTE DUMP
No dump for low level waste or hazardous waste, including without limitation low level radio active waste, shall be established within the Town unless the proposed developer of the dump shall first secure a permit for same from the Board of Health. The Board of Health may consider the general location of the site, the soil and water conditions, assess to the site, the measures proposed for containing waste materials, and the potential hazard to persons, property and the environment. The Board may establish a fee for permit, applications, and may require the developer to provide such information, including testing, studies and reports as it deems necessary to determine the safety of the proposed dump. The Board may, subject to appropriations, hire consultants and may require the proposed developer to pay the cost of such consultants by indemnification agreement, bond, prepayment or some combination thereof.
ARTICLE 18 – DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE WAY OR OTHER LAND ALTERATIONS:
No alteration of any land within the boundaries of a public way shall be made for driveways, private ways, or otherwise, except by the Town of Monson upon authorization of the Highway Surveyor. Any owner or occupant of land abutting a public way who desires any alteration of land within a public way shall file with the Highway Surveyor a written proposal specifying the location, dimensions, and purposes of the desired alteration. The Highway Surveyor shall, within ten days of such filing, deny same, request further information, or approve same. The Highway Surveyor shall direct the Highway Department, land owner, or occupant filing to effect the alteration at the owner or occupant’s expense. The owner or occupant shall be responsible for any debris or material that comes from such access onto Town property. The Town shall not be responsible for any run-off of water or material that may be allowed to enter the owner or occupant’s land because of such access or alteration.
The Inspector of Buildings, before issuing a new building permit, shall first ascertain that the above by-law has been complied with.
ARTICLE 19 – PUBLIC DRINKING:
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages, as defined by the General Laws, Chapter 138, Section 1, in any public way, Town park, Town cemetery, public school building or land or any recreation area under public control except during such times as a special license may be issued for such places. Any person violating this by-law shall be subject to a fine of not more than twenty-five ($25.00) and may be arrested without a warrant by a police officer.
ARTICLE 20 – WATER USE RESTRICTION:
Section 1. Authority – This by-law is adopted by the Town under its police powers to protect public health and welfare and its powers under M.G.L. c. 40, ss 21 et seq. and implements the Town’s authority to regulate water use pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, ss 69B. This by-law also implements the Town’s authority under M.G.L. c. 40, ss 41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
Section 2. Purpose – The purpose of this by-law is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water Supply Emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the Town or by the Department of Environmental Protection.
14
Section 3. Definitions –
Person shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association or other entity.
State of Water Supply Emergency shall mean a State of Water Supply Emergency declared by the Department of Environmental Protection under M.G.L. c. 21G, § 15-17.
Water Users or Water Consumers shall mean all public and private users of the Town’s public water system, irrespective of any person’s responsibility for billing purposes for water used at any particular facility.
Section 4. Declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation –
The Town, through its Board of Water & Sewer Commissioners, may declare a State of Water Supply Conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of the Board that a shortage of water exists and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water consumers. Public notice of a State of Water Conservation shall be given under Sec. 6 of this by-law before it may be enforced.
Section 5. Restricted Water Uses –
A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public notice required under Sec. 6.
a). Odd/Even Day Outdoor Watering – Outdoor watering by water users with odd numbered addresses is restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering by water users with even numbered addresses is restricted to even numbered days.
b). Outdoor Watering Ban – Outdoor watering is prohibited.
c). Outdoor Watering Hours – Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a State Water Supply Conservation and public notice thereof.
d). Filling Swimming Pools – Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
e). Automatic Sprinkler Use – The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited.
Section 6 Public Notification of a State of Water Supply Conservation
Notification of DEP
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the Town as part of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of water of the State of Water Supply Conservation. Any restriction imposed under Sec. 5 shall not be effective until such notification is provided. Notification of the State of Water Supply Conservation shall also be simultaneously provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
Section 7 Termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation: Notice
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the Board of Water & Sewer Commissioners, upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given in the same manner required by Sec. 6.
Section 8. State of Water Supply Emergency: Compliance with DEP Orders
15
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a State of Water Emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, condition of any order approved or issued by the Department intended to bring about an end of the State of Emergency.
Section 9. Penalties:
Any person violating this by-law shall be liable to the Town in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation and $100.00 for each subsequent violation which shall inure to the Town for such uses as the Board of Water & Sewer Commissioners may direct. Fines shall be recovered by indictment, or on the complaint before the District Court or by non-criminal disposition in accordance with Sec. 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
The Water/Sewer Superintendent or his/her designee shall be the enforcing agent for this bylaw in accordance with MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D.
Section 10. Severability:
The invalidity of any portion of provision of this by-law shall not invalidate any other portion of provision thereof.
ARTICLE 21 – THE PRIVATE POLICY PROTECTION ACT OF 2007:
The authority of the Town of Monson and its agencies of local government, as reserved to localities under Chapter 79 of the Massachusetts General Laws to seize privately owned parcels against the expressed will of the owner through the use of eminent domain procedures shall, in light of Kelo vs. New London, be specifically limited as follows:
1a). To only those proposed taking actions incorporating the transfer of private parcel(s) to the Town of Monson or any of its authorized agencies of local government and under no circumstances to another private party, and;
2a). To only those proposed taking actions whose purpose is the creation of a facility for actual public use and ownership to include public open spaces, parks, and watershed protection districts and never for the purposes of economic development or the enhancement of the local tax base.
Nothing in the by-law shall limit the authority of the Town of Monson or its authorized agencies of local government to seize property that is endangering the health and safety of its residents or which could otherwise be seized or foreclosed upon for tax delinquency in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 60 of the Massachusetts General laws.
ARTICLE 22-COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE:
Chapter 1. Establishment:
(1) There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee consisting of seven voting members pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44B. The Committee shall consist of the following members:
One (1) member of the Historical Commission as designated by the Commission for a term of three (3) years.
16
One (1) member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the Commission for a term of three (3) years.
One (1) member of the Parks and Recreation Commission as designated by the Commission for an initial term of two (2) years and thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
One (1) member of the Housing Authority as designated by the Authority initial term of two (2) years and thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
One (1) member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board initial term of one (1) year and thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
Two (2) additional at-large members to be designated by the Board of Selectmen. One (1) for an initial term of two (2) years and thereafter for a term of three (3) years and one (1) for an initial term of one (1) year and thereafter for a term of three (3) years.
(2) The term for the first-appointed Community Preservation Committee will begin on July 1, 2007, ending on June 30 at end of said term. Subsequent terms will begin on July 1 of each year and will be for three years. Any vacancy on the Community Preservation Committee shall be filled by the commission, authority or board that designated the member who creates the vacancy by designating another member in accordance with Section (1) above for the unexpired term.
(3) Should any commission, authority or board designating a member for the Community Preservation Committee cease to exist for whatever reason the Board of Selectmen will determine the appropriate alternative designating commission, authority or board.
Chapter 2. Duties:
(1) The community preservation committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the town regarding community preservation. The committee shall consult with existing municipal boards, including the conservation commission, the historical commission, the planning board, the parks and recreation committee and the housing authority, or persons acting in those capacities or performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study, the committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the town regarding community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly, including on the Town’s web page and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. The Committee will file an annual report on its activities to the Town Clerk.
(2) The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the acquisition, rehabilitation, restoration and preservation of historic resources; for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use; for the acquisition, creation, preservation and support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, land for recreational use and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings, or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
(3) The Community Preservation Committee may include in its recommendations to the Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community preservation, but for which sufficient funds are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose, or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
17
Chapter 3. Requirements for a quorum and cost estimates:
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by majority vote. Meetings will be held in accordance with the open meeting law. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated costs.
Chapter 4. Amendments:
The Community Preservation Committee shall, from time to time, review the administration of this by-law, making recommendations, as needed, for changes in the by-law and in administrative practice to improve the operations of the Community Preservation Committee. This by-law may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the Town Meeting, provided that the amendments would not be in conflict with Chapter 44B of the Massachusetts General Laws.
Chapter 5. Severability:
In case any section, paragraph or part of this by-law be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 6. Effective Date:
Following Town Meeting approval of this by-law and acceptance of the Community Preservation Act at Town Election, this Chapter shall take effect immediately upon approval by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth. Each appointing authority shall have thirty days after approval by the Attorney General to make their initial appointments. Should any appointing authority fail to make their appointment within that allotted time, the Selectmen shall make the appointment.
ARTICLE 23-DEPARTMENT of MUNICIPAL FINANCE:
Section 1. There is hereby established in the town of Monson a Department of Finance and Budget. The department shall be managed by a Director of Finance and Budget who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for a term of three (3) years.
Section 2. The Director of the Department of Finance and Budget shall have all the powers and duties presently vested in the office of the Town Accountant. The offices of the Collector, the Treasurer, and the Assessors shall become part of the department and the Collector, the Treasurer, and the Assessor shall be under the supervision of the Director.
Section 3. The Director of the Department of Finance and Budget shall be responsible for coordinating the fiscal management practices of the Accountant’s department, Collector’s department, Assessing department, Treasurer’s department, and administering budgeting including financial reporting, accountability and control, financial and programmatic implications on current and future policies to all town departments and Board of Selectmen.
The powers and duties of the Finance Director shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) To coordinate with all town departments and manage the collection of all budget and financial information, including the forecasting of revenues for the forthcoming fiscal year in order to prepare an annual budget for the annual town meeting;
(2) To set policies and procedures for the collection of all revenues due and owing to the town of Monson as a result of tax levies, and the issuance of licenses and permits;
18
(3) To review and oversee, on a yearly basis, the various town trust funds, and to insure that funds are prudently invested, and when any such trust fund fails due to the extinction of the purpose for which said fund was created, the Department of Budget and Finance shall, with the advice and consent of the Board of Selectmen, seek appropriate relief in a court of competent jurisdiction from the duties of investment and distribution imposed by the trust fund instrument;
(4) The Town Administrator shall be the Chief Procurement Officer for the town of Monson;
(Amended ATM May 11, 2015)
(5) To report to the Board of Selectmen and Finance Committee concerning all financial matters affecting town government;
(6) To coordinate with the Department of Revenue pertaining to all matters on their municipal calendar; and
(7) To coordinate and manage all financial information received from the Board of Assessors to forecast future financial growth and anticipated revenues and advise the Board of Selectmen, Finance Committee and town meeting accordingly.
Section 4. The Board of Assessors shall be retained as an elective body, with each member serving a three-year term, with such terms so arranged that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board of Assessors shall maintain the powers and duties of the board directed by statute, provided however, that the Director of finance and Budget shall supervise all employees assisting in the performance of assessing functions. Any incumbent Assessor, upon acceptance of this act by the voters of the town of Monson, shall continue to hold said office and perform the duties thereof until the expiration of his term or an earlier vacating of office.
Section 5. Pursuant to all state, federal and municipal statutes, laws, regulations and by-laws, the Department of Finance and Budget shall make detailed estimates of all money necessary to maintain the proper operation of government.
Section 6. The Department of Finance and Budget shall report to the Board of Selectmen.
Section 7. Upon the establishment of the Department of Finance and Budget, the person holding the office of Town Accountant may become Director of Finance and Budget. All incumbents in the offices of the Collector and the Treasurer and the Assessors and all present employees of any of the departments or offices referenced in this act shall be transferred to the Department of Finance and Budget, to serve under the direction of the Director of Finance and Budget and shall not forfeit pay grade or time in service.
Section 8. The Board of Selectmen may delegate or assign administrative and personnel duties to the Director of the Department of Finance and Budget.
Section 9. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, the Board of Selectmen may establish an employment contract for the Director of Finance and Budget for a period not to exceed three (3) years to provide for the salary, fringe benefits and other conditions of employment including, but not limited to, severance pay, relocation expenses, reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performances of duties or office, liability insurance and leave.
The contract shall prevail over any conflicting provision of any local personnel by-law, rule or regulation. In addition to the benefits provided municipal employees under chapters 32 and 32B of the General Laws, the contract may provide for supplemental retirement and insurance benefits.
19
Nothing contained in this section shall affect the appointment or removal power of the Board of Selectmen over any position hereinbefore mentioned, nor shall it grant tenure to such officer, nor shall it abridge Section 67 of Chapter 44 of the General Laws.
ARTICLE 24-TRENCH PERMITTING:
The Board of Selectmen shall designate the trench permitting authority for the Town of Monson as required by M.G.L. Chapter 82 A et.seq. and as codified in 520 C.M.R. 14.00, et.seq.
ARTICLE 25-BRUSH FIRE PERMITS:
Section 1:
Pursuant to statutory and other authority given to a fire chief, the chief may issue a permit authorizing the permittee to burn certain material, on the permittee’s property, as set forth on the permit. No permit may authorize burning of any material other than that generated on the property.
Section 2:
A fee, in an amount set by the Board of Selectmen from time to time, shall be paid prior to the issuance of such permit. Any permit issued prior to payment in full, including on issued for a check returned for insufficient funds, shall be null and void. Any person burning under a permit issued prior to payment in full, or otherwise erroneously, shall be considered to be burning without a permit.
Section 3:
It is the sole responsibility of the permittee to insure that the burning done pursuant to the permit is in conformance with any conditions set forth in the permit, and is done in a safe and controlled manner. A permittee, in requesting such permit, agrees to use such permit in conformance with this by-law and all applicable statutes and regulations, and expressly agrees to reimburse the Monson Fire Department for all expenses and costs, both direct and indirect, of any nature whatsoever, incurred as a result of a fire started pursuant to such permit. This liability shall also expressly be applicable to such a fire even if the permit was issued prior to payment in full or was otherwise issued erroneously.
This section does not in any way limit other recourse which the Monson Fire Department or Town of Monson may have as a result of such fire.
Section 4:
Any request for a permit under this by-law shall be made in person at the Monson Fire Department. At the time of request and prior to issuance of the permit, the person so requesting a permit must sign a copy of this bylaw, acknowledging that he has read the bylaw and understood it, and expressly agreeing to comply with it, particularly the reimbursement of provisions.
ARTICLE 26-COUNCIL ON AGING (amended STM 11/04/2019):
Section 1: Establishment; powers and duties
A. There is hereby established a Council on Aging consisting of seven (7) citizens of this town, appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms not to exceed three (3) years for any member. Said terms shall be staggered so that not more than three appointments shall be made in any calendar year. Members can be reappointed for consecutive terms.
B. The duties of said Council on Aging shall be to:
20
1. Identify the total needs of the community’s elderly population;
2. Educate the community and enlist support and participation of all citizens concerning these needs;
3. Design, promote or implement services to fill these needs, or coordinate present existing services in the community; and
4. Promote and support any other programs which are designed to assist elderly programs in the community.
C. Said Council on Aging shall cooperate with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs and shall be cognizant of all state and federal legislation concerning funding, information exchange, and program planning which exists for better community programming for the elderly.
D. Said Council on Aging shall give an annual report to the Board of Selectmen with a copy of that report directed to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs.
Section 2: Council funds:
A. The Council on Aging is hereby authorized to accept grants or gifts from the state and federal government, from charitable corporation, from a private corporation, or from an individual. Such funds as may from time to time be received shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer and held as a separate account.
B. The Council on Aging is further authorized to deposit to said account all sums received in connection with the conduct of programs or activities it is authorized to conduct.
C. The Council on Aging may, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, expend funds from the said account for any purpose it is authorized to perform without further appropriation.
ARTICLE 27-RECYLING:
In order to implement a program of Recycling in conjunction with ordinary waste disposal, residents of every household shall separate waste materials into the following categories before depositing same for disposal:
1. Glass and cans
2. Newspapers and corrugated cardboard
3. Other waste
If no separating takes place, waste materials shall not be accepted at the disposal location.
ARTICLE 28-RIGHT TO FARM:
Section 1. Legislative Purpose and Intent:
The Right to Farm by-law is for the purpose of stating with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97 of the Massachusetts Constitution, and all state statues and regulations there under including but not limited to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9; Chapter 111, Section 125A and Chapter 128, Section 1A.
We the citizens of Monson restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town’s authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution (“Home Rule Amendment”).
This general by-law encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands within the Town of Monson by allowing agricultural uses and related
21
activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and local agencies. This by-law shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the Town.
Section 2. Definitions:
The word “farm” shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial agricultural, or accessory thereto. The words “farming” or “agriculture” or their derivatives shall include, but not limited to the following:
? Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
? Dairying;
? Production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities.
? Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any other forestry, lumbering or tree growing operations;
? Raising of livestock including horses;
? Keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise;
? Keeping and raising of poultry, swing, cattle, sheep, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas, alpacas, and camels), and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
“Farming” shall encompass activities, but not limited to, the following:
? Operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over roads within the town;
? Control of pests including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators, and disease organisms of plants and animals;
? Application of manure, fertilizers, and pesticides;
? Conducting agriculture-related educational, agri-tourism and farm-based recreational activities, provided that the activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or services of the farm;
? Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of the farmer’s market or farm stand including signage thereto;
? Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment or apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing, management, or sale of agricultural products;
? On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operation;
? Construction and use of farm structures and facilities for the storage of animal wastes, farm equipment, pesticides, fertilizers, agricultural products and livestock, for the processing of animal wastes and agricultural products, for the sale of agricultural products, and for the use of farm labor, as permitted by state building codes and regulations; including construction and maintenance of fences.
? Harvest of livestock that fall within Massachusetts General Law guidelines.
Section 3. Right to Farm Declaration:
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist with the Town of Monson. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally accepted agricultural practices. It is herby determined that whatever impact may be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community and society in general. The benefits and protections of this by-law are intended to apply exclusively to those agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this Right to Farm by-law shall by deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or imposing any land use regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning by-law.
22
Section 4. Effective Date:
This by-law becomes effective upon approval by the Massachusetts Attorney General and publishing by the Town Clerk as required by M.G.L. Chapter 40 § 32.
Section 5. Disclosure Notification to Real Estate Buyers:
In order to allow prospective purchasers to make informed decisions prior to real estate transaction and to promote understanding between farmers and their new neighbors after a transaction, the Town of Monson will include with all municipal lien certificates the following:
“It is the policy of the Town of Monson to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production of food and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers that the property they are about to acquire lies within a town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Purchasing, and henceforth occupying land within Monson means that one should expect and accept such conditions as a normal and necessary aspect of living in Monson.”
Within 30 days after this by-law becomes effective the Board of Selectman shall make available for use by selling landowners or their agents (and assigns) copies of example written notifications.
Within 30 days after this by-law becomes effective the Board of Selectman shall prominently place in the town hall the above disclosure.
Section 6. Resolution of Disputes:
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may, notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance with the Board of Selectman, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Board of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. Upon receipt of said complaint, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Board of Selectman shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreed-upon time frame.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public health risk, shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Board of Health within an agreed-upon time frame.
Section 7. Severability Clause:
If any part of the by-law is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this by-law. The Town of Monson hereby declares the provisions of this by-law to be severable.
ARTICLE 29-STRETCH ENERGY CODE:
1. Definitions
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009-The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building code created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the establishment of minimum design and
23
construction requirements for energy efficiency. Commencing July 1, 2010, the baseline energy conservation requirements of the MA State Building Code will default to IECC 2009 and MA amendments.
Stretch Energy Code-Codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, the Stretch Energy Code is the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 with amendments contained herein.
2. Purpose
The purpose of 780 CMR 120.AA is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the base energy code applicable to the relevant sections of the building code for both new construction and existing buildings.
3. Applicability
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as applicable.
4. Authority
A municipality seeking to ensure that construction within its boundaries is designed and built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780 CMR may mandate adherence to this appendix.
780 CMR 120 AA may be adopted or rescinded by any municipality in the commonwealth in the manner prescribe by-law. Updated 2/18/10
5. Stretch Code
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, including any amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into the Town of Monson General By-laws.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the building inspector/municipal code official.
ARTICLE 30-SECONDHAND ARTICLES, PAWN SHOP, DEALERS AND COLLECTORS
Section 1-LICENSE REQUIRED
All dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old or precious metals or secondhand articles in this Town shall be licensed by the Selectmen. The fee for such license shall be established by the Board of Selectmen. For the purpose of this by-law, the term “precious metals” shall include any precious metal such as gold, silver or platinum without regard to the form or amount.
Section 2-GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
A). Every licensed dealer of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old or precious metals or secondhand articles within this Town shall keep a book in which shall be written at the time of every purchase of any such article a description thereof and the name, age and residence of the person from whom and the day and hour when such purchase was made, and such book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Selectmen, or any person by them authorized to make such inspection, and every licensed dealer of such shop shall put in some suitable and conspicuous place on his or her shop a sign having his or her name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters.
B). Such shop and all articles of precious metals therein may at all times be examined by the Selectmen, or their designee, to make such examination and no precious metals purchased or received by such licensed dealer shall be sold or altered or removed from premises until a period of at least thirty days has elapsed from the date of its purchase or receipt.
24
C). All licensed dealers shall produce a receipt identifying the business name, address, and license number. It shall contain an accurate and detailed description of all items including but not limited to: all distinguishing marks, model names or numbers, serial numbers, etchings or engravings. Jewelry items shall include a complete description including the material, ring size, weight, chain length, shapes, karat weight and color.
D). All licensed dealers shall refrain from paying cash for precious metals and articles purchased that will be liquidated, melted down, or resold. The preferred method of payment should be a business check which can be traced back to the recipient.
Section 3. All junk collectors, jewelers, pawnbrokers, secondhand dealers and auctioneers, who collect, by purchase or otherwise, junk, jewelry, old metals or secondhand articles from place to place in this Town shall be licensed by the Selectmen.
Section 4. Whoever violates this section shall be liable to a penalty of $50.00-$100.00 for each offense.
Section 5. For all jewelry and precious metal transactions, the licensed dealer shall obtain a government issued identification, make a color copy of, and record the full name, address, date of birth, and who shall be required to sign documentation avowing to the accuracy of the information listed, and ownership of said items being sold.
Section 6.
No person shall purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any article of a minor (a child under the age of 17) unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. In such case, the name, date of birth, and address of both minor and parent or guardian shall be recorded and the identification of the parent or guardian will be kept on file.
ARTICLE 31-PARKING BAN:
The Board of Selectmen or its designee may declare a parking ban on all ways within the Town for the purposes of snow and ice removal or any other state of emergency and shall be responsible for lifting the ban when determined that it is no longer necessary.
Snow/Ice Removal:
In the event of a parking ban declaration for snow and ice removal, no motor vehicle, other than a Town vehicle acting in an emergency shall be parked on any way within the Town.
Between the hours of 6AM-1AM, parking will be permitted on Main Street between Hampden Avenue and Washington Street. Any legally operating business outside of this area that requires on street parking during a ban shall contact the police department for permission, which shall be granted unless substantial public safety is a risk.
State of Emergency:
In the event of a parking ban declaration for a state of emergency, no motor vehicle, other than one acting in an emergency, shall be parked on any way within the Town.
Motor Vehicle Removal:
The Chief of Police and/or the Highway Department Superintendent or their designee may remove or cause to be removed any motor vehicle parked in violation of the parking ban.
25
Owner Responsible for Charges:
The owner or operator of a motor vehicle removed pursuant to this by-law shall be fully responsible for all charges and expenses incurred for removal and storage of such motor vehicle as well as the payment of any fines imposed under this by-law.
Penalty for Violation of this By-law:
In addition to any other legal remedies that may be available, whoever violates any provision of this by-law, the violation of which is subject to specific penalty, may be penalized by
non-criminal disposition as provided in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D as amended in accordance with the penalty and fine schedule established in the Town of Monson By-law.
ARTICLE 32-NO SNOW/DEBRIS DEPOSITED IN, ON OR ACROSS PUBLIC WAY: No person, other than an employee or other person in the service of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Town of Monson shall direct, discharge, dump, shovel, pile, push, blow, plow or deposit snow, ice, water under conditions where water would be subject to freezing, leaves, debris or any other matter onto, into or across any public way, including sidewalks or public property, or cause, direct, sanction or authorize any such activity involving snow, ice, water leaves, debris or any other matter onto a public way or public property.
Penalty:
In addition to any other legal remedies that may be available, whoever violates any provision of this by-law, the violation of which is subject to specific penalty, may be penalized by non-criminal disposition as provided in Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D as amended in accordance with the penalty and fine schedule established in the Town of Monson by-law.
ARTICLE 33-GRANT OR RENEWAL OF LICENSES AS AFFECTED BY NON-PAYMENT OF LOCAL TAXES, FEES, etc.
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 57, the Board of Selectmen, hereinafter referred to as the Board, may revoke or suspend any local license or permit including renewals and transfers issued by the Board for any person, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges provided that:
a.) The Town Collector shall annually furnish to the Board a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or pending petition before the appellate tax board.
b.) The Board may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the Board from the Town Collector; or any license or permit including renewals and transfers with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or other matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges; provided however that written notice is given to the party and the Town Collector as required by applicable provisions of the law, and the party is given a hearing to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Town Collector shall have the right to intervene in any
26
hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the Board with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the Board receives a certificate issued by the Town Collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
c.) Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the Board to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
d.) The Board may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in Mass. Gen. Laws, Chapter 268A, Section 1 in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
ARTICLE 34 - DEPARTMENTAL REVOVLING FUND BYLAW (amended 11/04/19):
Section 1. Purpose.
This by-law establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by the town, departments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by M.G.L. c. 44, §53E1/2.
Section 2. Expenditure Limitations
A department or department manager, board, committee or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this by-law without appropriate subject to the following limitations:
1. Full-time employee salaries shall not be charged to the fund unless fringe benefits associated with full-time employees are also charged to the fund.
2. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
3. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by Annual Town Meeting on or before July 1, of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization is later approved during the fiscal year by the Select Board and Finance Committee,
Section 3. Interest
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this by-law shall be credited to the General Fund.
Section 4. Procedures and Reports
Except as provided in M.G.L. c. 44, §53E1/2 and this by-law, the laws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of town monies and the expenditure and payment of town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established by this by-law. The town accountant shall include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available for the expenditure in the regular report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
27
Section 5. Authorized Revolving Funds
The Table establishes:
A. Each Revolving Fund authorized for use by a Town department, board, committee, agency or officer,
B. The Department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from each fund,
C. The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the Town Accountant,
D. The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used,
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures form each fund,
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund, and
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this by-law.
Revolving Fund
Department, Board, Committee, Agency or Officer Authorized to Spend from Fund
Limit on Spending
1. Collectors’ Report
Town Collector
$9,000
2. Driveway Inspector
Board of Selectmen
$2,500
3. Gas Inspector
Board of Selectmen
$8,000
4. Plumbing Inspector
Board of Selectmen
$14,000
5. Electrical Inspector
Board of Selectmen
$37,000
6. Cross-Alter Inspector
Board of Selectmen
$9,000
7. Forest Fire Equipment
Fire Chief
$13,000
8. Recycling & Hazardous Waste Materials
Board of Health
$16,000
9. Apartment Inspections
Board of Health
$1,000
10. Title V Inspector
Board of Health
$21,000
11. Summer Theatre
Parks & Recreation Commissioners
$22,000
12. P & R Pool Program
Parks & Recreation Commissioners
$90,000
13. School Transportation
School Committee
$45,000
14. Transportation for outside activities and out of district students
School Committee
$95,000
15. Community Garden
Board of Selectmen
$3,000
28
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Revolving Fund
Department, Board, Committee, Agency or Officer Authorized to Spend from Fund
Fees, Charges or other receipts credited to fund
Program or Activity Expenses Payable from Fund
Restrictions or Conditions on Expenses Payable from Fund
Other Requirements/Reports
Fiscal Years
16. School Technology Revolving Fund
Monson Public Schools
Fees and charges and other receipts paid for damage, repair, replacement and insurance
Repairs, parts, replacement and insurance and training and materials
Existing software contracts not paid for from account
None
On or after July 1, 2019
Revolving Fund
Department, Board, Committee, Agency or Officer Authorized to Spend from Fund
Limit on Spending
16. School Technology Revolving Fund
Monson Public Schools
$50,000.00

Town of Monson Zoning Bylaw

TABLE OF CONTENTS


SECTION 1.0  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY	4

1.7        DEFINITIONS……………………………………………………………..5                                                                                 

SECTION 2.0  ZONING DISTRICTS	17

2.1 	TYPES OF DISTRICTS	17

2.2 	DISTRICT LOCATIONS AND BOUNDARIES 	17

2.3 	RESERVED LAND DISTRICT 	18

2.4 	COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS	19

2.5 	INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 	19

SECTION 3.0  USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS	19

3.1  	SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS 	19

3.2 	PROHIBITED USES	20

	SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS (TABLE 1)	21
	
	DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS (TABLE 2)	30

3.3	NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES	33				
3.4	DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS………………………………………	35

SECTION 4.0  OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS	35

4.1 	FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT 	35

4.2 	WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION DISTRICT 	38

4.3 	SCENIC DISTRICT	44

SECTION 5.0  GENERAL REGULATIONS	50

5.1 	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR GENERAL                                                           AND CENTRAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES	50

	5.1.1	Purpose and Applicability  	50
	5.1.2 	Lighting	50
5.1.3	Noise	51
5.1.4	Odor	52
	5.1.5   	Storm Water Runoff	52
	5.1.6 	Erosion Control	52
	5.1.7 	Water Quality	53
	5.1.8 	Explosive Materials	53
	5.1.9 	Screening and Buffer Zones	53
	5.1.10	Landscaped Buffer Strip	53

5.2 	COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND LANDSCAPING 	54

5.3 	SIGN BY-LAW 	60

5.4 	OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING 	71
		
SECTION 6.0  SPECIAL REGULATIONS	71

6.1 	SCENIC ROADS 	71

6.2 	MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS 	71

6.3	ELDERLY OR HANDICAPPED CONGREGATE HOUSING 	74

6.4 	OPEN SPACE COMMUNITIES 	75

6.5 	SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS ON ESTATE LOTS 	79

6.6 	EARTH REMOVAL AND FILLING OF LAND BYLAW 	81

6.7 	ACCESSORY APARTMENTS 	87
	
6.8 	DWELLING CONVERSION	88

6.9 	SWIMMING POOL BYLAW	88

6.10 	TRAILERS	88
	
6.11 	COMMERCIAL RECREATION DEVELOPMENT BYLAW 	79

6.12 	PINBALL MACHINES AND ELECTRONIC GAMES 	93

6.13 	MIXED USES 	94

6.14 	WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES REGULATIONS 	96

6.15	PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT…………………….99

6.16	ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES……………………………………….106

6.17	MUNICIPAL USES………………………………………………………...110

6.18	WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS……………………………..111

6.19	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT………………………………………..113

6.20	BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS…………………………..123

6.21	COMMON ACCESS DRIVEWAY………………………………………..125

6.22	COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT………………………………………. 129 

6.23	LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
INSTALLATIONS………………………………………………………….133

6.24     REGISTERED MARIJUANA AND DISPENSARY (RMD) AND OFF SITE
            MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (OMMD)……………………...138
                                                                                                                  

SECTION 7.0  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT	145

7.1 	BOARD OF APPEALS 	145

7.2 	ENFORCEMENT OF ZONING BYLAW 	146
	
7.3 	SPECIAL PERMITS 	148

7.4 	SITE PLAN APPROVAL 	151

7.5       ASSOCIATE MEMBER OF THE PLANNING BOARD…………………154

	
	
 
SECTION 1.0  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

1.1  	PURPOSE  

These regulations are enacted to promote the general welfare of the Town of Monson, to protect the health and safety of its inhabitants, to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town, and to increase the amenities of the town, all as authorized by, but not limited to, the provisions of the Zoning Act, M.G.L. c. 40A, as amended, and Section 2A of 1975 Mass. Acts 808.

1.2  	AUTHORITY  

This Zoning By-Law is enacted in accordance with the provisions of the General Laws, Chapter 40A, any and all amendments thereto, and by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

1.3  	SCOPE  

For these purposes, the construction, repair, alteration, reconstruction, height, number of stories, and size of buildings and structures, the size and width of lots, the percentage of lot area that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures, and land in the Town of Monson are regulated as hereinafter provided.

1.4  	APPLICABILITY  

No division nor subdivision of any lot or parcel of land shall be made in such a manner as to make any lot thus set off, or the remaining portion of said lot or parcel, or the location of any building on such lot or remainder thereof, non-conforming to this Bylaw. No building shall be used, and no building shall be erected, altered, or changed in use, except in compliance with this Bylaw, but this shall not prevent the continuance of lawfully existing use of building which existed on the effective date of this Bylaw. Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent changes in the Zoning Bylaw unless the construction or use is commenced within one (1 ) year after issuance, and in cases of construction, unless such construction is continued until completion as continuously and expeditiously as possible. Special Permits shall lapse after one (1) year if a substantial use thereof or construction thereunder has not sooner commenced. The one (1) year period shall not include the time required to pursue or await determination of an appeal.


1.5  	AMENDMENT  

This By-Law may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the Town Meeting in the manner provided in M.G.L. c. 40A, s.5, and any amendments thereto.

1.6  	SEPARABILITY  

The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other section or provision herein.
1.7  	DEFINITIONS   

For the purpose of this Bylaw, the following words shall have the meanings given hereinafter: Where appropriate, the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the words “used” or “occupied” include the words “designed”, “arranged”, “intended”, or “offered”, to be used or occupied; the words “building”, “structure”, “lot”, “land” or “premises” shall be construed as though followed by the words “or any portion thereof”; and the word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Subdivision Control Law shall have the meanings given therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words not defined in either place shall have the meaning given in Merriam-Webster’s Unabridged Dictionary.

Accessory Building - A building customarily incidental to a principal building on the same lot or on an adjoining lot under the same ownership, and not attached to the principal building by any covered or roofed structure.

Accessory Use - The use of a building or premises which is customarily incidental to a principal permitted use.

Agricultural use, exempt -  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, aquaculture, or viticulture exempted by M.G.L. c. 40A, s. 3.

Agricultural use, nonexempt - Agricultural use of property not exempted by M.G.L. c. 40A, s. 3.

Alteration - A change in or addition to a building or structure.

Animal Unit - An animal unit shall be defined as 1 horse, 1 pony, 1 cow, 1 steer, 7 sheep or 7 goats.

Aquifer - Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable water and as defined by DEP Standards.

As-of-Right Siting: As-of-Right Siting shall mean that development may proceed without the need for a special permit, variance, amendment, waiver, or other discretionary approval in designated locations.  As-of-right development shall be subject to Site Plan Approval by Monson Planning Board acting as the Site Plan Review Authority (SPRA) to determine conformance with local zoning ordinances or bylaws.

Automobile repair shop -  Premises for the servicing and repair of autos, with or without fuel sales.

Automobile service station -  Premises for the supplying of fuel, oil, lubrication, washing, or minor repair services, but not to include body work, painting, or major repairs.

Automobile or motorcycle sales - Facility for the sale of motor vehicles or motorcycles.

Bed and Breakfast Establishment - A private, owner occupied residence with one to four guestrooms. The bed and breakfast is subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the building. Individual guests are prohibited from staying at any particular bed and breakfast establishment for more than twenty-one days in any one –year period.

Best Management Practices (BMPs) – Practices that have been determined to be the most effective and practicable means of preventing or reducing undesirable environmental impacts.

Building - A combination of any materials forming a roofed enclosure intended for the shelter of persons, animals, or property, including any part of a building and porches and accessory buildings attached thereto and not to include trailers or mobile homes.

Building Coverage - The percentage which the aggregate area of all buildings on the lot bears to the area of the lot.

Building Height - The vertical distance from the average finished grade within 10 feet of the walls of the building to the highest point of the top story in the case of a flat or mansard roofs, including the top of a parapet, or to the mean level between the plate and the ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.

Building Inspector - The Board of Selectmen or their duly authorized agent.

Building Permit: A construction permit issued by an authorized building inspector; the building permit evidences that the project is consistent with the state and federal building codes as well as local zoning bylaws, including those governing ground- mounted large-scale solar photovoltaic installations.

Building Setback Line - A line parallel to the street at a distance equal to the required front yard or at a greater distance when otherwise legally established by the Town or by private covenant.

Camping Unit - Tent, collapsible tent trailer, motor home, pick-up camper, truck cap, and travel trailers of twenty-four (24) feet or less.

Child Care Facility - A day care center or school age child care program, as those terms are defined in M.G.L. c. 28A, § 9.

Club - A bona-fide membership organization established under provisions of the General Law.

Club, Private membership, not conducted as gainful business -  Buildings, structures and premises used by a nonprofit social or civic organization, or by an organization catering exclusively to members and their guests for social, civic, recreational, or athletic purposes which are not conducted primarily for gain and provided there are no vending stands, merchandising, or commercial activities except as may be required generally for the membership and purposes of such organization.

Commercial recreational campground for transient guests - An area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy are located or may be placed, including cabins, tents, and major recreational equipment, which is primarily used for recreational purposes and retains on open air or natural character.

Commercial Trucking (adopted 11.14.2016)  -  Garaging, outside parking, storage and accessory light maintenance and cleaning of three (3) or more vehicles with a gross combination weight greater than 26,000 pounds.

Common Access Driveway (adopted 5.11.2009) – A driveway/curb cut shared by not more than 4 lots, such that each lot has approved frontage on an existing public way, maintained by the Town, with the required lot width as defined in section 6.21.2.1, has access obtained through the common use of a private driveway designed according to the standards for construction of shared driveways in Monson, and as shown on a plan prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, with parcel descriptions, suitable for recording at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.

Congregate Elderly and Handicapped Housing - A building or buildings arranged or used for the residence of persons age fifty-five (55) or older, or for handicapped persons, as defined in Chapter 121B of the Mass. General Laws, with some shared facilities and services.

Critical Root Zone – The critical root zone (also known as essential root zone) is the portion of a tree’s root system that is the minimum necessary to maintain the stability and vitality of the tree.  I can be calculated by using the following formula: tree trunk diameter at breast height x 2, then convert to feet.  For example, for a tree with a trunk diameter of 10 inches, the critical root zone would have a diameter of 20 feet.

Day Care Center - Any facility operated on a regular basis whether known as a day nursery, nursery school, child play school, or known under any other name which receives 7 or more children during the course of any one day.

Drip Line – The circle that could be drawn on the soil around a tree directly under the tips of its outermost branches.  Rainwater tends to drip from the tree at this point.

Driveway - That portion of a parcel of land on private property designated by the property owner as the vehicle access from a street to parking or garage areas on private property. A driveway shall have a maximum grade of 12% for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the street line and shall be no closer than ten (10) feet from any abutting side property line. The driveway access shall occur across the minimum frontage required in the Zoning District in which the frontage is located.

Dwelling - A building occupied as a residence.

Dwelling Conversion - The conversion of a one-family dwelling existing at the time of enactment of the Bylaw into not more than a four (4)-family dwelling unit.

Dwelling, Multi-Family - A building containing at least three but not more than eight dwelling units with separate sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities.

Dwelling Unit - One or more rooms providing complete sleeping, facilities for living, cooking, and bathing, for the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling unit.

Educational use, exempt - Educational facilities exempted from regulation by M.G.L. c. 40A, s. 3.

Educational use, nonexempt - Educational facilities not exempted from regulation by M.G.L. c. 40A, § 3.

Family - Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit, provided that a group of not more than seven persons keeping house together, but not necessarily related by blood or marriage, may be considered a family.

Family day care home - Any private residence operating a facility as defined in G.L. c. 28A, §9.

Farm Business - Business established for the processing, display or sale of farm products, fifty percent (50) of which must have been raised or produced on the premises or elsewhere in the Town of Monson.

Fast Food Establishment - An establishment whose primary business is the sale of food for consumption on or off the premises which is: a) primarily intended for consumption rather than for use as an ingredient or component of meals; b) available upon a short waiting time; and c) packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold.

Fence - A man made barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary.

Frontage - The linear distance of a lot measured along the street right-of-way from the intersection of one side-lot line to the intersection of the other side of the same lot provided that the minimum frontage required by this Bylaw shall be satisfied by a continuous, uninterrupted segment of such frontage. Lot frontage for each lot shall be on a public way.

Funeral establishment - Facility for the conducting of funerals and related activities such as embalming.

Garage, Private - A building or part thereof used for the storage of motor vehicles and accessory to a principal building on the same lot. 

General Service establishment - A facility providing general services such as cleaning and laundry service, radio and electrical repair shop, but excluding motor vehicle repair or service.

Groundwater - All the water found beneath the surface of the ground.

Habitable Area - The floor area of the living space for the exclusive use of a single family in a dwelling or in a dwelling unit. Living space shall not include porches, breezeways, garage, basement, and any unfinished or community areas, and shall be measured as net area, or as gross area less twelve percent (12%) for partitions and walls. Any area with less than six and one-half feet 6 1/2 feet clear head room shall not be considered habitable.

Hazardous Waste - A waste, which is hazardous to human health or the environment. Hazardous wastes have been designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under 40 CFR 250 and the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21C.

Heat Island Effect (Heat Pollution) – The increase in ambient temperatures that occurs in developed areas because paved areas and buildings absorb more heat from the sun than natural landscape.

Home Occupations - A use, which is customarily and may properly be carried on for compensation entirely within a dwelling or accessory building.

Horticulture - The growing and harvesting of fruits, vegetables, grains, berries, nuts and other plant fit for human consumption, feed for animals, tobacco, flowers, sod, trees, nursery or greenhouse products, and ornamental plants and shrubs.

Impervious Surfaces - Materials or structures on or above the ground that do not allow precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.

Infiltration – The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil.

Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation:  A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC.

Leachable Wastes  - Waste materials capable of releasing waterborne contaminants to the environment.

Livestock - shall mean domestic animals, including horses, ponies, cows, sheep and goats.
	
	Lot - A single area of land in one ownership defined by meets and bounds or boundary lines on a deed recorded in the Registry of Deeds, Hampden County, or drawn on a plan approved under the Subdivision Control Law, or on a plan endorsed by the Planning Board stating “Approval not required under the Subdivision Control Law”, or words of similar import.
	
	Lot Coverage - The portion of a lot which is rendered impervious to rainfall, including but not limited to structures, pavement and permanent accessories.
	
	Lot, Buildable - A land area meeting the specifications of the Bylaw and other lawful restrictions exclusive of the area of water courses, water bodies, wetland and land unsuited to common human activities. A buildable lot does not include land regulated by 310 CMR 10.
	
	Lot, Corner - A lot bounded on two (2) or more sides by streets in any corner lot, the street line setback must be maintained from all street lines forming boundaries of a lot.
	
	Lot, Through - A lot other than a corner lot which extends all the way between and abuts two or more generally parallel streets.

Lot Line - The established division line between lots or between a lot and a street.
	
	Lot Line, Front - The property line dividing a lot from a street (right-of-way). On a corner lot the owner shall designate one street line as the front lot line.
	
	Lot Line, Side - The line or lines bounding a lot which extend from the street toward the rear in a direction approximately perpendicular to the street. In the case of corner lots, or through lots, all lines extending from streets shall be considered side lot lines.

Lot Line, Rear - The lot line opposite the front lot line.

Low Impact Development – A set of approaches that seeks to mimic a site’s pre-development 
hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate and detain runoff          
close to its source.  Instead of conveying, managing, and/or treating stormwater in large, end of 
pipe facilities, LID utilizes small scale, decentralized practices that infiltrate, treat, evaporate, 
and transpire rain water and snow melt.  These practices include bioretention areas, grassed 
swales, reduced impervious areas, preservation of open space, increased development density,
smaller lot sizes, reconfiguration of lots, alternative street and parking design, and alternative
structural stormwater treatment methods. 
	
Manufactured (or Modular) Housing - A pre-fabricated structure made up of parts of 
standardized sizes that are arranged or fitted together to form a dwelling unit. The unit is usually 
transported by truck from a factory to a site built and placed on a foundation. A modular unit is 
not a mobile home and does not fall under the mobile home requirements of this Bylaw.

Manufacturing: -A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials, or the manufacture from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products.

Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) – The system of conveyances designed or used for collection or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or manmade or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structures that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Monson.

Medical or Dental Center or Laboratory: -A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients that does not include overnight care facilities.

	Monopole - The type of structure upon which antennas and other wireless communications devices are mounted that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood, steel or concrete and a platform (or racks) for panel antennas arrayed at the top.
	
	Motel-Motor Hotel - A building designed and used for lodging transients in non-housekeeping 
units with not less than twelve units in any one building. One permanent housekeeping dwelling 
unit is permitted for occupancy of a manager or custodian. Rooms for assembly, a swimming 
pool for the use of guests, and the serving of food shall be deemed to be accessory uses.

Municipal facilities - Facilities owned or operated by the Town of Monson.

Non-Conforming Building - A building legally existing at the effective date hereof, but which 
does not conform to all of the applicable requirements of this Bylaw regarding area and width of 
lot, frontage of lot, percentage of building coverage, required yards and parking facilities and 
building height limits.

Non-Conforming Use - A use of land, building, or premises which is not a use permitted by the
provisions of this Bylaw for the district in which such land, building, or premises are situated, 
but which was legally existing at the effective date hereof.

Office building -   A building or part thereof, for the transaction of business or the provision of services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise.

Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary – A Registered Marijuana Dispensary that is located off-site from the cultivation/processing facility (and controlled and operated by the same registered and approved not-for-profit entity which operates and affiliated RMD) but which serves only to dispense the process marijuana, related supplies and educational materials to registered Qualifying Patients or their personal caregivers in accordance with the provision of 105 CMR 725.00

On-Site Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic installation that is constructed at a location where other uses of the underlying property occur.  


Open Space - The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings or structures, unobstructed to the sky 
by man-made objects other than walks, swimming pools, and terraced areas not devoted to 
streets, driveways, off-street parking or loading spaces and expressed as a percentage of total lot 
area.

Outdoor Advertising Board - The Outdoor Advertising Board of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or any board or official which may hereafter succeed to its powers or functions.
Parking Area - Any open space used for parking motor vehicles exclusively, and in which no
gasoline nor motor vehicle accessories are sold, or no other business conducted.

Person - Shall include an individual, corporation, society, association, partnership, trust or other
entity, public or private.

Personal service establishment - A facility providing personal services such as hair salon, barber shop, tanning beds, dry cleaning, print shop, photography studio or shop, and the like.

Planned Unit Residential Development (PURD) – A housing development for persons of age 55 and older on a minimum of 10 acres of land, with extensive open space where the overall density does not exceed that which would occur in a conventional development.

Pre-development – The state of a site prior to development.  The pre-development state shall be interpreted as the state of a site at the time of property purchase for the permitted development project.

Premises - The portion of a lot or building actually in use for the specific purpose or under
consideration.

Primary Aquifer Recharge Area - Areas which are underlain by surficial geologic deposits
including glaciofluvial or lacustrine stratified drift deposits or alluvium or swamp deposits, and 
in which the prevailing direction of groundwater flow is toward public water supply wells or 
potential sites for such wells and as defined by DEP Standards.

Private Stable - A building or part of a building in which one or more horses or ponies are kept 
for the private use of the owner, and in which no horses or ponies are kept for sale, rent, hire, 
breeding, or for commercial cartage, trucking or other business purposes.

Radioactive Waste - Any waste material or substance which is a source of ionizing or non-
ionizing radiation. 

Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC). 

Recharge – The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through the soil.  

Registered Marijuana Dispensary – A use operated by a not-for-profit entity registered and approved by the MA Department of Public Health in accordance with 105 CMR 725.00 and pursuant to all other applicable state laws and regulations, also to be known as a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.  A RMD shall explicitly include facilities which cultivate and process medical marijuana and which may also dispense and deliver medical marijuana and related products.

Rest home, convalescent or nursing home - Any building with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.  

Restaurant or Tavern - A building, or portion thereof, containing tables and/or booths for at least two-thirds (2/3) of its legal capacity, which is designed, intended and used for the indoor sales and consumption of food prepared on the premises, except that food may be consumed outdoors in landscaped terraces, designed for dining purposes, which are adjuncts to the main indoor restaurant facility.  The term "restaurant" shall not include "fast food establishments."

Retail - A facility selling goods to the public but not specifically listed in the Schedule of Use Regulations.

Setback - The distance required from a street line to the nearest wall of a building.

Sign - Any object constructed of any material that is intended or designed to advertise or call the
attention of the public to the premises to a product made, displayed, or sold, and to services 
rendered thereon, or to identify the building or the occupants thereof, or any privately owned 
permanent or temporary device, billboard, placard, painting, drawing, poster letter, word, banner, 
pennant, insignia, trade flag, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an 
advertisement, announcement, or direction which is on a public way or on private property 
within public view of a public way, public park or reservation.

Sign, Accessory - Any sign that advertises, or indicates the person occupying the premises on 
which the sign is erected or maintained, or the business transacted thereon, or advertises the 
property itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent, and which contains no other matter.

Sign, Area of – a. The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed, 
any frame around the sign and any “cutouts” or extensions, but shall not include any supporting 
structure or bracing; b. The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to 
or painted on a surface, building, wall or window, shall be considered to be that of the smallest
quadrangle or triangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols; c. The area of a sign 
consisting of a three-dimensional object shall be considered to be the area of the   largest vertical 
cross-section of that object; d. In computing the area of signs, both sides of V-shaped signs, but 
only one side of back-to-back signs, shall be included.

Sign, Non-Accessory - Any sign not an accessory sign.

Sign, Temporary - Any sign, including its supporting structure, intended to be maintained for a
continuous period of not more than one-hundred (100) days in any calendar year. A temporary 
sign shall incorporate such uses as political events and elections, tag sales and other special 
events.

Sign, Standing - Any accessory sign that is not attached to a building.

Site Plan Review: review by the Site Plan Review Authority to determine conformance with local zoning ordinances or bylaws.  
Site Plan Review Authority: For purposes of this bylaw, Site Plan Review Authority is the Monson Planning Board. 

Solar Photovoltaic Array: an arrangement of solar photovoltaic panels.

Street - A “street” is (a) a public way currently funded for maintenance and used as a public way
and which is certified by the Town Clerk as being accepted by Town vote and not subsequently 
abandoned by Town vote, or (b); a public way shown on a plan theretofore approved and 
endorsed in accordance with the subdivision control law, or (c); a public way in existence when 
the subdivision control law became effective as shown on the “official street map”. Privately 
owned ways, abandoned ways, and proposed ways as shown on the “official street map” at the 
time of its adoption are not “streets” in conformance with this definition.

Street Line - The dividing line between a street and a lot, and in the case of a public street, the 
Street line established by public authority. If street lines have not been so established, they shall 
be deemed to exist twenty-five (25) feet on each side of the center line of the street.

Structure of Accessory Structure - A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to
give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall for a structure, tent, 
reviewing stand, platform, bin, flagpole, mast for radio antenna or the like. The word “structure” 
shall be construed, where the context allows, as though followed by the words “or part or parts 
thereof”.

Subdivision - Including resubdivision, shall be as defined in the Subdivision Control Law.

Swimming Pool - A body of water eighteen (18) or more inches in depth below grade at any point in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or container, permanent or temporary, whether located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semi-public, or private swimming by adults or children or both, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed for such use, and includes all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances, and all other facilities appurtenant to or intended for the operation and maintenance of a swimming pool, and also all pools operated and maintained in conjunction with or by clubs, community association, and motels.

Swimming Pool, Family - A swimming pool used or intended to be used only by the owner or lessee thereof and his family and by his friends invited or permitted to use it without payment of any fee.

Swimming Pool, Semi-Public - A swimming pool to be used by a non-profit organization of not more than two-hundred (200) persons living in the immediate vicinity of the pool.
a. A semi-public pool shall be operated under a set of Bylaws which include safety rules, limited guest privileges, as well as regulations to keep the use of said pool from becoming objectionable to the abutter and neighbors, or a general nuisance.
b. Sufficient provision shall be made on the property in which the pool is located for off-street parking for all members or their guests.

Trailer - Any vehicle, or object on wheels and having no motive power of its own but which is drawn by or used in connection with a motor vehicle and which is so designed and constructed, or reconstructed, or added to by means of such accessories as to permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation, whether resting on wheels, jacks, or other foundations and shall include a type of vehicle commonly known as mobile home, which shall be defined to mean a dwelling unit built on a chassis and containing electrical, plumbing, and sanitary facilities and designed to be able to be installed on a temporary or permanent foundation.

Transmission Lines: Those conductors and their necessary supporting or containing structures which are located entirely outside of buildings and are used for transmitting electric energy which is not connected to individual users/property owners.

Travel or Camping Trailer - A vehicle similar to a trailer or mobile home, but not exceeding thirty (30) feet in length and designed primarily for recreational purposes. The term “travel or camping trailer” shall also be applied to any motor vehicle whose body has been equipped for occupancy similar to that of a travel trailer or camping trailer.

Use - The purpose for which a structure or lot is arranged, designed or intended to be used, occupied or maintained.

Veterinary establishment -  A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short term care incidental to the clinic or hospital use.

Watershed Area - Lands lying adjacent to water courses or bodies which create the catchment of drainage areas of such water bodies or courses.

Windmill – A wind energy conversion system which converts wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy, consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 10 kw, and which is intended primarily for on-site consumption of utility power. (Adopted 11/27/2006)

Windmill Height – The height from original ground level to the top of the rotor at its highest point. (Adopted 11/27/2006)

Wireless Communications Facilities - The structures and devices designed to facilitate cellular and telephone services, personal communications services and enhanced specialized mobile radio service as defined in Section 704 of the Federal telecommunications Act of 1996. Included are towers, antennae mounted to towers or other structures, and accessory structures, such as sheds, which are directly required for facility operations. Not included in this definition are antennae and dishes used solely for residential television and radio reception; and amateur radio facilities used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio service license issued by the Federal Communication Commission provided the tower is not used for commerce.

Yard - A required open space, unoccupied except as herein permitted, between a principal building and a street or a lot line.

Yard, Front - A yard extending between lot side lines across the front of a lot adjacent to each street the lot adjoins.

Yard, Rear - A yard adjacent to the rear lot line and extending between side lot lines.

Yard, Side - A yard adjacent to the side lot line extending from the front yard to the rear yard.

Zoning Enforcement Authority: The person or board charged with enforcing the zoning ordinances or bylaws.  

Zoning Permit - A zoning permit is issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.

 
SECTION 2.0  ZONING DISTRICTS
2.1 	TYPES OF DISTRICTS 

	For the purpose of this Bylaw, the Town of Monson is hereby divided into the following types of use districts:

Residence Districts:
RV - Residential Village
RR - Rural Residential

Commercial Districts:
CC - Central Commercial District
GC - General Commercial
CR - Commercial Recreation District

Reserved Land District: RL

Scenic District: SD

Industrial District: I

Water Supply Protection District: WSP

Flood Plain District: FPD

2.2 	DISTRICT LOCATIONS AND BOUNDARIES 

2.2.1 	Map.  The zone districts described herein are shown on a map titled Zoning map - Town of Monson, Massachusetts, prepared by Pioneer Valley Planning Commission dated 1990 , which map is hereby declared to be made a part of the Zoning Bylaws of Monson, Massachusetts.
	
	2.2.2 	Boundaries.  The following rules will be used to interpret the Zoning Map.

1. Where boundaries are indicated in the right of way streets or watercourses, such boundaries shall be the centerline of the right of way.

		2. Where boundaries approximately follow property lines and are not more than twenty-five feet (25 ft.) therefrom, the property line shall be the district boundary, with the exception of the Water Supply Protection District and the Floodplain District wherein boundaries shall always follow natural features and landscape contours shown on the maps.
		
		3. Where boundaries are parallel to a street or road and fixed by dimensions on the zoning map, the distance shall be measured from the center line of such ways.	
		
		4. Where boundaries include the land lying under any water body or stream therein and opposite sides of the stream are in different zone districts, the zone boundary shall be considered the centerline of the stream.

		5. Where distances are not specified on the zoning map nor otherwise determined from the above provisions, the scale of the zoning map shall be used to determine the location of the district boundary.

		6. Where the location of a boundary line is uncertain, the Building Inspector shall determine its position in accordance with the distance in feet from other lines as given or as measured from the scale of the map.

	2.2.3  	Lot in More Than One District.  In the case of a lot lying in more than one zone district, the provision of the less restrictive district may be applied for a distance of not more than twenty-five (25) feet into the more restrictive district, provided the lot has frontage on a street in the less restrictive district.


2.3	RESERVED LAND DISTRICT

2.3.1	Purpose.  The purpose of the R.L. Zone District is to conserve lands in generally public or semi-public ownership, and to limit the location and use of land and buildings under private ownership for trade, industry, agriculture, and residential purposes, but this section shall in no way limit nor prohibit the use of land or buildings for any church or other religious purpose, or for any educational purpose, as provided in Section 2 of Chapter 40A of the General Laws of Massachusetts.

2.3.2	Permitted Uses. Any use which is permitted in the charter of the owner, provided that any industrial, business, and/or residential uses shall be limited to, and used exclusively by and for the requirements of the owner.

2.3.3	Prohibited Uses. Any industrial, business and/or residential use under private ownership that does not furnish a public service or utility, unless and until:

1. A plan of development showing the proposed changes in use and their relation to that section of the Town, shall have been prepared.

2. The Planning Board shall have made a complete study of the proposal from a physical, social, economic view, as well as its effect on the Town’s furnishing services and facilities.

3. The Planning Board shall have prepared a written report on its findings, and the changes required in the Zoning Bylaw which shall become a part of the record of a public hearing held by the Planning Board; and,

4. The amendments to the Zoning Bylaw shall have been adopted by a town meeting as provided by law.

2.4 	COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

In any Commercial District, no building nor structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or
used, nor may any premises be used except in conformance with the principal use regulations. The off-street parking and loading requirements of Section 5.4 hereafter shall apply to all new uses in Commercial Districts, and shall also apply to any building or use that is expanded by more than 20% in area after the effective date of this Bylaw.
2.5 	INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

2.5.1 	Fire Protection.   Where an industrial use is located beyond the service area of public water supply, adequate provision for fire protection in the judgment of the Fire Chief of Monson shall be made.

2.5.2 	Flammables.  The storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be in the manner approved by the Fire Chief of Monson who may require any precautionary measures necessary in his judgment to eliminate serious exposure hazard to life and property.

2.5.3 	Parking.  Off-street parking and truck unloading shall conform to the requirements of Section 5.4 of the Zoning Bylaws.

2.5.4 	Buffer.  Landscaped buffer strips shall be required between residential districts and industrial districts, and shall conform to the requirements of Section 5.1.10 of the Zoning Bylaws.

SECTION 3.0  USE AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
3.1  	SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS 

Except as provided elsewhere in this Bylaw, no building or structure shall be erected or altered, and no building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose other than as provided for in this section.  The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each district are set forth in Table 1, Monson Schedule of Use Regulations. The following notations apply to the Schedule of Use Regulations:

Y-Yes		Use Permitted

SP-PB-SPA 			Use allowed by Special Permit from Planning Board with Site 
			   Plan Approval
SPA				Use allowed with Site Plan Approval

SP-ZBA-SPA 			Use allowed by Special Permit from Zoning Board of Appeals with     
			   Site Plan Approval

SP-ZBA			 	Use allowed by Special Permit from Zoning Board of Appeals

N-No			Use Prohibited

Uses permitted and uses allowed by special permit or by site plan approval shall be in conformity with all density and dimensional regulations and any other pertinent requirements of this Bylaw.

	3.2 	PROHIBITED USES. Any use not specifically or generally listed herein or otherwise permitted in a district shall be deemed as prohibited. The following uses shall be prohibited in all districts:

	3.2.1  	Trailer camps or parks providing locations and service facilities for house trailers except as provided for in Section 3.1. An individual trailer may be located on a lot provided it is not used as living quarters while so located.

	3.2.2  	Junk yard, dump and auto graveyard.

3.2.3	Billboards.
 
Town of Monson Schedule of Use Regulations (Table 1)

Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
General Uses										
Exempt Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture & farm business	Parcel larger than 5 acres.  50% of products sold must be raised on the premises.  Temporary stands for the sale of products are promoted up to six months per year. 	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
Commercial Greenhouse	Non-exempt only. 	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	Y
Commercial, livestock, dairy, poultry farm	Non-exempt only. Subject to restrictions in note "g"	Y	Y	N	Y	N	N	N	Y	Y
Wood harvesting, tree farm, nursery	Non-exempt only.	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y
Conservation land		Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
Commercial boarding stable, riding academy	Non-exempt only.	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	SP/ZBA	N
Commercial golf course		N	SP/ZBA	N	N	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	SP/ZBA
Commercial landing strip or heliport		N	SP/ZBA	N	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N	N	 SP/ZBA
Commercial recreational camping for transient guests	Subject to restrictions in Section 6.11.	N	N	N	N	SP/ZBA                SPA	N	N	N	N
Commercial fishing or ski grounds		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	Y	Y	N	N	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA
Windmill	Subject to restrictions in Section 6.18	N	SP/PB	N	N	N	N	N	SP/PB	SP/PB
Residential Uses										
Single family detached dwelling		Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N	Y	N
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
Residential Uses		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Dwelling conversions	The ZBA may issue a special permit for a one-family dwelling to accommodate up to four (4) families.  See note "h"	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP/ZBA	N
Multi-family dwelling	Subject to restrictions in Section 6.2.	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N	N	N
Accessory apartment	Subject to restrictions in Section 6.7.	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	SP/ZBA	Y	N
Estate lots	Subject to restrictions in Section 6.5.	N	SP/PB	N	N	N	N	N	N	N
Trailer	Subject to restrictions in Section 6.10.	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N	N	N
Room rental	Taking of boarders and/or roomers not to exceed four persons by a resident family.  Subject to signage regulations.	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Congregate housing for the elderly or handicapped	Subject to restrictions set forth in Sections 6.3 -- Special Use Regulations for Congregate Housing.	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N	Y	N
Open space community	Subject to restrictions set forth in Sections 6.4 -- Special Use Regulations for Open Space Communities.	N	SP/SPA     PB	N	N	N	N	N	SP/SPA   PB	N
Dwellings in the commercial recreational district	Residential uses permitted only where accessory to a permitted use such as a single-family dwelling for persons employed on the premises.	N	N	N	N	Y	N	N	N	N
										
Bed and Breakfast
Establishments		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	SP/ZBA	N
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
Government & Public Service Uses		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Government administration building		N	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Public utility administration building	Subject to restrictions in District( RV); see note "i" and in (CC), see note "j".	SP/ZBA	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Fire or police station		Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Municipal dog pound		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

Municipal highway department accessory uses		Y	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N
Civil defense facility		SP/ZBA	N	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N	N
Community center, facility for the elderly		Y	N	Y	N	N	N	N	Y	N
Childcare facility		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N
Childcare facility - exempt		Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
Institutional Uses										
Exempt educational uses		Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
Exempt Religious Uses		Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
Public library, museum		Y	Y	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	Y	Y	N
Public park, playground or recreation area		Y	Y	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	N	Y	Y
Non-exempt educational use		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N
Lighting for public park, 
playground or recreational area		
SP/ZBA	
SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	
SP/ZBA	
SP/ZBA	
SP/ZBA	
SP/ZBA	
SP/ZBA
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Neighborhood or community clubhouse, headquarters of fraternal organization	Shall serve primarily the residents of Monson.	SP/ZBA	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Private membership club, not conducted as gainful business		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	Y	Y	N	SP/ZBA	Y	N
Hospital, sanitarium		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N	N	N
										
Rest home, convalescent or nursing home		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N	N	N
Cemetery, crematory	Crematory use shall be restricted to the cemetery within which it is located.	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N	Y	N

Private museum, art gallery, craft center		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	SP/ZBA	N

Business Uses										

Retail Store		N	N	Y	Y	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N
Bank, loan agency		N	N	Y	Y	N	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N
Office building		N	N	Y	Y	N	Y	N	Y	N
Services	Businesses and personal services shops.	N	N	Y	Y	N	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N
Restaurant, tavern	For serving food or beverage to persons inside the building.  Catering and take out as accessory use only.	N	N	Y	Y	N	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N
Fast food establishment		N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N
Telephone exchange		N	N	Y	Y	N	Y	N	Y	N
										
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Auto service station, auto repair shop	Provided that all repair work shall be conducted in an enclosed building and no unregistered vehicles incapable of operation shall be stored in the open.  Subject to restrictions in note "k".	N	N	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N
Auto sales, motorcycle sales

Commercial Trucking
(adopted 11.14.2016)	Used car sales only where incidental to new car sales.


	        N

        N	N

        N	Y

SP/SPA
    ZBA

	Y

 SP/SPA
    ZBA	N

        N	N

 SP/SPA
    ZBA	N

          N     	Y

  SP/SPA
      ZBA
(adopted 
 5.8.2017)	N

        N

Radio and electrical repairs shop		N	N	Y	Y	N	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N
Funeral establishment		N	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Bowling alley		N	N	Y	Y	SP/ZBA	N	N	Y	N
										
Theater, except drive-in theater		N	N	Y	Y	SP/ZBA	N	N	Y	N
Printer		N	N	Y	Y	N	SP/ZBA	N	SP/ZBA	N
Medical or dental center or laboratory		N	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Veterinary establishment, place for boarding animals or raising pets for gainful purpose	Parcel must be 2 acres or more in size.	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	N	N	N	N

Motel, motor hotel	
Provided the lot area is not less than 2,000-sq. ft. for each rental unit.	
N	
N	
Y	
Y	
N	
N	
N	
P/ZBA	
N
Wholesale trade and storage warehouses, cold storage locker plant	Provided there is no manufacturing nor processing of materials.	N	N	Y	Y	N	Y	N	Y	N
Cleaning and laundry service	Laundromat and dry cleaners must comply with Water Supply Protection By-Law.	N	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	N
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Mixed residential/business uses


Medical Marijuana Treatment
Center/Registered Marijuana
Dispensary

Off –Site Medical Marijuana
Dispensary
	See Section 6.13.

	       N

       
      N



      N                    
                     	N


N



N
	SP/SPA    ZBA

N



N	SP/SPA     ZBA

N



N	N


N



N	N


Y
SPA


Y
SPA	N


N



N	N


N



N	N


N



N





Industrial Uses										
Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, assembly & storage of materials, mechanical products or equipment





	No use shall be permitted which would be detrimental or offensive or tend to reduce property values in the same or adjoining districts by reason of dirt, odor, fumes, smoke, gas, sewage, refuse, noise, excessive vibration or danger of fire or explosion.  Scrapping and salvage of motor vehicles and parts is not permitted.  No operations involving the rendering of fats, oils or viscera are permitted.  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	N	N	N	N	N	SP/SPA    ZBA	N	SP/ZBA	N










Whole business and distributing plant	The assembly of electrical appliances, instruments, products and devices, including the manufacture of parts.  Foundries for non-ferrous metals and the manufacture and storage of chemicals and plastics. 	N	N	N	N	N	Y	N	Y	N
Printing, publishing, packaging, data processing and allied uses	No use shall be permitted which would be detrimental or offensive or tend to reduce property values in the same or adjoining districts by reason of dirt, odor, fumes, smoke, gas, sewage, refuse, noise, excessive vibration or danger of fire or explosion.  	N	N	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N	Y	N
										
										
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Research or development laboratory	No use shall be permitted which would be detrimental or offensive or tend to reduce property values in the same or adjoining districts by reason of dirt, odor, fumes, smoke, gas, sewage, refuse, noise, excessive vibration or danger of fire or explosion.  No research or testing to be conducted outdoors unless expressly permitted by Special Permit.  Wholesale or retail sale of products is prohibited.  	N	N	N	N	N	Y	N	Y	N
Lumber yard & similar bulk storage of materials outside a structure		N	N	N	SP/ZBA	N	Y	N	Y	N
Accessory Uses										

Home occupation	
The use of a portion of a dwelling or accessory building which is incidental and subordinate to the residential use and is for gainful employment by the resident.  Home occupations shall include, but are not limited to the following: doctor, dentist, lawyer, engineer, artist, teacher of academic subjects, accountant, family day care worker, real estate or insurance agent, travel agent, secretarial service, tailor, dancing or music teacher, craft instructor, photographer, barber, beauty parlor operator, as well as the use of a portion of a dwelling or accessory building as a place for incidental work and storage in connection with his off-premises trade by a resident builder, carpenter, electrician, painter, plumber, or other artisan, or by a resident tree surgeon, landscape gardener, or similar person, provided that: 
a. Such use is clearly secondary to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes, of which the occupant must be the owner of the dwelling.
b. Not more than two persons, other than the residents of the premises, are regularly employed therein in connection with such use.
c. No trading in merchandise is regularly conducted except for products made on the premises or of parts or other items customarily maintained in connection with and incidental to such merchandise.
d. No external change in made which alters the residential appearance of the building.
e. All operations, including incidental storage, are carried on within the principal or accessory buildings, and that there is no outward evidence that the premises are being used for any purpose other than residential, except for an accessory sign.
		
Y	
Y	
Y	
Y	
N	
N	
N	
Y	
N
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Private garage or stables		Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	N	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA
										
										
Family Day Care, Large		SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA

Family Day Care, Home		
Y	
Y	
Y	
Y	
Y	
Y
	
Y	
Y	
Y
Sign	Subject to Sign By-Law in Section 5.3 requiring a permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
Swimming pool	Subject to Swimming Pool By-Law in Section 6.9.	Y	Y	SP/ZBA	SP/ZBA	Y	N	Y	Y	N
Private raising/keeping of livestock - not a farm	Parcel must be not less than 1 1/2 acres of land for first grazing animal and 1/2 acre for each additional animal.  No accessory building for the housing of animals is allowed within 75 feet of any lot line.	Y	Y	N	N	Y	N	Y	Y	N
										
Land Use Classification	Standards & Conditions			Zoning 	District					
		RV	RR	CC	GC	CR	I	RL	WSP	FPD
Unregistered vehicles	Any vehicle not registered shall be stored in a building or in a location that is not visible from a street or way, not to include farm machinery.	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
 
Town of Monson Dimensional and Density Regulations (Table 2)


District	Use	Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft. or as noted)	Minimum Frontage (ft.)	Minimum Front Yard (ft.)	Minimum Side Yard (ft.)	Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)	Maximum Height (ft.)	Maximum No. of Stories	Maximum Bldg. Coverage (%)	Minimum Open Space (%)	Other
RV	Any permitted use	20,000	125	40	15	40	40	3	25		
	Multi-family	31,000	125	40	40	40	40	3	25	30	15 foot landscaped buffer is required along side and rear lots abutting property not already containing a buffer strip along said lot line.  Maximum number of dwelling units per structure: 4.
	Congregate housing for elderly or handicapped	31,000 plus 2,000 per bedroom	125	40	40	40	40	3	25	30	Maximum number of dwelling units per structure: 6
RR	Any permitted use	60,000	200	50	20	50	40	3	15		
	Congregate housing for elderly or handicapped	Per dwelling unit: 44,000	For 3 dwelling units: 300	75	75	50	40	3	20	40	Maximum number of dwelling units per structure: 4
	Open space community	10 acres	500 (landscaped buffer along a way)								500-foot buffer off existing way
		Per dwelling unit: 30,000	125	40	20	40	40	3	15		New building lot on newly created way
 
Town of Monson Dimensional and Density Regulations (Table 2)

District	Use	Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft. or as noted)	Minimum Frontage (ft.)	Minimum Front Yard (ft.)	Minimum Side Yard (ft.)	Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)	Maximum Height (ft.)	Maximum No. of Stories	Maximum Bldg. Coverage (%)	Minimum Open Space (%)	Other
RR	Kennel	 More than 3 but less than 10 dogs: 4 acres; ten or more dogs: 10 acres	200	500	500	500	15	1	10		75-foot landscaped buffer required along side and rear lots abutting property not already containing a buffer strip along said lot line
	Multi-family	10 acres	500	150	100	100	40	3	20	30	Maximum number of units per structure: 8.  75-foot landscaped buffer required along side and rear lots abutting property not already containing a buffer strip along said lot line.
		Per dwelling unit: 20,000	200	50	20	50					
	Estate lots	10 acres	40	50	20	50	40	3	25		
CC	Any permitted use	15,000	100	20 note "a"	10 notes "b" & "c"	20 note "b"	40	3	50		
	Motel or motor inn	15,000 plus 2,000 per rental unit	100	20 note "a"	50	75	40	3	50		
GC	Any permitted use	50,000	200	40 note "a"	12 note "b"	30 note "b"	40	3	40		
CR	Camping trailer campgrounds	25 acres	500	200	75 note “d”	75 note "d"	40	3	30	40	Maximum number of campsites per acres: 10
 
Town of Monson Dimensional and Density Regulations (Table 2)

District	Use	Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft. or as noted)	Minimum Frontage (ft.)	Minimum Front Yard (ft.)	Minimum Side Yard (ft.)	Minimum Rear Yard (ft.)	Maximum Height (ft.)	Maximum No. of Stories	Maximum Bldg. Coverage (%)	Minimum Open Space (%)	Other
I	Any permitted use	40,000	150	40	30	30	40 note “f”	3 note “f”	40		
FPD	Any permitted use	40,000	note "e"	40	30	20	40	3	25		
WSP	Any permitted use	note "e"	note "e"	note "e"	note "e"	note "e"	note "e"	note "e"	note "e"		


Notes for Tables 1 & 2

 Note a	Front yards across the street from a residential district shall be landscaped with no parking in such yards.
 Note b	Side and rear yards shall have a 20-foot wide buffer as described in Section 5.1.10 of existing Bylaw.
 Note c	Where each owner of abutting lots in CC district agrees to build on a common lot line, no side yard shall be required, provided that no building or group of attached buildings constructed on separately owned lots shall result in combined rear yards, exceed 200 feet in total length between side yards giving vehicular access to a street or way.
 Note d	Side yard shall have a 100-ft. wide buffer and the rear yard shall have 200-ft. wide buffer as described in Section 5.1.10 of existing Bylaw.
 Note e	Within the overlay district, the dimensional regulations of the underlying district shall remain in effect.
 Note f	For a maximum building height over 40 feet in the industrial district, a special permit from the Fire Chief must be obtained.
 Note g 	The raising and keeping of livestock for the private use of the owner is permitted as an accessory use on a parcel which is not agriculturally exempt, but which contains not less than one and one-half (1 1/2) acres of land for the first grazing animal unit and an additional one half (1/2) acre of land for each additional grazing animal unit providing no accessory building for the housing of animals is located within 75 feet of any lot line.
 Note h 	The Board shall place such reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the granted exception as they deem necessary under the purpose of the Zoning Bylaws.
 Note i  	Public Utility installations, provided there are no service or storage yards in connection therewith, as a special permit for an exception after approval of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may require such safeguards as will preserve the residential character of the neighborhood.
 Note j 	Public utility building or structure, including storage yard, where properly landscape buffered from any other use. 
 Note k	Automotive service stations, public garages, and repair garages, provided: 
a.		No part of such use shall be less than 100 feet from a residence district;
b.	No vehicular access from such premises to a street shall be less than 300 feet along a street to the nearest part of property used or held to used for a school, library, church, playground, park, recreation, social or community center, or a hospital or institution for the ill, handicapped or feeble;
c. 	Vehicular accesses to such premises shall not be located where they will constitute a traffic hazard; such entrances and exits to street shall be approved by the Board of Selectmen as to location and construction with the intents and purposes of this Bylaw.


 
3.3 	NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES

3.3.1  	Applicability.  This Zoning By-law shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing required by M.G.L. c. 40A, s. 5 at which this Zoning By-law, or any relevant part thereof, was adopted.  Such prior, lawfully existing nonconforming uses and structures may continue, provided that no modification of the use or structure is accomplished, unless authorized hereunder.

3.3.2  	Nonconforming Uses.  The Board of Appeals may issue a special permit to change a nonconforming use in accordance with this section only if it determines that such change or extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood.  The following types of changes to nonconforming uses may be considered by the Board of Appeals:  

	1.  Change or extension of the use;
	2.  Change from a nonconforming use to another, less detrimental, nonconforming use.  

3.3.3  	Nonconforming Structures.  The Board of Appeals may issue a special permit to reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure in accordance with this section only if it determines that such reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood.  The following types of changes to nonconforming structures may be considered by the Board of Appeals:

	1.  Reconstructed, extended or structurally changed; 

2.  Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner.

3.3.4  	Variance Required.  The reconstruction, extension or structural change of a nonconforming structure in such a manner as to increase an existing nonconformity, or create a new nonconformity, including the extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming distance within a required yard, shall require the issuance of a variance from the Board of Appeals; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to nonconforming single and two family residential structures, which shall be governed by Section 3.3.5, below.

3.3.5  	Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures - Alterations as of Right.  Nonconforming single and two family residential structures may be reconstructed, extended, altered, or structurally changed upon the issuance of a building permit after a determination by the Building Commissioner that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure.  The following circumstances shall not be deemed to increase the nonconforming nature of said structure:  

1.  Alteration to a structure which is located on a lot with insufficient area, where such alteration complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, and building height requirements.

2.	Alteration to a structure which is located on a lot with insufficient frontage where
such alteration complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage, and building height requirements.

3.  Alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required yard or setback areas, where such alteration complies with all current setback, yard, building coverage and building height requirements.

4.  Alteration to a nonconforming structure which will not increase the footprint of the existing structure providing that existing height restrictions shall not be exceeded.

5.  Alteration to the side or face of a structure which is nonconforming with regard to a required yard or setback area where such alteration will not encroach upon such area to a distance greater that the existing structure. 

3.3.6  	Nonconforming Single and Two Family Residential Structures - Alterations by Special Permit.  In the event that the Building Commissioner, after applying Section 3.3.5, above, determines that the nonconforming nature of such structure would be increased by the proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change, the Board of Appeals may, by special permit, allow such reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change where it determines that the proposed modification will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood.

3.3.7  	Abandonment or Non-Use.  A nonconforming use or structure, which has been abandoned, or not used for a period of two years, shall lose its protected status and be subject to all of the provisions of this Zoning By-law. 

3.3.8	Reconstruction after Catastrophe or Demolition.  Any nonconforming structure may be reconstructed after a catastrophe or after demolition in accordance with the following provisions:

1.	(adopted 11.26.2012)  Reconstruction of said premises shall commence within two years
after such catastrophe or demolition.  Notwithstanding the previous sentence, a nonconforming structure destroyed or partially destroyed so as to be unable to be used by the June 1, 2011 F-3 tornado may extend for up to one (1) year the timeframe to reconstruct said premises for a total of up to three (3) years.  However no extension under this sentence shall be granted beyond June 2, 2014.


2.  The reconstructed building(s) shall be located on the footprint and within the cube of the original nonconforming structure, as defined by the preexisting footprint and height thereof.  

3.3.9  	Reversion to Nonconformity.  No nonconforming use shall, if changed to a conforming use, revert to a nonconforming use.

3.4	DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS

3.4.1	Table of Dimensional Regulations.  All permitted uses and uses allowed by special permit shall be in conformity with the dimensional and density regulations set forth in Dimensional and Density Regulations (Table 2).

3.4.2   	Land for Cars and Parking.  The use of land for access to, or for parking in connection with a use shall be considered to be accessory to and a part of such use; this provision shall not prohibit access across a commercial district to an industrial district, but shall prohibit access to business or industrial uses across a residential district.

3.4.3	Corner Visibility.  Corner Clearances: Between the lines of streets intersecting at an angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees and a line joining points on such lines twenty-five (25) feet distant from that point of intersection, no building nor structure may be erected, and no vegetation may be maintained between a height of three (3) feet and a height of eight (8) feet, and above the plane through their average grades.

3.4.4 	Residential Coverage Requirements.  No building nor structure shall be built in any residence district except in conformance with the following requirements and land hereafter divided, subdivided, or sold shall make provision for conformance with these requirements. Eaves, chimneys, and other architectural features may project not more than 24 inches into the required yards and uncovered steps may project into the required yards. 

3.4.5 	Location of Detached Accessory Buildings.  No detached accessory building shall be built in any required front or side yard nor within five feet of the rear lot line.

3.4.6  	Gas and Oil Pipe Lines.  No building used for human occupancy or human habitation shall be located less than 40 feet from the right-of-way of any high-pressure gas or liquid petroleum transmission pipeline. Any pressure of one hundred (100) P.S.I. or greater shall be considered to be high pressure.

SECTION 4.0  OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
4.1 	FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT 

4.1.1  	Purposes.  The purposes of the Floodplain District are:

1. 	To provide that lands in the Town of Monson subject to seasonal or periodic flooding described hereinafter shall not be used for residence or other purposes in such manner as to endanger the health or safety of the occupant thereof.

	2. 	To protect, preserve and maintain the water table and water recharge areas within the Town so as to preserve present and potential water supplies for the public health and safety of the Town of Monson.

	3.	To assure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the water course(s) within the
	Town of Monson in order to provide adequate and safe floodwater storage capacity to protect persons and property against the hazards of flood inundation.

4.1.2 	Scope of Authority.  The Floodplain District is an overlay district and shall be superimposed on the other districts established by this Bylaw. All regulations of the Monson Zoning Bylaw applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in effect, except that where the Floodplain District imposes additional regulations, such regulations shall prevail.

4.1.3 	District Delineation.  

	1.	The Floodplain District is defined as all lands designated as Zone A or Zone A 1-30 on the Town of Monson Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) panels 250145-0008-9, 0015-0019, 0035 and 0040, of plans on file with the Town Clerk or as determined by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
	
	2. 	The floodway boundaries are delineated on the Monson Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) panel 250145-0001-0045 dated June 1981 and modified by subsequent changes or as determined by a registered professional engineer and approved by the Floodplain Administrator

	3. 	The FIRM and FBFM maps are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk.
4.1.4  	Permitted Uses.  In the Floodplain District no new building shall be erected or constructed, and no existing structure shall be altered, enlarged or moved; no dumping, filling or earth transfer or relocation shall be permitted; nor shall any land, building or structure be used for any purposes except: 
		
		1.  Conservation of water plants and wildlife.
	
		2. 	Outdoor recreation, including play areas, nature study, boating, fishing and hunting where otherwise legally permitted, but excluding buildings and structures.

	3. 	Wildlife management areas, foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths and bridges, provided such uses do not affect the natural flow pattern on any watercourse.

	4. 	Grazing and farming, including truck gardening and harvesting of crops.
	
		5. 	Forestry and nurseries.

	6. 	Dwellings lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this Bylaw.
	
	7. 	Temporary, non-residential structures used in connection with fishing, growing, 	harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises.

4.1.5	 Uses by Special Permit.   No structure or building shall be erected, constructed, substantially improved over 50 percent of assessed market value or otherwise created or moved; no earth or other materials dumped, filled, excavated, or transferred, unless a special permit is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.  The applicant shall submit five (5) copies of the Special Permit Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals. In addition, the applicant shall also file one copy of the plan with the Conservation Commission.

Uses allowed by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 7.3 within the Floodplain District are described in Section 3.0 and shall be subject to the following additional restrictions:

	1. The following requirements apply in the Flood Plain District:

(a)  Within Zone A or Zones A1-30, where base flood elevation is not provided on the FIRM or FBFM, the applicant shall obtain any existing base flood elevation date. These data will be reviewed by the Building Inspector for their reasonable utilization toward meeting the elevation or flood proofing requirements, as appropriate, of the State Building Code.

	2.  The following provisions apply in the Floodway designated on the FBFM:

					(a)  Within the Floodway designated on the FBFM, no encroachments (including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, or other development) shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed development, as a result of compensating actions, will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of a 100 year flood in accordance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s regulations for the National Flood Insurance Program.
		
					(b)	 Any encroachment in the Floodway meeting the above standard must also comply with the floodplain requirements of the State Building Code.

4.1.6 	Additional Special Permit Criteria.  In addition to the Special Permit criteria specified in Section 7.3, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit if it finds:

		1. The proposed use will not create increased flood hazards, which shall be detrimental to 
		the public health, safety and welfare; and,

2. The proposed use will comply in all respects to the provisions of the underlying District or Districts within which the land is located.

	3. The proposed is in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws, including the 
	Massachusetts Building Code and the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. 
	Chapter 131, Section 40).

4.1.7 	Prohibited Uses.  The following uses are specifically prohibited and may not be allowed by special permit:

		1. Solid waste landfills, junkyards and dumps.

		2. Business and industrial uses, not agricultural, which manufacture, use process, store or 
		dispose of hazardous materials or wastes as a principal activity, including but not limited 
		to metal plating, chemical manufacturing, wood preserving, furniture stripping, dry 
		cleaning and auto body repair.
		
		3. The outdoor storage of salt, other de-icing chemicals, pesticides or herbicides shall be 
		prohibited without suitable overhead protection from weather. All storage shall be within 
		an impervious containment area.

		4.	Draining, dredging, excavation or disposal of soil or mineral substances, except as 
		necessary for permitted uses or uses allowed by special permit, as specified in the Earth 
		Removal Bylaw, Section 6.6.

4.2 WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION DISTRICT
  
4.2.1 Purpose of District. The purpose of this Water Supply Protection District is to:

1.  Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of the Town of Monson.

2. Preserve and protect existing and potential sources of drinking water supplies;

3. Conserve the natural resources of the town; and

4. Prevent temporary and permanent contamination of the environment.

4.2.2 Scope of Authority. The Water Supply Protection District is an overlay district superimposed on the zoning districts.  This overlay district shall apply to all new construction, reconstruction, or expansion of existing buildings and new or expanded uses.  Applicable activities/ uses in a portion of one of the underlying zoning districts which fall within the Water Supply Protection District must additionally comply with the requirements of this district.  Uses prohibited in the underlying zoning districts shall not be permitted in the Water Supply Protection District.

4.2.3 Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms are defined below:

Aquifer:  Geologic formation composed of rock, sand or gravel that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water of potentially recoverable water.

Water Supply Protection District: The zoning district defined to overlay other zoning districts in the Town of Monson.  The Water Supply Protection District may include specifically designated recharge areas.

Impervious Surface:  Material or structure on, above, or below the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil.

Mining:  The removal or relocation of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand, gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock.

Potential Drinking Water Sources: Areas which could provide significant potable water in the future.

Recharge Areas: Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and carry it to aquifers. Recharge areas may include areas designated as Zone I, Zone II, or Zone III.

Toxic or Hazardous Material:  Any substance or mixture of physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual, or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water in the Town of Monson.  Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation; synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as Toxic or Hazardous under Massachusetts General Laws (M.G.L.) Chapter(c.) 21C and 21E and 310 CMR 30.00, and also include such products as solvents and thinners in quantities greater than normal household use.

4.2.4 Establishment and Delineation of  Groundwater Protection District. For the purposes of this district, there are hereby established within the town certain groundwater protection areas, consisting of aquifers or recharge areas which are delineated on a map.  This map is at a scale of 1 inch to 12,000 feet and is entitled "Zone II Map, Bethany, Palmer & Bunyan Road Wells, Town of Monson," dated October 2001.  This map is hereby made a part of the town zoning bylaw and is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.

4.2.5 District Boundary Disputes. If the location of the District boundary in relation to a particular parcel is in doubt, resolution of boundary disputes shall be through a Special Permit application to the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA).  Any application for a special permit for this purpose shall be accompanied by adequate documentation. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land to show where the bounds should be located.  At the request of the owner(s), the town may engage a professional engineer, hydrologist, geologist, or soil scientist to determine more accurately the boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land, and may charge the owner(s) for the cost of the investigation.

4.2.6 Use Regulations. In the Water Supply Protection District the following regulations shall apply:

A.  Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted within the Water Supply Protection District, provided that all necessary permits, orders, or approvals required by local, state, or federal laws are also obtained:

1.Conservation of soil, water, plants, and wildlife;

2.Outdoor recreation, nature study, boating, fishing, and hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
	
3. Foot, bicycle and/or horse paths, and bridges;

4. Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splash boards, and other water control, supply and conservation devices;

5. Maintenance, repair, and enlargement of any existing structure, subject to Section B (prohibited uses) and Section C (special permitted uses);

6. Residential development, subject to Section B (prohibited uses) and Section C (special permitted uses);

7. Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting, and grazing, subject to Section B (prohibited uses) and Section C (special permitted uses);

Underground storage tanks related to these activities are not categorically permitted 

B. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited:
		
1. Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006;
		
2. Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in M.G.L.c. 140B, §1;

3. Landfills receiving only wastewater and/or septage residuals including those approved by the      Department pursuant to M.G.L.c. 21, §26 through 53; M.G.L.c. 111, §17; M.G.L c. 83, §6 and 7, and regulations promulgated thereunder;

4. Facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste that are subject to M.G.L.c. 21C and 310 CMR 30.00, except for the following:
      		
(a) Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR 30.000;

(b) Household hazardous waste centers and events under 310 CMR 30.390;
      		
(c) Waste oil retention facilities required by M.G.L. c. 21, § 52A;
		
		(d) Water remediation treatment works approved by DEP for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface waters;


5.  Petroleum, fuel oil, and heating oil bulk stations and terminals including, but not limited to, hose listed under Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 5171 and 5983.  SIC Codes are established by the US Office of Management and Budget and may be determined by referring to the publication, Standard Industrial Classification Manual, and any other subsequent amendments;

6.  Storage of liquid hazardous materials, as defined in M.G.L. c. 21E, and/or liquid petroleum products unless such storage is:

(a) Above ground level, and;

(b) On an impervious surface, and

(c) Either
(1) In container(s) or above ground tank(s) within a building, or;

(2) Outdoors in covered container(s) or above ground tank(s) in an area that has a containment system designed and operated to hold either 10% of the total possible storage capacity of all containers, or 110% of the largest container’s storage capacity, whichever is greater;

7.  Storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31;

8.  Storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage, including loading areas, is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;

9.  Storage of animal manure unless covered or contained in accordance with the specifications of the Natural Resource Conservation Service;

10. Earth removal, consisting of the removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, or any other earth material (including mining activities) to within 4 feet of historical high groundwater as determined from monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data compiled by the United States Geological Survey, except for excavations for building foundations, roads, or utility works;

11.   Discharge to the ground of non-sanitary wastewater including industrial and commercial process waste water, except:
a) The replacement or repair of an existing treatment works that will not result in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of the existing treatment works;
b) Treatment works approved by the Department designed for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface water and operating in compliance with 314 CMR 5.05(3) or 5.05(13);
c) Publicly owned treatment works;

12.  Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing deicing chemicals brought in from outside the district;

13. Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in MGL Chapter 128, §64, unless such storage is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.

C. Uses and Activities Requiring a Special Permit. The following uses and activities are permitted only upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority  (SPGA) under such conditions as they may require:

1.   Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that does not conform to the Water Supply Protection District;

2.  Those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous materials in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use, permitted in the underlying zoning (except as prohibited under Section B).  Such activities shall require a special permit to prevent contamination of groundwater;

3. Any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 2500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater.  A system for groundwater recharge must be provided which does not degrade groundwater quality.  For non residential uses, recharge shall be by storm water infiltration basins or similar system covered with natural vegetation, and dry wells shall be used only where other methods are infeasible.  For all non-residential uses, all such basins and wells shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contamination.  The owner shall permanently maintain any and all recharge areas in full working order. 

Changes of use or modification to existing underground storage tanks are not categorically permitted
.

4.2.7  Procedures for Issuance of Special Permit

1. The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under this bylaw shall be the Monson Planning Board.  Such special permit shall be granted if the SPGA determines, in conjunction with the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and Town Water and Sewer Department that the intent of this bylaw, as well as its specific criteria, are met.  The SPGA shall not grant a special permit under this section unless the petitioner's application materials include, in the SPGA's opinion, sufficiently detailed, definite, and credible information to support positive findings in relation to the standards given in this section.  The SPGA shall document the basis for any departures from the recommendations of the other town boards or agencies in its decision         

2. Upon receipt of the special permit application, the SPGA shall transmit one copy to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and Town Water and Sewer Department for their written recommendations.  Failure to respond in writing within 35 days of receipt by the Board shall indicate approval or no desire to comment by said agency.  The applicant shall furnish the necessary number of copies of the application.

3. The SPGA may grant the required special permit only upon finding that the proposed use meets the following standards, those specified in Section 4.16 of this bylaw, and any regulations or guidelines adopted by the SPGA. The proposed use must: 

(a) In no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect the existing or potential quality of quantity of water that is available in the Water Supply Protection District; and

(b) Be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related natural characteristics of the site to be developed.

4. The SPGA may adopt regulations to govern design features of projects.  Such regulations shall be consistent with subdivision regulations adopted by the municipality.

5. The applicant shall file six copies of a site plan and attachments.  The site plan shall be drawn at a proper scale as determined by the SPGA and be stamped by a professional engineer.  Qualified professionals shall prepare all additional submittals.  The site plan and its attachments shall at a minimum include the following information where pertinent:

(a) A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fuels, and other potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use;

(b) For those activities using or storing such hazardous materials, a hazardous materials management plan shall be prepared and filed with the Hazardous Materials Coordinator, Fire Chief, and Board of Health.  The plan shall include:

(1) Provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up procedures;

(2) Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces;

(3) Evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act 310 CMR 30, including obtaining an EPA identification number from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.  

(c) Proposed down-gradient location(s) for groundwater monitoring well(s), should the SPGA deem the activity a potential groundwater threat.

6. The SPGA shall hold a hearing, in conformity with the provision of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9, within 65 days after the filing of the application and after the review by the Town Boards, Departments, and Commissions. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication and posting and by first class mailings to "parties of interest" as defined in MGL Chapter 40A, §11.  The decision of the SPGA and any extension, modification, or renewal thereof shall be filed with the SPGA and Town Clerk within 90 days following the closing of the public hearing.  Failure of the SPGA to act within 90 days shall be deemed as a granting of the permit. However, regardless of how the permit is approved, no work shall commence until a certification of the permit from the Town clerk is recorded as required in MGL 40A § 11

4.2.8 Servability. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall give written notice of any violation of this Bylaw to the responsible person as soon as possible after detection of a violation or a continuing violation.  Notice to the assessed owner of the property shall be deemed notice to the responsible person. Such notice shall specify the requirement or restriction violated and the nature of the violation, and may also identify the actions necessary to remove or remedy the violations and preventive measures required for avoiding future violations and a schedule of compliance.  A copy of such notice shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, and Water and Sewer Department.  The cost of containment, clean-up, or other action of compliance shall be borne by the owner and operator of the premises. 
A determination that any portion or provision of this overlay protection district is invalid shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder.

4.3 	SCENIC DISTRICT

4.3.1	Purpose.  The purposes of the Scenic District Bylaw are to:

1.  Create, preserve and enhance areas considered to be of natural scenic beauty including wooded canyons, ridges and fine vistas or viewsheds.

2.  Regulate removal, filling, excavation or alteration of land within a scenic area, which is likely to have a significant adverse effect on watershed resources or natural scenic qualities.

4.3.2	Scope of Authority.  The Scenic District is an overlay district and shall be superimposed on the other districts established by this Bylaw. All regulations of the Monson Zoning Bylaw applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in effect, except that where the Scenic District imposes additional regulations, such regulations shall prevail.

4.3.3	Designated Area.  The Scenic District Bylaw shall be applied to areas of scenic value as designated on the overlay map entitled “Scenic District, Town of Monson” on file with the Town Clerk.

4.3.4	General Application Procedure.  Any new construction or establishment of any dwelling, sign or other facility which requires a building permit within the Scenic District is subject to review by the Scenic District Review Board if any such action affects the exterior appearance. The procedures for board review, the Scenic District review criteria and the Scenic District standards are further detailed in Sections 4.3.8, 4.3.9 and 4.3.10, respectively.  If the construction, establishment or alteration of any building, sign or facility results in the removal, filling, excavation or alteration of land within a Scenic District, an application for a special permit, as specified in Section 6.6.5, shall be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals for their review. The procedures for review and development standards are further specified in Section 4.3.12.

4.3.5	Scenic District Review Definitions.  For the purposes of this Bylaw:

1.  Prominent Ridgelines: Ridgelines that form the limits of significant viewsheds and provide a natural backdrop for village development. They vary considerably in scale, width, scope, length, alignment, accessibility and relationship to adjacent uses. 

2.  Viewsheds: Locations that provide the observer a visual perspective of the area in terms of foreground, middleground, and background.


4.3.6	Uses Not Permitted.  The following uses are not permitted in the Scenic District:

	1.  Surface mining;
	
	2.  Pipelines located above ground;
	
	3.  Power plants;
	
4.  Refineries or oil or gas tanks storing over 5,000 gallons above ground;
	
	5.  Auto sales, storage, or salvage yards;
	
	6.  Solid waste disposal sites;
	
	7.  Wrecking yards.

4.3.7	Scenic District Review Board.

1.  In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, a Scenic District Review Board is hereby established. The Scenic District Review Board shall review applications for all actions that are subject to the provisions of this section and shall make recommendations to the appropriate decision-making body concerning the conformance of the proposed action to the design review standards contained herein.

2.  The Scenic District Review Board shall consist of five members.  Appointments to the Scenic District Review Board shall be made as follows:

(a)  One member shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the Planning Board, with the concurrence of a majority of said Board;

(b)  One member shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the Historical Commission, with the concurrence of a majority of said Commission; and,

(c)  One member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the Conservation Commission, with the concurrence of a majority of said Board.

(d)  Two members shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the Board of Selectmen, with the concurrence of a majority of said Board.

3.  The terms of all members of the Scenic District Review Board shall be three years, except that when the Board is originally established, the Board of Selectmen shall make their appointments for a two-year term and the Conservation Commission shall make their appointments for a one-year term.

4.3.8	Procedures for Review by the Scenic District Review Board.  

1.  Applications for all actions subject to review by the Scenic District Review Board shall be made by completing an application form and submitting it to the Building Inspector. Application forms are available from the Office of the Building Inspector.

2.  All applications to the Scenic District Review Board shall include all information required by the rules and regulations of the Scenic District Review Board, as applicable, in addition to any other information that is required under this Bylaw as part of an application for a special permit, variance or building permit.

3.  Upon receipt of an application for Scenic District review, the Building Inspector shall immediately transmit the application to the Scenic District Review Board. The Scenic District Review Board shall review the application and return its recommendations in writing to the Building Inspector within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the application. If the application for Scenic District review is associated with an application for a variance or a special permit, the Building Inspector shall immediately transmit the Scenic District Review Board’s recommendations to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals respectively.

4.3.9	Scenic District Review Applications.  To facilitate siting and design of buildings 
sensitively related to the natural setting, applications for Scenic District review of proposed development in the scenic district must be accompanied by the following:

	1.  Plot plan;
	
2.  View points - Photographs of the development site taken from points along the street, together with a map indicating the distance between these points and the site;

3.  Placement, height and physical characteristics of all existing and proposed buildings and structures located on the development site;

	4.  Landscape plan; and

5.  Existing and finished topography of proposed development site map with at least five-foot contour lines.

4.3.10	Scenic District Review Criteria.  

1.  Scenic District review should ensure that when man-made structures are built in scenic areas, they are sensitively related to the natural setting and that special consideration has been given to their siting and design.

	2.  Any Scenic District application may be approved where consistent with the following:

(a) The plan has taken maximum feasible measures to reduce the scenic impact of the use in the Scenic District;

(b) Where public views will be unavoidably affected by the proposed use, architectural and landscaping measures have been employed so as to eliminate significant degradation of the existing visual character of the site;

(c) Operational safeguards have been employed where needed to mitigate against sources of dust, odors or smoke;

	(d) The standards set forth in Section 4.3 are met.

3.  Additionally, design should be aimed at achieving an aesthetic standard or 
goal in harmony with nature.  The following design elements should be given special consideration:

(a) Building Mass and Siting.  Foundations should be constructed to reflect the natural slope of the terrain. Excessive support members or mechanical systems should be covered or screened. Rooflines and roof surfaces should be an important part of the building design. Sloped roofs should reflect the natural slope of the terrain.  The placement of buildings and structures shall not detract from the visual setting or obstruct significant views.

(b) Landscaping.  The removal of native vegetation, especially timber, shall be minimized and the replacement vegetation and landscaping shall be compatible with vegetation of the designated area.

(c) Building Materials and Architectural Style.  Natural building materials such as brick, stone, masonry or wood should be emphasized in the design of the exterior.  Architectural style shall reflect the traditional New England character of community and shall promote the New England Village concept.

(d) Colors.  Preference should be given to “earth” colors, such as olive, ochre, sienna, gray, gray green, gray blue, etc. Warm colors may be appropriate in small accessory treatment or for design details. 

(e) Accessory Buildings.  Antennas should not be silhouetted against the view, preferably not mounted on roof.  Fencing placed near the street should be of a height to allow for view. Swimming pools and equipment sheds should not be placed in front yard area.

4.3.11	Scenic District Review Development Standards.  No Scenic District Review application may be approved unless the following standards are met:

1.  Buildings and landscaping are to be designed and located on the site to blend with the natural terrain and vegetation and preserve the scenic character of the site.

2.  Building sites shall be directed away from the crest of hills in order to preserve the integrity of the area.

3.  Retaining walls may be used to create usable yard space in the side and rear yard. Retaining walls in the exposed side and downhill portion of a lot shall be screened with appropriate landscaping materials.

	4.  Building materials shall blend with the natural landscape.

5.  Structures, signs, and plant materials are to be constructed, installed, planted, or painted to complement and enhance scenic views.

6.  Potentially unsightly features such as parking lots, communication towers, etc., are to be located in areas not visible from the street in the Scenic District. Where it is not possible to locate such features out of view, they are to be screened from view by planting and/or fences, walls, or berms. Screening as required under this Section is to utilize primarily natural materials rather than solid fencing, preferably vegetation in conjunction with low earth berms.

7.  Any grading or earth-moving operation in conjunction with a proposed development is to be planned and executed in such manner that final contours appear to be consistent with the existing terrain both on and adjacent to the site.

8.  The number of access roads to or from the street in the Scenic District is to be minimized wherever possible, consistent with safety and circulation needs.

9.  Business or industrial uses other than restaurants, recreation, or travel-related uses such as gasoline service stations and roadside stands are to be conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.

10.  Trees or groves, which contribute to the visual attractiveness of the site, may not be removed, unless necessary for safety reasons or to provide the least cleared area sufficient to locate and construct approved roads and structures on the site. Selective clearing of vegetation may be permitted where views may be presently obscured by such vegetation adjoining or within 200 feet of a public or private way, subject to approval of tree removals.

11.  The size, height and design of on-premise signs should be the minimum necessary for identification.

	12.  Utilities shall be constructed and routed underground except in those situations where natural features prevent the underground siting or where safety considerations necessitate aboveground construction and routing. Aboveground utilities shall be constructed and routed to minimize detrimental effects on the visual setting.
	
	13.  Developments for more than one structure shall incorporate variable setback, multiple orientations, and other site-planning techniques to avoid the appearance of a solid line of development.

4.3.12	Scenic District Earth Removal.  

1.  The Scenic District shall comply with the earth removal procedural guidelines as specified in Section 6.6.1 of this Bylaw. However, the applicant may submit, or the Planning Board may require, any further information, which will assist in the review and which, is deemed necessary to determine the effect of the proposed activity in the Scenic District.

	2.  The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Section 6.6.3 of this Bylaw.
	
	3.   Additional exceptions - the following shall be used as additional exceptions to the earth removal Bylaw for Scenic Districts:
	
	(a) The Act does not apply to owners of land who propose to cut forest products on land devoted to forest purposes and who have complied with the provisions of the Forest Cutting Practices Act, M.G.L. Ch. 132, by obtaining a permit thereunder;
	
	(b) The Act does not apply to any activity which is subject to the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40, as indicated by a valid order of conditions or positive Determination of Applicability issues thereunder.
	
	(c) The Act shall not apply to any structure (or change of land use) commended before the Act becomes effective hereunder.
	
	4.  Violation and Enforcement
	
	(a) Any person, other than a bona fide purchaser, who purchases or otherwise acquires land upon which an activity has been done in violation of this Bylaw shall forthwith comply with the conditions of the special permit or restore the land to its condition prior to the violation. Failure to do so is in itself a violation of this Bylaw.
	
	(b) The Zoning Board of Appeals, its agents, officers, and employees, may enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of carrying out this Bylaw.
	
	(c) If an applicant fails to commence work within one year following the date of issuance of an order, such inaction shall constitute an abandonment of the project, and the Zoning Board of Appeals, after notice to the applicant, may revoke the special permit.
	
	(d)  The Zoning Board of Appeals may revoke an order if it finds that the applicant has exceeded the scope of the activity as set forth in the special permit or has not complied with the conditions set forth in the special permit, or if it determines that facts not available or not brought to its attention at the time the special permit was issued, warrant such revocation.

	 SECTION 5.0  GENERAL REGULATIONS
	
	5.1 	PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR GENERAL AND CENTRAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES
	
5.1.1	Purpose and Applicability.  The purpose of environmental performance standards is to ensure that any use allowed by right or Special Permit in any district is conducted in a manner which does not adversely affect the surrounding natural or human environment by creating a dangerous, injurious or objectionable condition. The following environmental controls shall be enforced by the building inspector and shall apply throughout the life of the use or structure.

5.1.2 Lighting. (Adopted at Town Meeting 5/12/2014)  All Site lighting shall to the extent feasible minimize light pollution, including glare and light trespass, while maintaining safety, visibility and security of individuals and property. 

1.	Lighting shall be shielded to prevent direct glare and light trespass, and shall be contained to the target area to the extent feasible.  Light trespass beyond the property line and above a 90 degree horizontal plane is prohibited.

2.	All outdoor lighting shall have full cutoff fixtures. Cutoffs shall shield bulbs from visibility.

3.	General site lighting shall focus light downwards in order to prevent light from going upwards or reaching off-site areas

(a)	The horizontal plane of the bottom of lamp fixtures shall not exceed 90 degrees. No up lighting is allowed: parking, security and aesthetic lighting shall shine downward.

(b)	Spotlights used to illuminate buildings, signs or specific site features may point upward toward an object but shall be targeted on such objects so as to prevent direct up lighting. Cutoffs shall limit lighting to a 45 degree angle above the horizontal plane. 

(c)	Upward search or spotlighting of the sky for entertainment or advertising purposes is prohibited.


4.	All nonessential lighting, including display, parking and sign lighting, shall be automatically turned off after business hours, leaving only the lighting necessary for site security.

5.	Light pole heights shall be a maximum of 25 feet for the General Commercial Industrial districts, and a maximum of 16 feet for the Central Commercial District. Greater pole heights may be allowed with site plan approval from the Planning Board. 

6.	Pedestrian lighting should be provided on high pedestrian volume corridors/areas or where a special design treatment is desired to supplement roadway/parking lighting. Pedestrian lighting should be consistent throughout a site and minimize variance between bright and dark areas. For high crime or activity areas, higher values may permitted by the Permit Granting Authority.

Commercial/industrial site lighting output standards by district
Zoning District	Maximum (footcandle)	At Property Line
(footcandle)
General Commercial and Industrial	5	0
Central Commercial	5	0
Pedestrian corridors/areas	1	0





		
	


	5.1.3 	Noise
	
	1.  Excessive noise at unreasonable hours shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to volume, frequency, shrillness or intermittence.

2.  The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular or frequent source of sound produced by any use or activity shall not exceed the following limits at the property line of the sound source:
	
		Source Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A’s)
	District 				               7 a.m. - 10 p.m. 		  10 p.m. - 7 a.m.
		General & Central Commercial 		65 				60
		Industrial 						70 				65
		Residential 					55 				45
	
	Sound pressure level shall be measured at all major lot lines, at a height of at least four (4) feet above the ground surface. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter meeting the standards of the American Standards Institute, ANSI SI.4-1961 “American Standards Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters”. The instrument shall be set to the A-weighted response scale and the meter to slow response. Measurements shall be conducted in accordance with ANSI SI.2-1962  “American Standard meter for the Physical Measurements of Sound”.
	
	3.  Sound levels specified shall not be exceeded for more than 15 minutes in any one day, except for temporary construction or maintenance work, agricultural activity, timber harvesting, traffic or railway noise, church bells, emergency warning devices, parades or other similar special circumstances.
	
	4.  No person shall engage in or cause very loud construction activities on a site abutting residential use between the hours of 10 p.m. of one day and 7 a.m. of the following day.
	
	5.1.4 	Odor.  No use shall be permitted to produce excessive, offensive or harmful odors, fumes, dust or vibration perceptible without instruments for more than 15 minutes in any one day at any location more than 200 feet from the boundaries of the originating premises, except for temporary construction or maintenance work, agricultural activity, parades or similar special circumstances.
	
	5.1.5   	Storm Water Runoff.  In those areas not served by storm drains, the rate of surface water run-off from a site shall not increase after construction. If needed to meet this requirement and to maximize groundwater recharge, increased runoff from impervious surfaces shall be recharged on site by being diverted to vegetated surfaces for infiltration or through the use of detention ponds. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are and shall require oil, grease and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants.
	
	5.1.6 	Erosion Control.  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practical, by minimizing tree removal and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. These regulations are intended to supplement the Wetlands Protection Act. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of streams and water bodies shall be minimized by using the following erosion control practices:
	
	1.  The duration of exposure of disturbed areas due to stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regarding shall be kept to a minimum.
	
	2.  During construction, temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed areas from erosion. Until a disturbed area is permanently stabilized, sediment in runoff water shall be trapped by using staked haybales or sedimentation traps.
	
	3.  Permanent erosion control and vegetative measures shall be in accordance with the erosion/sedimentation/vegetative practices recommended by the Soil Conservation Service.
	
	4.  All slopes exceeding 15% resulting from site grading shall be either covered with 4 inches of topsoil and planted with a vegetative cover sufficient to prevent erosion or be stabilized by a retaining wall.
	
	5.  Dust control shall be used during grading operations if the grading is to occur within 200 feet of an occupied residence of place of business. Dust control methods may consist of grading fine soils on calm days only or dampening the ground with water.
	
	5.1.7 	Water Quality.  All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, hazardous materials or wastes, and potentially harmful raw materials shall be located within an impervious, diked containment area adequate to hold the total volume of liquid kept within the storage area.
	
	5.1.8 	Explosive Materials.  No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground, unless they are located in anchored tanks at least seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, town way or interior roadway or 40 feet from lot line for underground tanks; plus all relevant federal and state regulations shall also be met.  Propane gas tanks in 100 lb. cylinders (or smaller) shall be exempt from these safety regulations.
	
	5.1.9 	Screening and Buffer Zones.  Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installation, sand and gravel extraction operations and areas used for the storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts metal or any other articles of salvage or refuse shall have sufficient setbacks and screening to provide a visual buffer sufficient to eliminate their adverse impact on surrounding properties (a dense evergreen hedge 6 feet or more in height). All such plantings shall be maintained as an effective visual screen; plants, which die, shall be replaced within one growing season. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be provided and be maintained in good condition.
	
	5.1.10	Landscaped Buffer Strip.  A landscaped buffer strip is intended to provide in a reasonable time a visual barrier between different land uses. Except for vehicular and pedestrian passways, the area shall be used only for an interplanting of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, with lawn or other suitable and appropriate ground cover.  Suitable existing growth may be incorporated into the planting. Where considered appropriate in the judgment of the permit granting authority, walls and fences may be used in lieu of plantings. A planting plan showing the types, sizes and locations of material to be used shall be subject to the approval of the permit granting authority. The permit granting authority may waive the requirements of the visual barrier where it deems it advisable, for example, where a street is the dividing line between different land uses. Proper maintenance of a required landscaped buffer strip shall be the responsibility of the owner, and shall be a condition of conformance with the Zoning Bylaw.  The buffer strip shall be sufficient to mitigate any noise and/or dust that may arise during the construction phase of the development or that may result from the normal daily operation of the development.
	5.2 	COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND LANDSCAPING 
	
5.2.1	Purposes.

1.  To promote highway traffic safety and protect the capability of state and local roads to conduct traffic smoothly and efficiently;

	2.  To promote an attractive and viable commercial district and expand the commercial    tax base of the Town;

3.	To protect the rural character, aesthetic visual qualities and property values of the Town and neighboring properties;
	
4.	To discourage unlimited commercial “strip development” and curb cuts along existing roads and encourage commercial growth in nodes and clusters;

5.	To promote walking, biking and a pleasant outdoor environment for street life (use of public and semi-public space);

6.	To protect and recharge water resources; 

7.	To minimize light pollution;

8.	To prevent degradation of natural and landscape features as part of the development process; 

9.	To reduce use of potable water;

10.	To reduce heat pollution, also known as urban heat island effects; and 

11.	To implement the goals of the Community Plan for Monson Center.

	
	5.2.2 	General.  Commercial developments shall be permitted in accordance with the Schedule of Use Regulations – Section 3.1 and with the additional requirements specified herein.
	
	5.2.3 	Access
	
	1.  The number of curb cuts on local roads shall be minimized. To the extent feasible, access to businesses shall be provided via one of the following:
	
		(a)  Access via a common driveway serving adjacent lots or premises;
	
		(b)  Access via an existing side street;
	
		(c)  Access via a cul-de-sac or loop road shared by adjacent lots or premises.
	
	2.  One driveway per business shall be permitted as a matter of right. Where deemed necessary by the Planning Board, two driveways may be permitted as part of the Site Plan Approval process, which shall be clearly marked “entrance” and “exit”.
	
	3.  Driveway widths shall be limited to the minimum for safe entering and exiting.
	
	4.  All driveways shall be designed to afford motorists exiting on to local roads with safe sight distance as determined by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Chapter 3.
	
	5.  The proposed development shall have assured safe interior circulation within its site by separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
	

5.2.4	Landscaping

1.	General Commercial Development 

(a)  A continuous landscaped buffer strip shall be provided to visually separate
parking and other uses from the road. This buffer shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide unless the building is located closer than fifteen (15) feet to road, in which case the buffer area shall be the distance between the building and the road.

(b) Except for sidewalks and approved driveways, the buffer strip shall be
planted with grasses, medium height shrubs, and shade trees (minimum 2.5- inch caliper, planted at least every 50 feet along the road frontage). Shade trees may be planted within the right-of-way provided that no tree is located closer than two (2) feet to any curb, subject to Tree Warden approval.

2.	Village Center Commercial Development 

(a)	Village Center Commercial development occurs in the Central Commercial District, and may also occur in the Mill/Mixed Use, Industrial or other Zoning Districts.  The Planning Board may be required to make a determination regarding whether a proposal is subject to General Commercial Development or Village Center Commercial Development landscaping requirements.

(b)	A continuous landscaped buffer strip shall be provided to visually separate parking and other uses from the road. This buffer shall be at least eight (8) feet wide from the sidewalk unless the building is located closer than eight (8) feet to the sidewalk, in which case the buffer area shall be the distance between the building and the sidewalk. No buffer area is required where the building abuts the sidewalk. 

(c)	Except for approved driveways, the buffer strip shall be planted with shade trees (minimum 2.5-inch caliper, planted at least every 25 feet along the road frontage) subject to Tree Warden approval and a mix of shrubs, grasses, perennials, seating and other streetscape amenities (e.g. bicycle racks, decorative lighting, etc.). Hardscape plazas designed for public use are acceptable provided that vegetative landscaping is included within the design. Turf grasses are allowed by Planning Board approval and only in areas specifically designed for public use.

1.	 Where power lines are present, trees shall be placed as far back from the power lines as possible, and it is acceptable to select smaller (at maturity) and slower growing shade trees or ornamental trees (e.g. American Hornbeam, Amur Maple, Eastern Red Bud, Flowering Dogwood, etc.)

(d)	Some or all shade trees required in the buffer strip may be planted instead between the sidewalk and the road edge space permitting and with Planning Board approval.

(e)	A 5-foot wide sidewalk, approved by the town Highway Department, shall be constructed along the length of the property within the right-of-way. The Planning Board may waive this requirement, or may approve a wider sidewalk to accommodate on-street dining or other commercial purposes compatible with the village center. 

(f)	In cases in which there is no buffer area (i.e. the building abuts the sidewalk), the applicant shall provide appropriate streetscaping to introduce vegetation and improve the outdoor experience, including but not limited to raised planters, window boxes, hanging planters, seating, etc. subject to Highway Surveyor approval. 

3.	Parking Areas

(a)	At least one tree (minimum 2.5-inch caliper) per 10 parking spaces shall be provided. 

(b)	Parking areas shall have a landscaped strip at least five (5) feet wide around their entire perimeter. Vegetative screening at least 3’ high upon planting shall be provided to obscure car grills.

(c)	Large parking areas shall be subdivided with landscaped islands such that no paved parking surface shall extend more than 20 contiguous spaces. 

(d)	Landscaped islands shall contain at least one tree (minimum 2.5-inch caliper), shall be at least five (5) feet wide, and shall contain a minimum of 36 square feet per tree. Islands shall primarily contain vegetation and/or sidewalk.

(e)	Landscaping shall be protected from intrusion and damage by parked vehicles (e.g. using wheel stops)

4.	Natural Features and Soil Preservation

	Development and landscaping plans shall, to the extent feasible:

(a)	Minimize land clearing, alteration of natural topography and features, destruction of vegetation, soil compaction, damage to root systems and associated environmental impacts

(b)	Preserve scenic views and  natural drainage channels on the site 

(c)	Use Best Management Practices (BMPs) for Limit-of-work controls (also known as perimeter controls or development envelopes) to establish the disturbance limits of clearing and grading activities

(d)	Preserve and re-apply at least 6” of the site’s topsoil and at least 12” of the site’s subsoil

5.	Tree Preservation 

	Development and landscaping plans shall, to the extent feasible:

(a)	Preserve open space, existing tree stands, trees at the site perimeter, and contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites

(b)	Preserve vegetation and trees on steep slopes, near waterbodies and near habitat areas

(c)	Preserve specimen trees with a circumference at breast height (4.5 feet above ground) of 60 inches. The entire area within the dripline and critical root zone of preserved trees, including understory vegetation, shall be retained in an undisturbed state

(d)	Replace any trees recommended for preservation or trees on adjacent properties that are lost during construction

(e)	Use Best Management Practices (BMPs) to protect trees during construction (i.e. protective fencing, pruning, soil aeration, trunk wrapping, root pruning, watering, etc.

(f)	Tree species shall be from a town approved tree list.
A Selection of Approved Street Tree Species
Botanical Name	Common Name	Notes
Acer rubrum	Red Maple	Low salt areas
Acer saccharum	Sugar Maple	In special circumstances, low salt, wide root zone areas
Cercidiphyllum japonicum	Katsura tree	Prune to single stem, moist soils
Fraxinus pennsylvanica	Green Ash	
Ginkgo biloba	Ginkgo	Male only
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis	Thornless Common Honeylocust	
Nyssa sylvatica	Black Gum, Tupelo	Moist soils
Quercus robur	English Oak	
Quercus rubra	Red Oak	Will tolerate poor, sandy soils
Platanus x acerifolia	London Plane Tree	
Tilia cordata	Littleleaf Linden	
Tilia americana “Redmond”	American Basswood	
Titlia americana “Greenspire”	American Linden	
Ulmus americana "Valley Forge"	Valley Forge Elm	
Ulmus americana "Princeton"	Princeton Elm	
Ulmus parvifolia "Allee"	"Allee" Lacebark Elm	
Zelkova serrata	Japanese Zelkova	































6.	Reduction of Water Use

Development and landscaping plans shall, to the extent feasible:

	
(a)	Minimize total lawn area.

(b)	Maximize use of plants and landscaping with low maintenance 
requirements, and that require little or no irrigation.

(c)	Minimize use of potable water for landscape irrigation, including
installing high-efficiency irrigation systems, using mulch to prevent
water evaporation, and irrigating with captured water.

(d)	Incorporating Low Impact Development practices for stormwater management, including use of rain barrels and rain gardens.

7.  Additional Requirements

a.	To the extent feasible, trees shall be sited to maximize shade cast over paved areas.

b.	Deciduous shade trees may be used for 100 percent of the total tree requirement. Deciduous ornamental and evergreen (coniferous) trees may be used for up to 25 percent of the total tree requirement. Where it is determined that power lines and full-grown deciduous trees will come into conflict, deciduous ornamental trees may be used for a larger proportion of the total tree requirement.

c.	All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained. Shrubs or trees which die shall be replaced within one growing season.

d.	All plantings shall be sited and maintained so as not to present a traffic visibility hazard. 

e.	Landscaped areas shall be designed to detain and infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks and buildings to the extent feasible. New driveways and sidewalks shall be graded accordingly.  

f.	Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading  areas, dumpsters, utility buildings and structures and other unsightly uses shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and streets using dense, hardy evergreen planting, or earthen beams, or wall or tight fence complemented by evergreen plantings.


	
5.3 	SIGN BY-LAW 

5.3.1 	Applicability.  Any new sign whose total area exceeds two (2) square feet cannot be attached, erected or otherwise installed as provided by this section until after a sign permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. All signs, wherever located, must be in conformity with the State Building Code, available from the Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer.

5.3.2 	General Standards.  Any exterior sign or advertising device hereafter erected or maintained, must, unless expressly provided, conform to the following restrictions in all districts.

1.  The combined total square foot area of a sign or signs must be in accordance with the schedule shown below:
	
			Type of District 					         Max. Sq. Ft. 
			Residential 							              3
	Temporary (residential) 						  6
	General & Central Commercial 					100
	Industrial 								100
	Temporary (Commercial & Industrial) 				 20
	Churches, Public Schools, Libraries, Museums and
	Parks, Parish Houses and Schools, Philanthropic 
	Institutions, Playgrounds and Municipal Buildings 			 10
	
	Where more than one sign is desired, several signs may be used provided that their total combined area does not exceed the amounts shown in the schedule. The combined area of all signs shall not exceed the amounts allowed in this schedule.
	
	2. Any traffic or directional signs owned or installed by a government agency shall be permitted.
	
	3.  If affixed to, suspended from, or incorporated as part of a building, no sign or advertising device shall project more than 24 inches over or beyond any building.
	
	4.  If any sign is supported by or suspended from a pedestal, post, or tree, it cannot project more than 24 inches over or into any pedestrian or vehicular way customarily used by the public.
	
	5.  No sign shall project or extend more than six (6) feet above the eavesline or parapet of any building to which it is affixed.
	
	6.  If any sign or advertising device is free standing, it cannot extend more than twelve (12) feet above ground level.
	
	7.  Signs printed or placed on the inside of the window shall be permitted, provided that the aggregate area of such signs does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the area of the window glass or six (6) square feet, whichever is the lesser.
	
	8.  No sign nor advertising device shall incorporate, or be lighted by flashing or blinking lights, or be designed to attract attention by a change in intensity or be repeated motion.
	
	9.  No sign shall constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic because of intensity or direction of illumination.
	
	10.  Any illumination provided for signs shall be white only, the light-source lamp or tube shall be shaded from view off the premises; and the light shall not be intermittent.
	
	11.  Signs shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the front lot line, unless it is attached to the front wall of a building located less than twenty (20) feet from the front lot line.
	
	12.  Signs should not project into or over a public way and are not attached to poles of telephone or electric light power companies.
	
13.	No sign shall be posted on vegetation.
	
	5.3.3	Residential District Signs.  In any Residential District, the following exterior signs, and no others are permitted:
	
	1.  One sign not over three square feet in area for each family residing on the premises. Such signs may include identification of any accessory professional office or other accessory use permitted in any residential district.
	
	2.  Except for a professional nameplate and a residential number plate, any sign in any residential district shall be set back at least twenty feet from the front lot line unless it is attached to the front wall of a building located less than 20 feet from the street lot line.
	
	3.  No billboard or sign on which the principle product or service advertised is not regularly produced or available on the premises shall be erected or maintained.
	
	4.  One identification sign for each membership club, funeral establishment, community facility or public facility is permitted provided that the sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in surface area.
	
	5.  Signs pertaining to the lease or sale or use of a lot or building provided that such signs do not exceed a total area of six (6) feet. Such signs shall be removed forthwith upon sale or rental of the premises advertised.
	
	6.  Signs prohibiting trespass, hunting and the like, not to exceed two (2) square feet.
	
	7.  Signs designating historical places, natural resources or points of interest must be of a size and design approved by the Historical Commission or by the Scenic District Review Board.
	
	5.3.4 	General and Central Commercial and Industrial District Signs.  In the above districts, the following exterior signs and no others are permitted:
	
		1.  Signs permitted in the Residential Districts subject to the same regulation.
	
	2.  The TOTAL maximum area of all advertising signage shall be 100 square feet; the maximum height to the top of the sign face shall be fifteen (15) feet. All dimensions include border, trim, cutouts and extension but exclude base or apron supports and other structural members.
	
	3.  Signs affixed to, suspended from, or incorporated as part of a building, provided that the total area of the sign on a wall shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
	
		4.  A marquee over the principle entrance to a place of public assembly.
	
	5.  One square foot of freestanding signage is permitted for each foot of street frontage. Signs in excess of (20) square feet in surface area but less than one hundred (100) square feet in surface area require a special permit from the ZBA.  Freestanding signs shall be setback at least fifteen (15) feet from any street or lot line; and, it shall be erected at a height of not less than five (5) feet nor more than fifteen (15) feet above ground or sidewalk.
		
	5.3.5 	Non-Conforming and Temporary Signs

	1.  Signs legally existing at the time this Bylaw is adopted may continue as non-conforming uses, subject to the provisions of Section 3.3.2 hereof (Non-Conforming Uses).  This provision shall not apply to billboards, signs and other advertising devices subject to the provisions of Sections 29 through 33, inclusive of Chapter 93, and to Chapter 93D of the General Laws.
		
	2.  A directional or identification sign may be erected and maintained in any district where the Board of Appeals finds that such sign will serve the public safety, and will be of such size, location and design as will not be detrimental to the neighborhood.
	
	3.  All signs and hand bills erected for a permitted use, by a Special Permit, or special event, including signs advertising the sale or rental of premises, shall be removed within a week when circumstances leading to their erection no longer apply. A fine shall be assessed after this one-week period.
	
	4.  In any district, one temporary sign of an architect, engineer or contractor erected during the period such person is performing work on the premises on which such sign is erected and shall be permitted, provided: it shall not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area; and, it shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the street lot line.
	
	5.3.6 	Signs Allowed on Special Permits. The Board of Appeals may grant, by Special Permit, more than the number of signs herein permitted or signs of a maximum size other than herein specified, if it determines that the architecture of the building, the location of the building or the land or nature of the use being made of the building or the land is such that additional signs or signs of a larger maximum size should be permitted in the public interest.
	
	5.3.7 	Permit Fees.  A permit of $30 for RR and RV districts and $50 for all other districts shall be paid to the Building Inspector for each sign permit issued under this Bylaw.
	
	5.3.8 	Enforcement
	
	1.  Maintenance and Removal.  Every sign shall be maintained in good structural conditions at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust resistant material. The Building Inspector or the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall inspect and shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which shall constitute a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or obsolescence.
	
	2.  Abandoned Signs.  Except as otherwise provided in this article, any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of three months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned, unless the property remains vacant for a period of six months of more. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or owner of the premises.
	
	3.  Dangerous or Defective Signs.  No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign, which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises.
	
	4.  Removal of Signs by the Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer.  The Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall cause to be removed any sign that endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or materially, electrically, or structurally defective sign, or a sign for which no permit has been issued.  
	
	The Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall prepare a notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved and which shall state that, if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within 20 days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provision of this section.  
	
	All notices mailed by the Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be sent by certified mail. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail.  For all other signs, the notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located a shown on the last equalized assessment roll. If known, or with reasonable care should be known, the notice shall be mailed to or delivered to the owner of the sign and the occupant of the property.  
	
	Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the Building Inspector or Zoning Enforcement Officer ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the Monson Board of Selectmen within 45 days after the date of mailing the notice, or 45 days after receipt of the notice if the notice was not mailed.
	5.4 	OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING

5.4.1. Required Minimum/Maximum Parking Spaces. (Adopted at Town Meeting 5/12/2014) - In the Central Commercial District, there shall be provided and maintained off-street automobile parking and spaces accessed by a driveway in connection with the construction, conversion or increase by units or dimensions of buildings, structures and use in the following amounts:


Land Use	Spaces Required -
per 1000 square foot (sf) of Gross Floor Area (GFA):
	Maximum	Minimum
Residential		
Single Family Residences	4 per dwelling unit	2 per dwelling unit
1 per Accessory Apartment
1 per unit <700 sf total area
Home Occupation 	4 per dwelling unit plus 1.5 per nonresident employee 	2 per dwelling  unit plus 1 per non-resident employee 
Bed and Breakfast 	1.2 spaces per guest room or suite 	1 space per guest room or suite 
Multi-Family Residences 	2.5 per dwelling unit 	1 per dwelling unit 
Elderly and Handicapped Congregate Housing	 1 ½ spaces for each sleeping room	1 ½ spaces for each sleeping room
Institutional		
Theater, Assembly Hall or Auditorium having fixed seats	1 space for each 4 seats	
Other places of public assembly and public recreation including:
•	Museums, Libraries, Art Galleries, Government Buildings, Craft Centers
•	Social/Fraternal Clubs and Organizations
•	Indoor Recreation Facilities  
•	Churches and Places of Worship	


2


4

5

1 space per 3 seats in portion of the building used for services 	


1


3

5

1 space per 5 seats in the portion of the building used for services 
Day Care Centers	1 space per 4 children at max. capacity	1 space per 8 children at max. capacity
Elementary, Middle and High Schools  	1 space per 3 seats in the auditorium (plus one space for each 10 students for High Schools)	1 space per 5 seats in the auditorium (plus one space for each 10 students for High Schools)
Nursing Home 	3	2 
Business		
General Office Building 	4 	2
Medical Office Building	8	2
Bank/Personal Services  	3	2
Free Standing Retail	3	1
Small Shopping Centers	6	3
Big Box Retail	4	2
Gymnasiums, Physical Fitness Centers, Health Spas, Martial Arts Centers and Dance Studios	3	1
Restaurants, Taverns 	10 	6
Drive-Thru Restaurant	9	2
Commercial Kennel, veterinary establishments	3 	1
Hotels, Motels, Tourist Home	1.2 spaces per guest room or suite	1 space per guest room or suite
Automotive Repair and/or Service	4	2
Automotive Sales and/or Rentals	3	1
Outdoor Recreation Facilities 	As determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority based on a parking demand study.	As determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority based on a parking demand study.
Industrial		
Industrial Plant	2	1
Warehouse	1	1
Self Service Warehouse	1 space per 10 compartments	1 space per 20 compartments
Other		
Any use permitted in this Bylaw not interpreted to be covered by this schedule	Closest similar use as shall be determined by the Building Inspector	Closest similar use as shall be determined by the Building Inspector

5.4.2 		Parking Spaces for Dwellings.  Parking spaces for dwellings may be provided in a garage or as open parking spaces.

5.4.3 	Parking Lot Space Dimensions.  A required parking space shall contain not less than 180 sq. ft. in the case of a parking lot, or at least 130 sq. ft. in the case of garage parking, with free access to each space.

5.4.4 	Loading Areas

1.  Provisions shall be made for the loading and unloading of all trucks off the street and highway right-of-way, and without encroachment of required areas. The adequacy of space, and suitably located area, shall be determined among other things by expected volume, building use, and relation to streets and access driveways.

2.  Not less than one loading space, 10 ft. x 25 ft. with 14 ft. height clearance, shall be required for a building with a gross floor area of 10,000 sq. ft. or more.

5.4.5 Access 

One driveway per lot shall be permitted as a matter of right. Where deemed 
necessary by the Planning Board, two driveways may be permitted as part of the Site 
Plan Approval process, which shall be clearly marked “entrance” and “exit”.

5.4.6 Off Street Parking for Central Commercial District. 

The purpose of this section is to establish flexible regulations designed to ensure that adequate parking is provided for the Central Commercial District.  This section balances the need for providing adequate parking with the need to maintain the character and fabric of Monson Center and the Central Commercial District.  With the clustering of uses and buildings in the Central Commercial District creative alternatives can be utilized to reduce the number of parking spaces required, but still meet the parking demand, strengthening the center’s economy and improving its appearance.  These alternatives provide an opportunity for landowners and developers to work with the town to arrive at innovative parking solutions.

For the Central Commercial District, no additional off-street parking is required for the continued use or reuse of existing buildings, as long as that use or reuse does not increase the total floor area within the building.  However, off-street parking shall be provided for any new structure, for an enlargement or addition to an existing building, in accordance with Section 5.4.5.1.  For purposes of this Bylaw, the replacement of an amount of floor space equal to that in existence at the time of enactment of this Ordinance is not considered to be an addition of new space.

5.4.7  Location and layout.

1.	Location.  All required parking shall be provided on the same lot with the main use it is to serve or, on a lot that is in the same ownership as, and located within, five hundred (500) feet of the main use, except as provided in Sections 5.4.5.3, 5.4.5.4. or 5.4.5.8 of this Section.

Parking required for two or more buildings or uses must be provided on the same lot as the main use or, on a lot under the same ownership in combined facilities where it is evident that such facilities will continue to be available for the several buildings or uses, except as provided in Sections 5.4.5.3, 5.4.5.4., 5.4.5.7 or 5.4.5.8 of this Section.

2.	All off-street parking shall be located behind or to the side of the principal building.  This is intended to maintain the pedestrian friendly orientation and the historic character of the District.

3.	Size. In a parking lot or parking building up to sixty percent (60%) of the parking bays must be 9 feet by 18 feet in size.  The remaining forty percent (40%) may have a reduced bay size of 8 feet by 16 feet to accommodate smaller cars.  These bay sizes are exclusive of adequate driveways and aisles which must have direct access to a street or alley.  In the case of perpendicular parking, a minimum aisle width of twenty-four (24) feet must be maintained.  Bumper or wheel guards shall be provided when needed. Compact car spaces shall be grouped together to the greatest possible extent in areas clearly designated for compact cars.

4.	Lighting, Landscaping. See Section 5.2 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND LANDSCAPING 

5.	Surface and Maintenance.  For all new construction, all off-street parking facilities shall be surfaced with bituminous concrete or its equal (“equal” to be determined by the Building Inspector for by-right uses and by the Permit Granting Authority for Special Permits/Site Plan Approvals), with adequate drainage, and periodically maintained by the owner or operator, and such facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. Surfacing, grading, and drainage shall facilitate groundwater recharge in order to reduce stormwater runoff.
 
6.	Marking and Striping.  Parking spaces must be clearly marked and striped.



5.4.8 Shared Parking

In the Central Commercial District the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit permitting the use of parking spaces for more than one use on the same parcel or on a lot that is in the same ownership as, and located within, five hundred (500) feet of the uses when they find that the applicant has submitted an adequate Parking Management Plan (including supportive documentation) showing that:

a.	the peak parking demand generated by the uses occur at different times, and
 
b.	there will be adequate parking for the combined uses at all times

The Parking Management Plan (including supportive documentation) shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, Engineer, Landscape Architect, Architect or Transportation Planner licensed (where required) to practice in Massachusetts.  The Planning Board may permit said Parking Management Plan to be prepared by others in cases where they find that because of the size or nature of the project the above level of expertise is not required.

Shared Parking can also be provided on a lot that is not under the same ownership in conjunction with the requirements of this Section provided that it also receives a Special Permit and complies with the requirements of Section 5.4.5.4

5.4.9 Off-Site Parking 

In the Central Commercial District the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit permitting the providing of required parking for a use on a lot that is not under the same ownership when they find that the applicant has submitted an adequate Parking Management Plan (including supportive documentation) showing that:

a.	That the parking spaces are also located in the Central Commercial District.

b.	The parking is suitably located in the neighborhood in which it is proposed

c.	The parking has adequate paving, landscaping, screening, lighting, curbing or wheel stops, and provides for safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and at all curb-cuts with abutting streets
 
d.	The applicant has submitted sufficient legal documentation (approved by the Planning Board and shall be included as an enforceable condition of any Building Permit, Site Plan approval, or Special Permit) guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated shared parking spaces on the parcel.   

It should be noted that said Special Permit is contingent upon the continued ability to legally use the off-site facility and that said Special Permit, and any uses dependent on it, shall terminate upon the termination of any legal agreements permitting the use of said off-site parking.  The use for which the parking was being provided at the off-site facility shall cease upon the termination of said Special Permit until such time as adequate parking is provided in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.

The Parking Management Plan (including supportive documentation) shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor, Engineer, Landscape Architect, Architect or Transportation Planner licensed (where required) to practice in Massachusetts.  The Planning Board may permit said Parking Management Plan to be prepared by others in cases where they find that because of the size or nature of the project the above level of expertise is not required.

5.4.10 Reduction of Required Parking

In the issuance of a required Special Permit or Site Plan Approval the permitting authority can approve a reduction of up to 20% in the number of required parking spaces in Section 5.4.5.1 where the applicant can provide a Parking Management Plan demonstrating that a reduction is warranted as a result of the utilization of transportation demand management measures which reduce automobile use, which may include:

a.	The availability of public transportation

b.	the subject property lies within walking distance from shopping, employment, restaurants, housing, schools, and other trip destinations  

c.	the provision of bicycle storage facilities to encourage bicycling


5.4.11 Access/Curb-Cuts to Off Street Parking Areas 

Access to lots shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.2.3.

In an effort to reduce the number of curb-cuts and turning movements onto Main Street, where an existing parcel has more than one curb-cut accessing onto Main Street, the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit allowing for a reduction of up to an additional 20% of required parking spaces where they find that: 

a.	some or all of these extra curb-cuts will be eliminated and discontinued, and

b.	such eliminated and discontinued curb-cut(s) is sufficiently designed to physically prevent vehicles from using said curb-cut, and

c.	there is still sufficient parking provided on-site (or as otherwise permitted under this bylaw) to accommodate the use

Abutting property owners are encouraged to coordinate access to their lots including utilizing common curb-cuts and driveways under reciprocal easements.  In the issuance of a required Special Permit or Site Plan Approval the permit granting authority can waive setback and related requirements to achieve this where the applicant demonstrates that the curb-cut and access driveway design improves traffic circulation and reduces the number of turning movements onto Main Street.  Said Special Permit/Site Plan Approval shall not become effective until the easement has been recorded, notwithstanding the provisions above. 


5.4.12 Combined Parking Lots

Abutting property owners are encouraged to coordinate parking layouts, including combining and connecting, with adjacent parking lots.  In the issuance of a required Special Permit or Site Plan Approval the permit granting authority can waive setback and related requirements to achieve this where the applicant demonstrates that the parking design improves traffic circulation and provides better utilization and higher occupancy rates and minimizes trips onto Main Street.

The permit granting authority may also permit a reduction in the number of parking spaces required if the applicant demonstrates that the combined parking will still provide sufficient parking to meet the needs of the project.


5.4.13 Fees-In-Lieu of Parking 

Within the Central Commercial District, in cases where it is not possible or desirable to meet the required number of off-street parking spaces, the Planning Board may issue a Special Permit allowing a fee of $2,000 per required parking space to be paid to the town of Monson for required off-street parking spaces not provided where they find that:

a.	The parking required cannot be physically provided to serve the use, and; 

b.	The payment into the fund would ultimately lead towards addressing the parking demand generated by the use by adding parking spaces in municipal parking areas and facilities serving the same general area in which the increased parking demand will be generated.

Fees paid to the town in lieu of providing required parking spaces on-site, shall be deposited into a Downtown Parking Reserve Account to be used solely for expenses related to increasing parking to serve the Central Commercial District.  


SECTION 6.0 SPECIAL REGULATIONS.  
6.1 	SCENIC ROADS 
No repair, maintenance, reconstruction, or paving work that involves or includes the cutting or removal of trees, or the tearing down or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof shall take place on the following streets except with the prior written consent of the Planning Board.
	6.2 	MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS 
	
	6.2.1 	Multi-family dwelling units shall be permitted in the RV and RR districts only after Town Meeting approval and upon issuance of a Special Permit with Site Plan Approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals as specified in Sections 7.3 and 7.4 of this Bylaw, and in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
	
	6.2.2 	General Requirements
	
	1.  No land shall be used for multiple dwelling purposes, and no building shall be altered, enlarged, nor erected for multiple dwelling use, except in a “Multiple Dwelling District”, established after a public hearing and a town meeting under the Zoning Enabling Act, except as provided in Section 3.1. No multiple dwelling district shall be approved until the Monson Board of Health shall have determined that the land will be suitable and safe for the disposal of sanitary sewage, and that an adequate potable water supply will be provided.
	
2.	  After establishment of a Multiple Dwelling District, the use of land therein shall be subject to a Special Permit issued by the Board of Appeals in conformance with the requirements of this Section. 

3.	  No zoning permit shall be issued for a multiple family dwelling or accessory building, except in strict conformance with the site plan, endorsed with the approval of the Board of Appeals. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a multiple family dwelling until all of the requirements of this Section have been met, unless incomplete public improvements and protective provisions are covered by a performance bond, filed with and acceptable to the Board of Appeal.
	
	4.  The applicant for an establishment in a multiple dwelling district shall submit to the Board of Appeals an application on the prescribed form, together with a site plan, topographic map, and date containing all of the information required hereafter. All public improvements and all streets shall be provided under the rules and regulations governing the subdivision of land for the Town of Monson, including bonding for said facilities. Prior to a public hearing on such application, the Planning Board and the Conservation Commission shall make a report with recommendations to the Board of Appeals, which
	report shall cover: 
	
	(a) The relationship of the proposal to the Master Plan of Development for the Town.
	
	(b) The adequacy of provisions to protect and preserve the character of the Neighborhood.
	
		(c) The conformance of the site plan to this Bylaw.
	
	5.  In Multiple Dwelling Districts, no parts of any building nor structure shall be used, except for:
	(a) Any use permitted in a residence district, except that two and three-family dwelling houses shall be of the duplex type; one dwelling unit over another is not permitted.
	
	(b) Buildings and group buildings designed and used for multiple dwelling purposes, provided no single building nor group of connected buildings contain more than eight dwelling units.
	
	(c) Uses accessory to a multiple dwelling use, but expressly excluding any commercial or retail enterprises.
	
	6.2.3 	Additional General Requirements.  The following standards shall be used as additional requirements in the special permit/site plan approval process for all multi-family units:
	
	1.  Multi-family structures shall have access on roads having sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic generated by the site.
		
	2.  More than one dwelling may be placed on a lot, but no principal structures shall be placed closer to each other than 50 feet and must be visually separated by trees and plantings. In addition, each dwelling must be provided with access, drainage and utilities functionally equivalent to that provided under the Planning Board’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
	
	3.  Parking areas shall not be located within a required front, rear or side yard as specified in the dimensional regulations and shall be screened from public ways and adjacent or abutting properties by building location, fencing or planting. No individual parking area shall contain more than twenty (20) spaces. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit. One additional space for visitor parking shall be provided for every ten resident parking spaces.
	
	4.  No building shall be floodlit. Drives and parking areas shall be illuminated only by shielded lights not higher than fifteen (15) feet.
	
	5.  Multi-family structures shall be separated from adjacent properties by buffer strips consisting of trees and/or fencing sufficient to minimize the visual and noise impacts of the development.
	
	6.  In the Rural Residential district, a minimum of 40% of the area of each lot shall be permanently reserved as open space. A minimum of 50% of land reserved as open space shall be grassed or landscaped land available for active and passive recreation.
	
	7.  Connecting walkways shall be provided between structures and parking areas within the site.
		
	8.  All land not devoted to dwellings, accessory uses, roads, or other development shall be set aside as common land for recreation, conservation, or agricultural uses which preserve the land in essentially its natural condition.
	
	6.2.4 	Additional Utility Requirements for Application to Units without Municipal Services
		
	1.  For dwellings to be served by on-site water and waste disposal systems, the applicant shall submit a septic system design prepared by a certified engineer and approved by the Board of Health and a plan illustrating the location of water supply wells with the special permit application. No septic system serving the project shall exceed 2,000 gallons per day sewage flow. More than one septic system may serve the site in order to meet this requirement.
	
	2.  Dwellings with on-site waste disposal systems shall be allowed only upon demonstration by the applicant that the groundwater quality of the boundaries of the lot will not fall below the standards established by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection in the published “Drinking Water Regulations,” or by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in the published “Drinking Water Regulations” or where groundwater quality is already below these standards, upon determination that the activity will result in no further degradation. Where compliance is in doubt, the Zoning Board of Appeals may hire a Professional Engineer to analyze and certify groundwater quality impacts, and may charge the applicant for the cost of such analysis.
	
	6.2.5 	Community Association
	
	1.  If a multi-family development is owned by more than one person or converted to ownership of more than one person, a non-profit, incorporated community association shall be established, requiring membership of each property owner in the development. The community association shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of all-communal water and septic systems, common open space, recreational and thoroughfare facilities. A community association agreement of covenant shall be submitted with the special permit/site plan approval application guaranteeing continuing maintenance of such common utilities, land and facilities, and assessing each lot a share of maintenance expenses. Such agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of Town Counsel and the Permit Granting Authority.
	
	2.  Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the association fails to maintain the common open land in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the agreement, the Town may, after notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common land from becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also provide that the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the development.
	
	6.2.6 	Common Open Space Ownership
	
		1.  All common open land shall be either:

(a) Conveyed to a community association owned or to be owned by the owners of lots within the development. If such a community association is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots in perpetuity;
	
	(b) Conveyed to a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation or preservation of open space;
	
	(c) Conveyed to the Town, at no cost, and be accepted by it for a park or open space use. Such conveyance shall be at the option of the Town and shall require the approval of the voters at a Town Meeting.
	
	2.  In any case where such land is not conveyed to the Town, a restriction enforceable by the Town shall be recorded to ensure that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state and not be built for residential use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways. Such restrictions shall further provide for maintenance of the common land in a manner which will ensure its suitability for its function, appearance, cleanliness and proper maintenance of drainage, utilities and the like.
	6.3	ELDERLY OR HANDICAPPED CONGREGATE HOUSING 
	
	Congregate elderly or handicapped dwelling units shall be permitted in the RV and RR districts only upon issuance of a Special Permit with Site Plan Approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals, as specified in Sections 7.3 and 7.4 of this Bylaw, and in accordance with the additional requirements specified here.
	
	6.3.1	Additional Requirements.  The following standards shall be used as additional requirements in the special permit/site plan approval process for all congregate elderly or handicapped housing units:

1.  The applicant shall comply with all requirements of Sections 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 of this Bylaw.

2.  Congregate elderly and handicapped dwellings shall comply with all dimensional regulations for multi-family dwellings contained in the dimensional and density regulations.

3.  The maximum number of elderly or handicapped occupants per structure shall not exceed six. 
	6.4 	OPEN SPACE COMMUNITIES 
	
	6.4.1 	Open Space Communities shall be permitted in the RR district only upon issuance of a Special Permit with Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board, as specified in Sections 7.3 and 7.4 of this Bylaw, and in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
	
	6.4.2 	General Description.  An “Open Space Community” shall mean (a single family residential) development in which the houses are clustered together into one or more groups on the lot and separated from each other and adjacent properties by permanently protected open space.
	
	6.4.3 	Purposes.  The purposes of open space community development are to:
	
	1.  Allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential subdivisions, provided that the overall density of the development is no greater than what is normally allowed in the district;
	
	2.  Encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural lands and other natural resources;
	
	3.  Maintain the traditional New England rural character and land use pattern in which small villages contrast with open space and farmlands;
		
	4.  Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a more economical and efficient manner;
		
		5.  Encourage a less sprawling form of development that consumes less open land.
	
	6.4.4 	Additional General Requirements.  The following standards shall be used as additional requirements in the special permit/site plan approval process for all open space communities:
	
		1.  The development shall include single-family dwellings only.
	
	2.  The minimum land required for a cluster development shall be ten (10) acres and the parcel shall be held in single ownership or control at the time of application.
	
		3.  Each lot shall have adequate access on a public or private way.
	
	4.  Each lot shall be of a size and shape to provide a building site, which shall be in harmony with the natural terrain and other features of the land.
	
	5.  There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation, facilities, roadways, driveways, and parking.


6.  The site plan shall identify the location and extent of all wetlands on the site as determined by the Conservation Commission under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40.

	6.4.5 	Additional Utility Requirements
	
	1.  All structures which require plumbing shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer, if available, or to a communal septic system at no expense to the municipality.
	
	2.  For dwellings to be served by on-site waste disposal systems, the applicant shall submit a septic system design prepared by a certified engineer and approved by the Board of Health and a plan illustrating the location of water supply wells with the special permit application. No communal septic system serving the development shall exceed sewage flow of 2,000 gallons per day. Septic systems shall be placed in the development to maximize the distance between systems and shall be placed within common areas rather than on individual lots. Maintenance of communal septic systems shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association specified in Section 6.4.8.
	
	No cluster development shall be approved unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the potential for groundwater pollution is no greater from the proposed open space community development than would be expected from a conventional subdivision with single family houses on lots meeting the normal lot size requirements located on the same parcel. Where necessary, the Planning Board may hire a Professional Engineer to analyze and certify groundwater quality impacts, and may charge the applicant; for the cost of such analysis.
	
	6.4.6 	Dimensional and Density Requirements
	
	1.  A one-family detached dwelling, or lawful accessory building, may be constructed on a lot with an Open Space Community development although such lot has less area and frontage than normally required, as herein specified.
		
	2.  The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in an open space community shall be calculated based upon 1.5 units per acre for the net developable acreage remaining once the area of all wetlands, all areas unsuitable for on-site sewage disposal and lands with slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent have been subtracted from the total acreage of the property.
		
	3.  Under the supervision of the Conservation Commission and in accordance with the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, all wetlands shall be identified, and their area subtracted from the net developable acreage of the total parcel.
	
	4.  Under the supervision of the Board of Health, and in conformance with Title V, percolation tests shall be conducted for all lots in the total acreage of the property, which would be developed in a standard subdivision layout. The area of those lots which is determined to be not suitable for on-site sewage disposal shall be subtracted from net developable acreage of the total parcel.
	
	5.  Lot sizes shall not be less than one-half (50%) of the minimum lot size normally required in the district, or thirty thousand (30,000) square feet per lot.
	
	6.  In no instance shall a designated lot have less than 100 feet of frontage on a public or private way.
	
	7.  The frontage requirement, the linear distance of a lot measured along the street right-of-way for the overall development, shall also be set back 500 feet from the street right-of-way by a buffer strip of at least fifty (50) feet in width which shall include trees and shall be kept in a natural or landscaped condition.
	
	8.  All residential structures and accessory uses within the development shall be set back from the boundaries of the development by a buffer strip of at least fifty (50) feet in width which shall include trees and shall be kept in a natural or landscaped condition.
	
	6.4.7 	Common Open Space Requirements
	
	1.  All land not devoted to dwellings, accessory uses, roads, or other development shall be set aside as common land for recreation, conservation, or agricultural uses which preserve the land in essentially its natural condition.
	
	2.  The total area of common open space shall equal or exceed the area by which all single-family dwelling lots are reduced below the basic minimum lot area normally required in the zoning district.
	
		3.  The following lands shall not be used to meet the common open space requirements:
	
			(a) Lands within the floodplain district;
	
	(b) Lands identified as wetlands in accordance with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act;
			
			(c) Lands with slopes greater than twenty-five percent (25%)
	
	4.  Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other than recreation, conservation, or agriculture, except for easements for underground utilities and septic systems, shall be prohibited.  Structures or buildings accessory to recreation, conservation, or agricultural uses may be erected but shall not exceed 5% coverage of such common open land.
	
	6.4.8 	Common Open Space Ownership
	
		1.  All common open land shall be either:
	
	(a) Conveyed to a community association owned or to be owned by the owners of lots within the development. If such a community association is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass with conveyances of the lots in perpetuity;
	
	(b) Conveyed to a non-profit organization, the principal purpose of which is the   conservation or preservation of open space;
	
(c) Conveyed to the Town, at no cost, and be accepted by it for a park or openspace use. Such conveyance shall be at the option of the Town and shall require the approval of the voters at a Town Meeting.

	2.  In any case where such land is not conveyed to the Town, a restriction enforceable by the Town shall be recorded to ensure that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state and not be built for residential use or developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways. Such restrictions shall further provide for maintenance of the common land in a manner, which will ensure its suitability for its function, appearance, cleanliness, and proper maintenance of drainage, utilities and the like.
	
	6.4.9 	Community Association
		
	1.  A non-profit, incorporated community association shall be established, requiring membership of each lot owner in the open space community. The community association shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of all-communal water and septic systems, common open space, recreational and thoroughfare facilities. A community association agreement of covenant shall be submitted with the special permit/site plan approval application guarantying continuing maintenance of such common utilities, land and facilities, and assessing each lot a share of maintenance expenses. Such agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of Town Counsel and the Planning Board.
	
	2.  Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the association fails to maintain the common open land in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the agreement, the Town may, after notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common land from becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also provide that the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the development.
	
	6.4.10 	Procedures and Pre-Application Review
	
	1.  Applicants for Open Space Communities shall follow the Special Permit procedures specified in Section 7.3 and the Site Plan Approval procedures specified in Section 7.4. 
	
	2. To promote better communication and to avoid misunderstanding, applicants are encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review by the Planning Board prior to the application for a Special Permit. Such Preliminary Plans shall comply with the Town’s Subdivision Control Regulations. 
	
	The Planning Board’s approval of a Special Permit hereunder shall not substitute for compliance with the Subdivision Control Act nor oblige the Planning Board to approve a related Definitive Plan for subdivision, nor reduce any time periods for Board consideration under that law. However, in order to facilitate processing, the Planning Board shall, insofar as practical under law, adopt regulations establishing procedures for submission of a combined Site Plan/Development Plan and application which shall satisfy this section and the Board’s regulations under the Subdivision Control Act.
	
	A copy of Site/Plan Development plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board with the application for a Special Permit. Following approval of the Special Permit, a Definitive plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board consistent with their Subdivision Regulations and in substantial conformity with the approved Site Plan/Development Plan, except where the Cluster Development does not constitute a subdivision under the Subdivision Control Law.
	
	
	6.5 	SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS ON ESTATE LOTS (revised 5.10.2010)

The purpose of this regulation is to allow for the creation of lots for single-dwelling units only, with less than the required frontage, in exchange for increased square footage, for the purposes of preservation of open space and decreasing density in given areas.

Single-family dwellings on estate lots shall be permitted in the RR districts only upon the issuance of a Special Permit from the Planning Board as specified in Section 7.3 of this By-Law, and in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.

1.  Estate lots shall be created from one lot in existence at the time of adoption of the by-law and which conforms to all the provisions of the zoning by-law. No more than two (2) estate lots may be created from an existing lot which was in existence at the time of the adoption of this estate lot by-law amendment and which conforms to all of the provisions of the zoning by-law.

2.  A filing fee in the amount of $250.00 per lot, plus all Legal Notification Fees will be paid by the applicant to the Town of Monson.

3.  The estate lot(s) shall have a minimum street frontage of not less than forty (40) feet and an access width of not less than forty (40) feet from the front lot line to the principal structure. The front lot shall meet all of the zoning dimensional requirements normally required in the district.

4.  No more than two (2) estate lots may be adjacent to each other at the street line.

5.  The area of an estate lot shall be at least ten (10) acres including the access strip.

6.  The width of the lot where the principal building is to be constructed shall equal or exceed the distance normally require for street frontage in the district.

7.  Front, rear and side yards must equal or exceed those normally required in the district.

8.	The grade length and location of access driveways shall be constructed and maintained to provide:

(a)	Adequate access by driveway and turn-around for vehicles, including sanitary and emergency vehicles year round;

(b)	A width of at least fifteen (15) feet with drainage and culverts where necessary;

(c)	A maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) unless a waiver is granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA).

(d)	Recommendation from the Highway and Fire Departments;

(e)	No parking areas or structures shall be allowed in the access strip.

9.	There shall be maintained or kept a naturally occurring or a planted vegetated buffer zone between any estate lot(s) and any front lot sufficient to provide privacy between the two lots.

10.	Plan submitted shall include the statement “Lot(s) is an estate lot; building is permitted only in accordance with the special permit estate lot provisions of the Monson Zoning By-Law.

11.	The Planning Board shall not endorse any plan under the Subdivision Control Law for the purpose of creating an estate lot unless the plan depicts the entire parcel which was in existence at the time of the adoption of this by-law and which shows the lot from which the estate lot was created.

6.5.12	Waivers (adopted 5.10.2010)  The Monson Planning Board acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) may grant the following waivers to the requirements of this section:

   1.  A maximum grade in excess of twelve percent (12%) may be allowed on limited sections of the estate lot driveway by a waiver granted by the SPGA if other items associated with design and construction of the estate lot driveway provide, in the opinion of the SPGA, safe and reasonable access for owners, fire, police and emergency vehicles taking into account the alignment of the driveway, the surface treatment of the driveway, the relationship of the location of the sections over twelve percent (12%) of the driveway to the compliant sections of the driveway and the overall drivability of the driveway.  Sections of the driveway over twelve percent (12%) shall be limited to two hundred and fifty (250) feet in length for each noncompliant section.  Noncompliant sections of the estate lot driveway shall be separated by a minimum length of two hundred and fifty (250) feet of driveway meeting the requirements of Section 6.5.8(c).

6.6 	EARTH REMOVAL AND FILLING OF LAND BYLAW 

In any zoning district, removal or addition of soil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, sod, quarried stone, or other mineral deposit shall not be permitted except by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.

6.6.1 	Definitions.  For the purposes of this Bylaw:

1.  “Earth Material” shall include soil, sod, loam, peat, clay, sand, gravel or quarried stone and other natural earth materials.
	
	2.  “Board” shall mean the Zoning Board of Appeals.
	
6.6.2 	Procedure for Earth Removal.  The removal of earth material from land in Monson, not in public use, shall be permitted only after the Board issues a special permit.  All applications for special use permits shall be submitted to the Board accompanied by additional documents as specified below:

	1.  Name and address of the legal owner of the land in question
	
	2.  Name and address of petitioner, if different.

3.  Names and addresses of all owners of property within five hundred feet (500 ft.) of the land.

	4.  An accurate description of the land from which the earth material is to be removed.

	5.  A full statement as to the purposes of the earth removal.

6.  A plan in ten (10) copies prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor, showing lot lines, tract boundaries, adjacent streets and roads, the original topography by two-foot contours and the proposed final contours after the completion of operation at two-foot intervals. 

Within ten days after receipt of the application for the special permit for the removal of earth material, the Board shall transmit a copy to the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Historical Commission and the Building Inspector, together with a copy of the plan, which shall be required. The above-mentioned boards, may at their discretion, investigate the matter and report their recommendations to the Board. 

A public hearing will be held by the Board. The public hearing may be held prior to receipt of the recommendation from the above four Boards, but no decision shall be made by the Board until after the receipt of such recommendations from the above four Boards or until the lapse of thirty days from the date of the filing of the application with the Board.

6.6.3 	Earth Removal General Requirements

1.  A Special permit granted hereunder by the Board shall impose reasonable conditions designed to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town, and shall include specific conditions pertaining but not limited to any or all of the following conditions:

(a)  Method of removal

(b)  The type and location of temporary structures;

(c)  The hours of operation;

(d)  Rules for transporting the material through the Town;

(e)  The area and depth of excavation;

(f)  The distance of excavation to street and lot lines;

(g)  The steepness of slopes excavated;

(h)  Re-establishment of ground levels and grades;

(i)    Provision for temporary and permanent drainage;

(j)  Disposition of boulders and tree stumps;

(k)  Fencing and signs necessary for public safety;

(l)  Stockpiling and replacement with loam or topsoil of four inches (4") or to pre-  
existing depth and topsoil condition, whichever is greater, over the area of removal within a specified time period.

(m)  Planting of the area to suitable cover, including trees on soil suitable fitted, 
	limed and fertilized
	
(n)  Provisions for proper access and egress to and from site to highway or local 
	streets

(o)  Opaque fencing and/or vegetated buffer strip of suitable height to collect dust 
and to mitigate visual impact; for more information see Section 5.1.9 and 5.1.10 of this Bylaw.

(p)  Inspection of the premises at any time by the Board or its representatives;

(q)  In non-industrial districts, a portable stone crusher use is allowed for a 
	duration of not more than 8 weeks in the calendar year.

		(r)  Except in the industrial district, no stone crusher nor other machinery not 
required for actual removal of the material shall be used, unless permitted by the Board.

2.  The Board shall require, as a condition to the granting of a special permit for the removal of earth material, that the applicant for the permit furnish cash, certified check, surety bond or other security in a sum sufficient to insure compliance with the conditions stipulated in each permit.

3.  A special permit granted shall be issued for a period of not more than one (1) year. Such permit may be renewed or re-issued with modifications of conditions by the Board without a public hearing.

4.  Upon petition of the permit holder or abutters or upon its own initiative, the Board shall hold a public hearing to re-issue or modify a special permit for removal of earth material or to order suspension or revocation of such permit, if the Board finds any violation of conditions stipulated in such special permit. The suspension or revocation of the special permit shall not relieve the permit holder of his obligations and thereunder except at the discretion of the Board.
	
5.  When the removal is in conjunction with continued operation of a sand or gravel pit in lawful operation on the effective date of this by-law and until the operation is abandoned for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, provided that in the course of operation:

(a) The depth of excavation is not increased below the grade of the lowest point excavated on the date this By-law is adopted.

(b) The total area of excavation is not increased by more than 10% over its area on such date.

(c) The amount of material removed per day does not exceed the maximum removed during any daily operation during the twelve months preceding the effective date of this by-law.

(d) The conditions stated herein under which a special permit is not required shall not include removal of earth materials from the premises when major topographical changes or soil stripping or loam stripping activities are involved.

6.6.4 	Earth Removal Exemptions.  Under no conditions will an exemption be granted for the removal of over 200 cubic yards of materials per lot in any five- (5) year period. No special permit is required for the removal of earth, which is less than 200 cubic yards per lot for the following: (Amended 11/26/07)

1.  When the removal is not more than fifteen cubic yards (aggregate) in one year from one parcel of land.

2.  When the removal is at the site of, incidental to, and in connection with the construction and alteration of a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and to the installation of walks, driveways and similar appurtenances to said building or structure.

3.  When the removal is incidental to the transfer of earth material from one part of a parcel of land to another part of the same parcel or to an adjacent parcel in the same ownership for the improvement of the property, provided that the area involved is suitably graded and planted thereafter. 

6.6.5	Procedure for Filling of Land.  The filling of land in Monson shall be done only after the Board issues a special permit.  All applications for special use permits shall be submitted to the Board accompanied by the following specific information:

	1.  Name and address of the legal owner of the land;

	2.  Name and address of the petitioner, if different;

	3.  Name and addresses of all owners of property within five hundred feet (500 ft.) of the 
	land;

	4.  An accurate description of the land and the location of the proposed filling;

	5.  A full statement as to the purposes of the filling of land;

	6.  A plan in three (3) copies, prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor, showing 
	lot lines, tract boundaries, adjacent streets and roads, the original topography by two-foot 
	contours and the proposed final contours after the completion of operation at two-foot 
	intervals;

	7.  The estimated quantity of material to be added and topsoil to be stripped and replaced;

	8.  The proposed form of bond to be used.

Within ten days after receipt of the application for the special permit for the removal of earth material, the Board shall transmit a copy to the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Historical Commission and the Building inspector, together with a copy of the plan, which shall be required.
The above-mentioned Boards, may at their discretion, investigate the matter and report their recommendations to the Board.

A public hearing will be held by the Board. The public hearing may be held prior to receipt of the recommendations from the above four boards, but no decision shall be made by the board until after the receipt of such recommendations from the above three Boards or until the lapse of thirty days from the date of filing of the application with the Board.

6.6.6 	Filling of Land General Requirements

1.  The filling of land that raises the existing grade by an average of two feet or more of any area of land 2,500 square feet of more, or raises the existing grade by an average of five feet or more of any area of land 1,000 square feet or more shall require a Special Permit that is subject to at least the following conditions.

(a)  No slope created by the filling operation shall be finished at a grade in excess of the natural angle of repose of the materials.

(b)  All filled areas shall, upon completion of the operation, be covered with not less than four inches loam, brought to the finish grade and seeded in a satisfactory manner.

(c)  No permit for the filling of land shall be issued if such filling will: (a) endanger public health or safety; or (b) constitute a nuisance; or (c) result in detriment to the normal use of adjacent property; or (d) cause significant erosion or sedimentation due to improper drainage design or management; or (e) result in traffic hazards in residential areas or excessive congestion or physical damage on public ways.

2.  A special permit granted hereunder by the Board shall impose reasonable conditions designed to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town, and shall include specific conditions pertaining but not limited to any or all of the following conditions:

(a)  Method of filling

(b)  The type and location of temporary structures

(c)  The hours of operation

(d)  Rules for transporting the material through the Town

(e)  The area and slope of proposed filled area

(f)  The distance of filling operation to street and lot lines

(g)  The steepness of finished slopes

(h)  Provision for temporary and permanent drainage

(i)  Fencing and signs necessary for public safety

(j)  Stockpiling and replacement of loam or topsoil of four inches (4") over the fill 
	area over a specified period of time

(k)  Planting of the area to suitable cover, including trees on soil suitably fitted, 
	limed and fertilized 

(l)  Provisions for proper access and egress to and from site to highway or local 
	streets

(m)  Opaque fencing and/or vegetated buffer strip of suitable height to collect dust 
and to mitigate visual impact. For more information, see section 5.1.9 and 5.1.10 of this Bylaw.

(n)  Inspection of the premises at any time by the Board or its representative.

3.  The Board shall require, as a condition to the granting of a special permit for the filling of land, that the applicant for the permit furnish cash, certified check, surety bond or other security in a sum sufficient to insure compliance with the conditions stipulated in each permit.

4.  A special permit granted shall be issued for a period of not more than one (1) year. Such permit may be renewed or re-issued with modifications of conditions by the Board without a public hearing.

5.  Upon petition of the permit holder or abutters or upon its own initiative, the Board shall hold a public hearing to reissue or modify a special permit for the filling of land or to order suspension or revocation of such permit, if the board finds any violation of conditions stipulated in such permit. The suspension or revocation of the special permit shall not relieve the permit holder of his obligations and thereunder except at the discretion of the Board.

6.6.7 	Filling of Land Exemptions.  No special permit shall be required for the following:

1.  Filling of land in conjunction with a development that requires a special permit. Any such filling, however, shall be approved as part of the Special Permit required for the development and shall meet the conditions of Sections 6.6.5 and 6.6.6 of this Bylaw.

2.  Filling of land in conjunction with a development that requires definitive subdivision plan approval. Any such filling of land, however, shall be approved as part of the Subdivision Plan and shall meet the conditions of Sections 6.6.5 and 6.6.6 of this Bylaw.

3.  Filling of land in conjunction with work by a Town of Monson Department. The Monson Conservation Commission, Zoning Enforcement Officer and Board of Health, however, shall approve any such filling of land, in writing, and the approval notice posted at the site.

4.  Filling of land in conjunction with the installation of an approved Title V septic system, provided the fill is not placed closer than (10) ten feet to the side and rear property lines and does not increase the stormwater run off from the property. Applicant to provide a plan prepared by a registered engineer, showing compliance with these provisions.

5.  Filling of land in conjunction with the construction and landscaping of a single family home, provided the grade is not raised by more than (4) four feet and the fill is not placed closer than (10) ten feet to the side and rear property lines and does not increase the stormwater run off from the property. Applicant to provide a plan prepared by a registered engineer, showing compliance with these provisions.

6.7 	ACCESSORY APARTMENTS 
An accessory apartment unit shall be permitted in the RR and RV districts only upon issuance of a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals as specified in Section 7.3 of this Bylaw, and in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.

6.7.1 	General Description.  An accessory apartment shall mean a separate housekeeping unit, complete with its own sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities, that is substantially contained within the structure of a single-family dwelling, but functions as a separate unit.

6.7.2 	Additional General Requirements.  The following standards shall be used as additional requirements in the special permit process for all accessory apartments:

	1.  One apartment per single-family house is allowed.

2.  The lot size and frontage of the single-family house must meet the requirements of the zoning district.

3.  There shall not be more than 700 square feet of gross floor area or 35% total square foot increase in the accessory apartment whichever is larger.

4.  The appearance of the overall structure shall retain the appearance of a single-family house.
	
5.  The owner of the structure must occupy one of the two-dwelling units within the structure.

	6.  There must be adequate, on-site parking for each dwelling unit.

6.7.3 	Application Procedure.  The procedure for the submission and approval of a Special Permit for an Accessory Apartment in an Owner-Occupied, Single-Family Dwelling shall be the same as prescribed in the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Appeals except it shall include a notarized letter of application from the owner(s) stating that he/they will occupy one of the dwelling units on the premises. 


6.8 	DWELLING CONVERSION. 

The Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for an exception for the use of an existing one-family dwelling for not more than four (4) families, under the following conditions:

1.  Such action will not tend to deteriorate the standards and character of the neighborhood.

2.  The existing dwelling is suitable and capable of being altered for the proper, safe and convenient use, for not more than four families, each containing the minimum habitable area, all without materially altering the exterior appearance.

(a)  The Board shall require adequate plans, setting forth the changes and improvements to be made. 

(b)  The Board shall place such reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the granted exception as they deem necessary under the purpose of the Zoning Bylaws.

 6.9 	SWIMMING POOL BYLAW

A Swimming Pool, including appurtenant structures, provided such pool is used only by the residents of the premises and guests, and that no portion of the water area be closer than twenty (20) feet to the side or rear lot line, and inground pools be securely fenced to a height of not less than four (4) feet.

6.10 	TRAILERS

6.10.1 	Trailer Storage.  A travel or camping trailer owned by the resident of the property may be stored thereon in the rear or side of the principal dwelling, and not within the required front yard, but such travel or camping trailer shall not be used for living purposes.

6.10.2 	Trailer Replacement.  An existing trailer or mobile home on the owner’s land may be replaced by a trailer or mobile home of equal or greater value and size subject to the residential district yard restrictions, provided the mobile home meets the requirements of the Massachusetts Building Code.

6.10.3 	Emergency Use of Trailers.  The owner or occupier of a residence which has been destroyed by fire or natural disaster may place a trailer or mobile home on the site of such residence and may, by right, reside in such trailer or mobile home for a period not to exceed twelve months while the residence is being rebuilt. Any such trailer or mobile home shall be subject to the provisions of the State Sanitary Code

6.11 	COMMERCIAL RECREATION DEVELOPMENT BYLAW 

6.11.1 	Permitted Uses.  Commercial Recreation Campsites shall include only the following permitted uses and approved combination thereof:

1.  Outdoor athletic activities, including facilities for skating, skiing, sledding, swimming, squash and tennis and related activities.

2.  A golf course of not less than nine holes as a principal recreational use, and a par-three golf course, or putting greens and driving range accessory to a major recreational activity.

3.  Riding academy with trails as a principal use, and the keeping and boarding of horses for riding, instruction and exhibition.

4.  The rental of campsites as a part of commercial recreation operation subject to the Standards and Regulations of Section 6.11.5.

5.  Activities similar to those listed above, that are commonly provided by such organizations as day camps, swimming and tennis clubs and other recreational enterprises and that are listed in the application and shown on the site plan, may be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to such additional safeguards as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require.

6.  Except as above, residential use shall be limited to existing dwellings and one additional single-family dwelling for the owner or caretaker of the property only.
	
	7.  Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to a permitted use.

6.11.2 	Application Procedure

1.  Commercial Recreational Development shall be permitted only upon issuance of a Special Permit with Site Plan Approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals as specified in Sections 7.3 and 7.4 of this bylaw and in accordance with the additional requirements specified here.

2.  The applicant shall submit five (5) copies of the Commercial Recreational Development Plan to the Zoning Board of Appeals. In addition, the applicant shall also file one copy of the Plan with the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission. The Zoning Board of Appeals may decide to forward said plan to other Town agencies and/or departments for their review.

3.  The applicant shall submit two (2) copies of the Commercial Recreation Development Site plan to the Planning Board for review. The Planning Board shall forward its comments in writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals within twenty-one (21) days of receipt.

4.  To promote better communication and to avoid misunderstanding, applicants are encouraged to submit a Preliminary Plan for review by the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the application of a Special Permit. The Preliminary Plan should conform to these regulations as well as the Standards for Site Plan Review outlined in Section 7.4 - such Preliminary Plan shall comply with the Town’s Subdivision Control Regulations - as they may apply.

6.11.3 	Fees.  If the applicant chooses to submit a Preliminary Plan to the Zoning Board of Appeals for review, the Commercial Recreation Development Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50) plus two dollars ($2) for each acre of land in the Plan.

The Commercial Recreation Development Definitive Plan shall be accompanied by a one-time application of fifty dollars ($50) plus five dollars ($5) for each acre of land contained in the Plan if a Preliminary Plan was filed or an application fee of two hundred dollars ($200) plus fifteen dollars ($15) for each acre of land contained if a Preliminary Plan was not filed.

If, in the judgement of the Board, consulting services are necessary or appropriate, the applicant shall, prior to the issuance of the Special Permit, pay for any such services. All consultants shall be selected by the Board.


6.11.4 	Additional General Requirements.  The following standards shall be used as additional requirements to the Special Permit/Site Plan approval process for Commercial Recreational Development:

1.  The total area of the site for the Commercial Recreation Development shall be at least fifty (50) acres.

2.  Commercial Recreation Development shall be separated from adjacent properties by buffer strips consisting of trees and/or plantings sufficient to minimize the visual and noise impacts of the campground. The buffer strip can only be used as a buffer strip, not as roads, parking, or for any other activity. Commercial Recreation Development must provide a minimum one hundred fifty foot (150) buffer strip to separate the recreational activities from the abutting properties.

3.  No driveway for entrance and exit shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any side or rear property line. No entrance or exit from a campsite shall be allowed to move through a residential development.

4.  The number of sites for tents, campers or travel trailers shall not exceed ten 
(10) per acre, exclusive of all public open space and wetlands.

5.  The site plan shall identify the location and extent of all wetlands on the site as determined by the Conservation Commission under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40.

6.  Parking areas shall not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet from any other property line and shall be screened from public ways and adjacent or abutting properties by trees and/or plantings.  Parking spaces adequate to accommodate, under normal conditions, the vehicles of employees, members, patrons, and persons using the facilities shall be provided as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals. No individual parking area shall contain more than twenty (20) spaces and shall be separated by adequate buffers.

7.  Roads, driveways and access ways shall have sufficient width, suitable grades, adequate storm drainage, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic generated by the site.  All roads shall provide free movement for fire equipment.
		
	8.  Lighting shall be so shielded as to cast no light upon adjacent property or public ways. Driveways and parking areas shall be illuminated only by shielded lights not higher than fifteen (15) feet.
	
	9.  Signs must conform to the rules and regulations of signs in Section 5.3 of these Bylaws.
	
	10.  Any commercial use of land or structure for recreational purposes shall be subject to the granting of an appropriate license by the Monson Board of Health under the provisions of Section 32A to 32D of Chapter 140 of the General Laws. No Special Permit/site plan approval shall be issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless and until the Board of Health has approved those aspects of the development, which come under its jurisdiction.
	
	11. A minimum of 40% of the total land area in a campground shall be reserved as open space.
	
	12.  The Planning Board may prescribe, from time to time, rules and regulations to amend the standards and conditions set forth in these zoning regulations for Commercial Recreation Development, provided the rules and regulations are not inconsistent with the Zoning Bylaws and Chapter 40A of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
	
6.11.5	Additional Utility Requirements

	1.  For units to be served by on-site waste disposal systems, the applicant shall submit a septic system design prepared by a certified engineer and approved by the Board of Health and a plan illustrating the location of water supply wells with the Special Permit application. No communal septic system serving the recreation facility shall exceed sewage flow of 2,000 gallons per day. Septic systems shall be placed in the development to maximize the distance between systems and shall be placed within common areas rather than on individual campsites.
		
	2.  No Commercial Recreation Development shall be approved unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the potential for groundwater pollution is no greater from the proposed Commercial Recreation Development than would be expected for a conventional subdivision with single-family houses located on the same parcel. Where necessary, the Planning Board may hire a Professional Engineer to analyze and certify groundwater quality impacts and may charge the applicant for the cost of the analysis.
	
	3.  Development of water areas and drinking water supplies and overall distribution of the water system within the area is subject to the regulations and standards established by the Monson Board of Health and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
	
	6.11.6 	Additional Requirements for Campsites in Commercial Recreation Development
	
		1.  Campsite Dimensions
	
			(a)  There shall be no more than ten (10) campsites per gross acre devoted to such 
			sites, and exclusive of all public open spaces and wetlands.
	
		(b)  Each campsite shall not have less than 20-feet of frontage on an access driveway or way connected ultimately to a public street.
	
		2.  Campsite Utilities
	
	(a)  Potable water supply, sanitary sewage disposal, garbage and waste collection shall be provided in accordance with Monson and Massachusetts Sanitary Codes. No occupancy shall be permitted until approved by the Monson Board of Health.
	
	(b)  A sanitary disposal station shall be located not nearer than 100 feet of any campsite and shall be screened by fences or natural growth. It shall have a hose and water for washdown purposes and suitable drainage for same.  All provisions for solid waste disposal will be made by the operator at no expense or other burden to the Town.  Where required, a community toilet facility complete with a minimum of one (1) shower stall, two (2) lavatories, and two (2) water closets separated for each sex, shall serve not more than twenty (20) campsites and shall be suitable screened by trees and/or plantings from the campsite. 
	
	(c)  The location, materials of construction and storage of fuels for outdoor cooking facilities of any kind shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief, and no outdoor cooking shall be allowed except at approved locations by the fire chief.
	
	d)  Water and electrical connections may be provided to each campsite. Individual sewage connections may be supplied to campsites, but cannot be used during the period from October 15 to the next following May 15.
	
		3.  Rental of Campsites
	
	(a)  Campsites may be occupied by a travel trailer, camp trailer, or tent but not any type of permanent building or mobile home.
	
	(b)  Campsites shall not be occupied from November 1 through November 30 and March 15 through April 15.
	
	(c)  The number of campsites in any one commercial recreation area shall not exceed 200 campsites. Trailer storage year round is not permitted, nor may trailers be left on sites, or tents left erected, during periods when not occupied.
	
	(d)  Spaces in campsites may be used only by recreational campers or equivalent facilities classified as short-term vacational housing.
	
	(e)  The definition of a travel trailer or camper shall be: a vehicular, prefabricated, portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, overnight camping, recreational and vacational uses.  Designed for temporary use, such travel trailers or campers are usually in, on, or behind a motor vehicle.
	
	(f)  Sale of lots or long-term lease of right to occupy campsites shall not be permitted.
	
	6.11.7	Building Permit Requirements.  A building permit for the construction of a Commercial Recreational Development shall not be issued until a special permit and an approved site plan are granted from the Zoning Board of Appeals.  Building permits are issued by the Building Inspector or Selectmen. All construction must conform to the standards and regulations of the State Building Code, available from the Building Inspector.
	6.12 	PINBALL MACHINES AND ELECTRONIC GAMES 
	
	Not more; than two (2) pinball machines or electronic games shall be permitted in any restaurant, tavern, club or other business establishment operated for public recreation in any district except by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals which shall consider whether the granting of such permit will cause any harm to the abutters, the zoning district in which the applicant is located, or the public welfare, and may impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations on time of use.
	6.13 	MIXED USES 
	
	6.13.1 	Mixed use and mixed residential /business use structures shall be permitted in the Central Commercial and General Commercial districts only upon issuance of a special permit with Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board as specified in Sections 7.3 and 7.4 of this Bylaw, and in accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
	
	6.13.2 	General Description.  A “Mixed Residential/Business Use” shall mean one or more business uses plus residential uses occupying the same structure or lot.
	
	6.13.3 	Purposes.  The purposes of a mixed-use or mixed residential/business use development are to:
	
		1.  Encourage the reuse of surplus or abandoned real estate within the Town Center;
	
	2. Promote a diversity of uses to improve retail, professional and other services available      
                to Monson residents.

	3.  Integrate appropriate limited residential uses in the commercial district.
	
	6.13.4 	Permitted Uses.  
	
     1  The following uses shall be permitted in a mixed use structure:
	
	a.  Places of public assembly including libraries, museums, art galleries, craft centers, recreation and community centers, and membership clubs;
	
	b.  Retail establishments selling convenience goods such as food, drugs, and proprietary goods; 
	
c.  General merchandise such as dry goods, apparel and accessories, hardware, home furnishings and similar items.

d.  Personal and consumer service establishments, medical, other professional and business offices including financial, insurance and real estate offices.
	
 2.  In addition to the uses permitted above in Section 6.13.4.1 the following use is also permitted 
      in a mixed residential/business structure:

            a.  Residential uses, provided all residential units are located above the first floor/street 
                 level of the building.  Residential units may be permitted in first floor portions of the 
                 building that do not front or access the street frontage.

	6.13.5 	Additional General Requirements
	
1.	Applicants for Mixed Use and Mixed Residential/Business Use shall follow the Special Permit procedures specified in Section 7.3 and the Site Plan Approval procedures specified in Section 7.4. 

2.	In cases of mixed occupancy, the regulation for each use shall apply to the portion of the building or land so used.
 
3.	For mixed residential/businesses uses there shall be provided on the lot at least fifty (50) square feet of usable open space which is landscaped for each dwelling unit, except in the case of existing buildings where this provision shall apply only to the maximum extent practicable. In lieu of providing open space on the ground, this requirement can also include pen areas accessible to all residents of the building provided on a balcony, deck or flat surface of a structure provided it is suitable for the use intended.

4.	The Planning Board may issue a Special permit allowing for a reduction of Dimensional and Density requirements when establishing or re-establishing a residential use within an existing structure or establishing/re-establishing a business use within an existing residential structure. Where a mixed use or mixed residential/business use may be located in the CC and GC districts, and where such use is proposed for a structure which is in existence on the date of the adoption of this Bylaw, and which has not been substantially changed since that date, and where such use is proposed for a lot which has not been decreased in size since the date of such adoption, a reduction in certain of the requirements contained in the Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations may be authorized by Special Permit from the Planning Board and to the additional provisions:

a.	A reduction in the minimum lot size requirement may be allowed to the extent that the number of proposed dwelling units shall not exceed that which may be determined by the Planning Board as being appropriate (based on floor plans submitted with the application) for the particular building in question, and provided that no individual dwelling unit shall be smaller than six hundred (600) square feet in living space. 
 
b.	A relaxation in the requirements dealing with building coverage, floor area ratio, and open space, may be allowed by the Planning Board, provided that it finds that the total number of dwelling units will not increase above that which might otherwise be possible.


6.14 	WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES REGULATIONS 

The purpose of this subsection of the Zoning By-Law is to establish appropriate siting criteria and standards for wireless communications facilities, to minimize the adverse impact on adjacent properties, to preserve scenic views, to limit the number and height of such facilities, to promote the shared use of existing facilities to reduce the need for new facilities, and to provide maximum wireless coverage as mandated by Section 704 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, while protecting the historic and residential character of the Town of Monson, the property values of the community and health and safety of citizens.

6.14.1 	General Use Restrictions

1.  No wireless communications facilities as defined in section 1.7 shall be erected or installed except by Special Permit from the Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, in accordance with the procedures specified in section 6.14 and section 7.3 as well as such rules and regulations as officially promulgated by the Planning Board.

2.  Any proposed modification to an existing wireless communications facility shall require Site Plan Review by the Planning Board only if there is an increase in the total square footage size of the antennas/cells.

3.  Wireless communications facilities in existence at the time of adoption of these Regulations including guyed towers, lattice towers and utility towers may be reconstructed, altered, extended or replaced on the same site by Site Plan Review by the Planning Board. 

6.14.2 	Design Guidelines.  The following guidelines shall be used when preparing plans for the siting and construction of wireless communications facilities.

1.  To the extent feasible, wireless communications facilities shall be located on existing structures, including but not limited to buildings, water towers, telecommunications towers, utility poles and related facilities, provided that such installation preserves the character and integrity of those structures. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that there are no feasible existing structures upon which to locate.

2.  To the extent feasible, wireless communications facilities shall be located so as to be as visually unobtrusive as possible from all views to the greatest extent possible. An applicant proposing a wireless communications facility shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the applicant has endeavored to minimize the visual and aesthetic impacts of the proposed facility on residential abutters; and, that the facility must be located at the proposed site due to technical, topographical or other unique circumstances.

3.  To the extent feasible, wireless communications facilities shall be designed to accommodate the maximum number of users technologically practical. The intent of this requirement is to reduce the number of towers, which will be required within the community. New towers shall be considered only upon a finding by the Planning Board that existing or approved towers cannot adequately fulfill the applicant’s service requirements or accommodate the wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed tower.

4.  All building-mounted facilities shall be designed and located so to appear as an integral part of the existing architecture of the building. No such facility shall project more than ten feet above the existing roof line of the building, or more than ten feet above the top of the existing structure upon which it is mounted, or more than five feet out from the plane of the existing wall or facade to which it is attached, provided that such projections do not otherwise violate existing yard dimensions or setback requirements.

5.  Only free standing monopoles, with associated antennas and panels are allowed in new locations.  Lattice style towers or any tower requiring guy wires for support are not allowed unless pre-existing on the location.

6.  No new wireless communications tower shall be located closer than two miles to any other existing tower location in Monson to the maximum extent feasible.

7.  All wireless communications towers shall be designed to be constructed at minimum height necessary to accommodate the anticipated and future use. In residential zoning districts, wireless communications facilities shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height as measured from ground level at the base of the tower.

8.  All wireless communications towers shall be pre-engineered to fail at a pre-determined height and “fold in half” in the event of a catastrophic failure.

9.  The setback of a wireless communications tower from the lot line or street line of the lot on which it is located shall be at least equal to 150% of the tower’s height. Further, within the residential districts (RV & RR) the tower shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from existing lot lines.

10.  All wireless communications facilities shall be painted, colored, and/or constructed of materials that minimize the visual impact of the wireless communications facilities on adjacent abutters, residential neighbors and other areas of Town; and owners of wireless communications facilities shall endeavor to install said facilities in a manner that blends them into the structure, building, tower and/or landscape where they are located. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions to ensure this result including but are not limited to structural design, painting, lighting, and landscaping standards.

11.  Fencing shall be provided to control unauthorized access by the public to wireless communications facilities and shall be compatible with the scenic character of the Town and of abutting properties and shall not be of barbed or razor wire unless completely blocked from view by shrubs or other landscaping. A landscape buffer of evergreen shrubs or tree plantings shall be provided on the outside of the fenced area. All landscape plantings must be continually maintained.

12.  Lighting shall be limited to the lighting required for emergency and for FAA compliance. All lighting shall be shielded to prevent undue impact on surrounding properties.

13.  Accessory structures housing support equipment for towers shall not exceed four hundred square feet in area and fifteen feet in height. Design of accessory structures shall be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood.

14.  Signs shall be restricted to warning/no-trespassing signs and an identification sign displaying the FCC registration number of the facility, the owner/operator, and an emergency telephone number where the owner/operator can be reached on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. All signs shall comply with the requirements of the Monson Zoning Bylaw.
	
15.  To the extent feasible, all network interconnections from the communications site shall be via landlines.

16.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. Clearing of land shall be performed in a manner, which will maximize preservation of natural beauty and conservation of natural resources.

6.14.3 	Submission Requirements.  The applicant for a Wireless Communications Facilities special permit shall submit to the Planning Board a written application on the prescribed form containing all of the following information:

1.  A site plan in accordance with the requirements of this section and section 7.4, which shall show all lot lines, the exact location of the proposed facilities, streets, landscape features, residential dwellings all buildings within five (5) hundred feet of the facility.

2.  A color photograph or rendition of the proposed wireless communications facilities including, but not limited to, the proposed tower with its antenna and/or panels. A rendition shall also be prepared illustrating a view of the facility from the nearest street or streets.

3.  A technical report prepared by a professional engineer containing; (1) a description of the proposed wireless communications facilities including the technical, economic and other reasons for the proposed location, height and design; (2) a survey of all pre-existing structures, buildings or towers which are capable of supporting the equipment necessary to provide the intended service, and a technical report which demonstrates why any such structure, building or tower cannot be used by the applicant; (3) a description of the capacity of the proposed facility including the number and type of panels, antenna and/or transmitter receivers that it can accommodate and the basis for these calculations; (4) a description of the special design features utilized to minimize the visual impact of the proposed wireless communications facilities, and (5) certification of compliance with all applicable stated and federal standards.

4.  A landscape plan showing the proposed site before and after development including topography and screening proposed to protect abutters.

5.  Within thirty (30) days after filing the applications for any new tower or extension in height thereto, the applicant shall arrange to fly a balloon at the maximum height of the proposed installation on a weekend day between the hours of noon and 3 P.M. The balloon shall be of size and color that can be seen from every direction for a distance of one (1) mile. The date and location of the flights shall be advertised at least fourteen (14) days, but not more than twenty-one (21) days, before the flights in at least two different issues of a newspaper with a general circulation in the Town of Monson.

6.14.4	Cessation of Use and Obsolescence

1.  The Building Inspector shall annually require proof of certification demonstrating compliance with the standards of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration, and the American National Standards Institute and required maintenance.

2.  Providers of wireless Communications service shall report to the Building Inspector, any cessation in the use or operation of any wireless communications facility that exceeds thirty (30) days, and such facilities shall be dismantled and removed at the owner’s expense within one (1) year of cessation of use or operation.

3.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a Wireless Communications Tower, the applicant shall post with the Town a bond in the amount set by the Planning Board. The amount shall be suitable to cover demolition, removal and disposal of the tower and its accessories in the event the Building Inspector condemns the tower or any accessory part thereto, or deems it unused for more than one (1) year. The Building Inspector shall give the tower’s owner forty-five (45) days written notice by registered mail before demolition commences. All demolition and removal costs will be billed to the tower’s owner and any unpaid amounts will become an encumbrance on the property.

4.  The applicant shall obtain and record in the appropriate registry of deeds a limited right of access granted to the Town of Monson by the lessor/landowner giving the Town the right to enter the property and remove the tower and accompanying structures in the event that the use of the tower as a wireless facility is abandoned.

6.15	  PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PURD)

The Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, may authorize a Planned Unit Residential Development (PURD) as defined by Section 1.7 by special permit with site plan approval in conformance with the procedures specified in Section 7.3. Such PURD shall be subject to rules; regulations and criteria as officially promulgated by the Planning Board.

6.15.1	Purpose It is the purpose of this section to allow for greater variety and flexibility in the development of housing types for persons of age 55 and older and to facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a more economical and efficient manner while at the same time conserving important natural site features and permanently preserving open space.

To provide housing for people 55+.  All occupants must be age 55 or 
older.  This will minimize the potential impacts in terms of noise, traffic,
parking, environmental impacts and related issues of such multifamily housing on surrounding properties.

6.15.2	Application

1.  The applicant for a PURD special permit shall submit to the Planning 
Board a written application on the prescribed form containing all the information required hereafter including the following materials:

(a)  A Development Statement listing the development team, setting 
forth the development concept, including in tabular form the number of units, type, size (number of bedrooms, amount of living space, gross floor area), ground coverage and summary showing the area of residential development and common open space as percentage of the total area.

(b)  A Development Site Plan of the entire tract in accordance with the 
requirements of this section and Section 7.4 and meeting, to the extent applicable and with modifications approved by the Planning Board, the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in the Monson Subdivision Regulations.

(c)  Architectural rendering of the site plans and typical structures 
including floor plans and elevations.

(d)  A traffic study of the area as it may be affected by the proposed 
development, including present and anticipated traffic counts, flow patterns, and capacity analysis of present and proposed intersections and entrances serving the development.  If appropriate, internal traffic patterns should also be shown.

(e)  An engineering report regarding the adequacy of sewage disposal, water supply and storm water drainage as the proposed design relates to existing utilities of the Town and Title V with Board of Health approval.

(f)  A project description including anticipated number of residents in each residential unit; unit selling prices; pre- and post-construction management methods including drafts of supporting documents and contracts; construction schedule and phasing schedule.

2. Said application shall contain sufficient information so that the Planning Board can determine the applicability of said application for the following items:

(a)  Is consistent with the Master Plan of Development of the Town;

(b)  Preserves and protects the character of the Town and especially the immediate neighborhood, giving due consideration to such features as public safety, including traffic control and traffic impact upon surrounding roads; development of adequate recreational facilities for the use of the residents of said proposal and/or the community; adequate fire protection; public health including sewerage disposal, drainage and water supply; and the compatibility of the size, location, and landscaping of said project with the adjacent neighborhood and the Town;

(c)  Minimizes potential adverse environmental impacts upon the Town;

(d)  Conforms to the specific provisions of this bylaw, including the performance standards of this section.

3. Said special permit shall not be issued unless the Planning Board affirmatively determines that each of the above listed criteria is met by said applicant.

6.15.3	Use Regulations:  The following uses shall be permitted in a PURD:

1. One family detached dwellings;

2. Two family detached dwelling;

3.  Townhouses;

4.  Multiple dwellings not exceeding four (4) units per building;


5.  Recreational uses and community facilities such as parks, gardens, swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and community buildings;

6.  Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal uses listed above, but expressly excluding any commercial or retail enterprise.

6.15.4  Dimensional Regulations – Property for PURD use shall comply with the following dimensional requirements:

1.  Minimum Parcel Size.  The total parcel shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres. No more than 50% shall be wetland or encumbered by easements or be unusable.

2.  Minimum Parcel Frontage.  The total parcel shall have a minimum frontage on a public way of at least fifty (50) feet.  There shall be no frontage requirements within the PURD.

3.  Front, Side and Rear Yards.  The minimum front yard (setback) shall be two (200) hundred feet, the side yard and rear yard requirements shall be eighty (80) feet and each setback requirement shall pertain only to the periphery of the PURD.

4.  Buffer Area.  A landscaped buffer strip not less than thirty (30) feet wide, as described in Section 6.5 shall be provided along the perimeter of the property.  Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Planning Board.  The Planning Board may modify or waive the buffering requirement where variations in topography, natural features, or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a buffer.

6.15.5	Density Regulations:

The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within the PURD is one (1) dwelling unit per 20,000 square feet of net developable area in the R.V. District, and one (1) dwelling unit per 40,000 square feet of net developable area in the R.R. District.

6.15.6	Net Developable Area

The net developable area of a parcel for PURD development shall be the total area of all lots shown to be developable under the Town of Monson Subdivision Regulations and zoning, and shall be calculated by the following procedure:

(a)  Where lots are not to be served by Town of Monson sewage collection system, percolation tests, in conformity with Title V, 310 CMR 15.00-15.99 as amended, shall be conducted under the supervision of the Board of Health, for all lots in the total acreage of the property which would be developed in a standard subdivision layout and using 40,000 square feet per lot.  The area of those lots which is determined to be not suitable for on-site sewage disposal shall be subtracted from the developable area of the total parcel.

(b)  Under the supervision of the Conservation Commission, the total acreage of all wetlands, in accordance with the Wetlands Protection Act, M.L.G. Chapter 131, Section 40, shall be identified and their area subtracted from the developable area of the total parcel.

6.15.7	Building Requirements

1. Building Character:  Buildings shall be in harmony with the prevailing character and scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the town through the use of appropriate building materials, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest and avoid monotony.  Proposed buildings shall relate harmoniously to each other with adequate light, air, circulation and separation between buildings.  

2.  Building Location.  Building location and orientation shall reflect:

(a)  Relationship to the street line and to other buildings in the development if in close proximity, in order to protect privacy and create visual coherence;

(b)  Views, solar access, and access to common open space, in order to enhance occupant’s interests;

(c)  Organization of large developments into recognizable sub-areas in order to provide scale and identity;

(d)  Avoidance of major topographic change and destruction of significant natural site features including removal of native trees and vegetation in order to preserve and protect the environment; Reduction of visual intrusion into abutting properties in order to protect existing character.  To the extent practicable, the multifamily units of the PURD shall be developed more towards the interior rather than the periphery of the tract so that the one family and two family detached residences, if any, border adjacent properties, acting as a buffer between the development and pre-existing one family neighborhoods.  The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape, and shall be designed to protect abutting properties and community amenities.  Building sites shall to the extent feasible: (1) minimize use of wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, hilltops; (2) minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations; (3) preserve unique natural or historical features; (4) minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal and grade changes; and (5) maximize open space retention and (6) screen objectionable features from neighboring properties and roadways.  

More than one structure may be placed on a lot, but no residential structures shall be placed closer to each other than ten (10) feet and must be visually separated by trees and plantings.  In addition, each dwelling must be provided with access, drainage and utilities functionally equivalent to that provided under the Planning Board’s Subdivision Rules and Regulations.

3.  Maximum Building Height.  The maximum height of structures shall be two (2) stories and thirty-five (35) feet above the ground.

4.  Maximum Number of Bedrooms.  The maximum number of bedrooms or rooms used primarily for sleeping purposes per dwelling unit shall be two (2).

6.15.8	Utilities

1.  Each dwelling in a PURD shall be provided with access, drainage and utilities that are functionally equivalent to that provided under the Planning Board’s Subdivision Regulations.  All utilities shall be placed underground.

2.  All structures which require plumbing shall be connected to a private well or public water supply, if available, and where units are to be served with an on site sewage disposal facility, shall meet the requirements of Title V, and the Subdivision regulations and have Board of Health approval.

6.15.9	Parking and Circulation Requirements

1.  There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of pedestrian circulation, roadways, driveways and parking. 

2.  Vehicular access to the PURD shall be provided from an existing public way, which in the opinion of the Planning Board is adequate to service the proposed development.  As a matter of public safety, an alternate emergency access may be required.

3.  Roads within the PURD shall be privately owned and maintained and shall be designed with sufficient width, suitable grade and adequate construction to safely provide for the needs of vehicular traffic generated by the development.  Access roads shall be designed and constructed according to the requirements of the Monson Subdivision Regulations or as otherwise modified by the Planning Board.

4.  Garages or off-street parking spaces, or a combination thereof, shall be provided for all occupants, employees, and visitors, and shall be not less than two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.  Storage of vehicles other than passenger cars and light trucks intended for passenger use shall be allowed only with specific Planning Board approval.

5.  A parking area for recreational vehicles shall be established with as a minimum one space for every two dwelling units, each space shall be as a minimum 12 feet wide by 40 feet long.  The parking area in the PURD shall be so located as not to be seen from abutting property.  Screening from abutting property may be accomplished by housing the recreational vehicles in buildings, by natural or constructed embankments, by vegetation or any combination thereof.

6.  Where the length of the dead end access is greater than 750 feet, a boulevard shall be constructed, with two travel paved ways each 18 feet wide with a 12-foot wide grassed strip separating each paved way.  

7.  Access to existing public way maintained by the town shall have a 10-foot landscaped buffer each side.

6.15.10  Landscaping Requirements

1.  A coordinated landscape design for the entire project area, including landscaping of structures, parking areas, driveways and walkways, and buffer strips, shall be submitted for approval by the Planning Board.

2. Wherever possible, existing trees and vegetative cover shall be conserved and integrated into the landscape design.

3.  Proper maintenance of the landscaping, including the buffer strip, shall be the responsibility of the owner, and shall be a condition of conformance with the Zoning bylaw.

4.  No building shall be floodlit.  Lighting for drives; parking areas, walkways and entranceways shall be in accordance with Section 5.1.2.

6.15.11  Common Open Space Requirements	   	 

1.  All land within the PURD which is not covered by buildings, roads, driveways, parking areas or other development, or which is not set aside as private yards, patios or gardens for the residents, shall be common open space.  The areas of the common open space shall equal at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the PURD tract.  Such land shall have a shape, dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use for park, recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes by all the residents of the development.  At least 70% of the common open space shall be retained in contiguous areas, unless approved by the Planning Board.

2.  Suitable and usable outdoor recreational area or areas shall be provided for the use of tenants.  At least 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit must be usable open space for active and passive recreation.  Such space shall not include wetlands as determined by the Conservation Commission.  Usable open space shall be defined to include land for community gardens, hiking/jogging paths, tennis courts, swimming pools, or similar facilities.  Structures or buildings accessory to recreation, conservation or agricultural uses may be erected but shall not exceed two percent (2%) coverage of the common open land.

3.Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other recreation, conservation, or agriculture, except for easements for underground utilities shall be prohibited.  Provision shall be made so that the common open space shall be owned in common and readily accessible to the owners and residents of all units in the development, or by membership corporation, trust or association whose members are the owners and residents of the units, or otherwise as the Board may direct.  In all cases, the common open space shall be subject to a perpetual restriction running to or enforceable by the Town, which shall be recorded in respect to such land.  Such restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Board shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and the use of common open space as the Planning Board may deem appropriate.

6.15.12  Community Association

1.An owners’ association shall be established, requiring membership of each lot or unit owner in the PURD.  The association shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of communal water, sewage, recreational and thoroughfare facilities.  An association agreement or covenant shall be submitted with the Special Permit application guaranteeing the continuing maintenance expenses.  Such agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of Town Counsel and the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit, and shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds.

2.  Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that the association fails to maintain the common facilities in reasonable order and condition in accordance with the agreement, the Town may, after notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable value of the properties within the development and to prevent the common land from becoming a public nuisance.  The covenants shall also provide that the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the development.

6.15.13  Project identification

1.  As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may permit a sign showing the project name to be permanently affixed at each entrance to the development.  Each sign shall be of a size and design to be approved by the Planning Board provided that no such sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in size.

2.  All streets shall be posted with standard street signs and all street names shall be approved by the Planning Board.  Dwelling Units shall be assigned street numbers as assigned by the Assessors Office.

6.15.14  Enforcement

1.  As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may establish time limits for any development or phases thereof.

2.  Before any building permits are issued for building in a given phase, the developer shall be required to provide the Town with performance security in a form and amount satisfactory to the Planning Board to guarantee the construction of required site improvements.

6.16   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES

616.1  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this bylaw is to establish reasonable and uniform regulation of adult entertainment uses within the Town of Monson.  The intent of the bylaw is to address and mitigate the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment uses.  Studies have documented that the quality of life in a community is degraded by adult entertainment establishments as a result increased levels of crime; depreciation of property values; adverse impacts on the business climate; adverse impacts on neighborhood character; and adverse impacts on public health including noise, litter, unsanitary conditions, traffic and adverse influence on children.
The provisions of this bylaw have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials; and it is not the intent nor effect of this bylaw to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended market.  It is neither the intent nor the effect of this bylaw to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or other illegal
matter or materials.
              

6.16.2 Definitions. For purposes herein, “substantial or significant portion of stock” shall mean more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the total display, shelf, rack, table, stand or floor area, utilized for display to rent or sell.

Adult Entertainment Uses shall include the following uses:

1.	Adult Bookstore:  An establishment having as a substantial or significant 
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, periodicals, pictures and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement.

2.	Adult Cabaret:  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, tavern, dance hall, or similar 
commercial establishment which features:

a)	Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or

b)	Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting 
anatomical areas specified as less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement; or

c)	Motion pictures, films, video cassettes, cable television, slides, DVDs or 
other photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the depiction or description of anatomical areas, specified as above, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement.

3.	Adult Motion Picture Theater:  An enclosed building or outdoor venue used 
for public uses, for presenting material (motion pictures, films, cassettes, cable television, slides, DVDs or any other such visual or electronic media) distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement.

4.	Adult Paraphernalia Store:  An establishment having as a substantial or 
significant portion of its stock in devices, objects, tools, toys, or electronic media which are distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual activity, including sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement.

5.	Adult Video Store:  An establishment having a substantial or significant 
portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rent) motion pictures, films, video cassettes, DVDs and other film material or similar audio/visual and electronic media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement.

6.	Establishments Which Display Live Nudity for its Patrons:  An 
establishment which provides live entertainment for its patrons, that includes persons in the state of nudity; or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on depicting anatomical areas specified as less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement.

7.	Nudity as defined in Massachusetts General Law c.272, S31
The condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female while in a state of sexual stimulation or the sensual experiences of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct of nudity.

6.16.3   Applicability

Adult Entertainment Uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts except for the General Commercial District.

Adult Cabarets, Adult Motion Picture Theaters and Establishments Which Display Live Nudity for its Patrons as defined in Section 6.16.2 shall only be allowed in the General Commercial district, and shall meet all other requirements of that district.

All Adult Entertainment Uses may be permitted only upon granting of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals.  
     
6.16.4   Application Procedures and Submittal Requirements. Applications for a special permit under this section shall comply with the requirements of the Special Permit and Site Plan Approval, Sections 7.3 and 7.4 of this Bylaw.  In addition to the submittal requirements of Sections 7.3 and 7.4 the special permit application and site plan shall include the following information:

1.	The name and address of the legal owner of the establishment, the legal 
owner of the property, and the manager of the proposed establishment.

2.	The distances between the proposed adult entertainment use and the 
property line of all uses listed in Section 6.16.5 of this provision.

6.16.5 Criteria for Approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for an Adult Entertainment Use only if the following minimum criteria are met.

1.	Adult Entertainment Uses shall not be located within:

(a) 200 feet from any residence.

(b)  1000 feet from any public or private school, state approved childcare 
      	facility, or nursery school.

                      		(c)  1000 feet from any church or other facility used for religious purposes.

(d) 1000 feet from any Public Park, playground.

(e)  1000 feet from any other adult entertainment use within the General 
Commercial district.

(f)  1000 feet from any Industrial District.

(g)  500 feet from any establishment licensed under M.G.L. c138, S12.

Measure of Distance: The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the proposed adult entertainment use is to be located to the nearest boundary line of any of the other designated uses set forth above.
                     

2.	Adult Book Stores, Adult Paraphernalia Stores and Adult Video Stores as 
defined in Section 6.16.2 shall not be permitted to open for business earlier than 8:00 A.M. and close no later than 1:00 A.M.

3.	Adult Cabarets and Establishments Which Display Live Nudity for its 
Patrons as defined in Section 6.16.2 shall not be permitted to open for business earlier than 11:00 A.M. and close not later than 1:00 A.M.

4.	No adult entertainment use special permit shall be issued to any persons 
convicted of violating the provisions of M.G.L. c.119, S63 or M.G.L. c.272, S28.

5.	All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a
manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public.

6.	No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to display for advertisements or 
other purpose any signs, placards or other like materials to the general public on the exterior of the building or on the interior where the same may be seen through glass or other like transparent material any sexually oriented material as defined in M.G.L. c.272, S31.

7.	No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to 
disseminate adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view displays or linger on the premises.

8.	No adult entertainment use shall have any flashing lights visible from 
outside the establishment.

9.	No adult entertainment use shall have a freestanding accessory sign.

10.	Any special permit granted for an adult entertainment use shall be personal 
to the applicant, shall not run with the land and shall expire upon expiration of the applicant’s lease or upon sale or transfer of the subject’s property/business.

11.	Any adult entertainment use granted a special permit shall comply with all 
other Town Bylaws and all statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.

6.16.6   Conditions, Safeguards, Limitations for Adult Entertainment Uses. In granting a special permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals may impose additional conditions, safeguards and limitations on the permit including but not limited to additional buffer zones, or screening.

6.16.7   Expiration. Any adult entertainment use special permit granted shall expire after a period of one calendar year from its date of issuance and shall be automatically renewable for successive one year periods thereafter, provided that a written request for such renewal is made to the special permit granting authority prior to said expiration and that no objection to said renewal is made and sustained by the special permit granting authority based upon the public safety factors applied at the time that the original special permit was granted, conditions imposed by the special permit granting authority at the time the permit was issued or renewed and violations of the bylaw itself.

6.16.8   Pre-Existing Adult Entertainment Uses. Any existing adult entertainment use shall apply for a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals within 90 days following the adoption of this bylaw. Existing adult entertainment establishments are exempt from the criteria of Section 6.16.5.

6.16.9   Severability. The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining 
provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
 
            
6.17  MUNCIPAL USES

The Zoning Board of Appeals, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, may authorize certain municipal uses in any zone by special permit in conformance with the procedures and standards specified in Section 7.3.

617.1  Institutional

6.17.1.1 Lighting for municipal parks and recreational areas in excess of the standards in Section 5.1.2 may be allowed by special permit. 


6.18 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (Adopted 11/27/2006)

The purpose of this subsection of the Zoning By-Law is to establish appropriate siting criteria and standards for wind energy conversion systems to minimize the adverse impact on adjacent properties, to preserve scenic views, to limit the number and height of such systems, while protecting the historic and residential character of the Town of Monson, the property values of the community and health and safety of citizens. Wind energy conversion system shall be allowed only in the Rural Residential district and for non commercial use by the property owners.

6.18.1 	General Use Restrictions

1. No wind energy conversion system- hereafter referred to as windmills, as defined in section 1.7 shall be erected or installed except by Special Permit from the Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, in accordance with the procedures specified in section 6.18 and section 7.3 as well as such rules and regulations as officially promulgated by the Planning Board.

2. The siting of windmills will not be approved in areas demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Special Permit Granting Authority, to have a significant importance on the natural scenic qualities of Monson. 
6.18.2 Administration 
1. The applicant shall submit a plan and supporting data, which shall bear the seal and signature of a registered civil or structural engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts. The engineer shall provide proof of insurance in the minimum amount of one million dollars. Submissions shall include the following: 
(a) A plan showing property lines of the applicant and abutters, proposed location of the windmill, location of buildings, overhead transmission and distribution lines, and any radio or telecommunications towers within two hundred (200) feet of the windmill; drainage or utility easements crossing within two hundred (200) feet of proposed power or control lines to or from the windmill; and location of guy wire anchors, if any; 
(b) A dimensional representation of the windmill mounted on its support structure, including foundation dimensions (both surface and depth), foundation materials, method of attaching tower to foundations, windmill dimensions including, tower height and rotor diameter, and clearance distances of blades to ground and nearest structure; 
(c) A statement as to whether the proposed windmill is a tested production model, or an experimental, one-of-a kind or prototype design; 
(d) Windmill design data including manufacturer's specifications and installation/operation instructions; certification by the manufacturer or a registered engineer that tower design is sufficient to withstand wind load requirements for structures as established by the Mass. Building Code; 
(e) The site-specific wind speed data including the monthly mean wind-speed for a period no less than 6 months. 
 
6.18.3 Windmill Standards. The following standards shall be used when preparing plans for the siting and construction of windmills.

1. Setback: The setback of a windmill from the lot line or street line of the lot on which it is located shall be at least equal to 200% of the tower’s height. Further, the windmill shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from existing dwellings on adjoining property.
2. Height: The maximum allowable height of the windmill to the tip of the rotor shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet. In addition maximum height shall be based on documentation of the machine's safety, and on the topography of and impact on the proposed site and the neighborhood. 
3. Minimum blade height: Minimum blade elevation shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet above the ground at the lowest point of blade arc. The diameter of the rotor may not exceed thirty five (35) feet. 
4. Noise.: The windmill shall not produce a noise level at the property line exceeding ten (10) decibels   over ambient/background noise or to cause a nuisance to abutters. 
5. Labeling Requirements: At least one sign shall be posted near ground level on the tower structure warning of high voltage. In addition, the following information shall be posted on a label on the generator or alternator of the windmill, and on the windmill control panel: 
(a) Maximum power output of system and wind speed at which it is achieved. 
(b) Nominal voltages and maximum current; 
(c) Manufacturer's name and address, model number and serial number; 
(d) Normal and emergency shutdown procedures; 
(e) Maximum wind speed the windmill, in automatic unattended operation, can sustain without damage to structural components, or loss of ability to function normally. 
6. Insurance: Prior to the issuance of a building permit to erect the windmill, the applicant must provide proof of insurance covering damage to adjacent properties in the event of an accident involving the tower or its associated equipment. The applicant shall maintain insurance coverage until the windmill is removed.
7. Access: To prevent unauthorized climbing, tower access shall be restricted by either: 
(a) An impassable fence and locked gate, both at least 6 feet high, constructed around the perimeter of the base of the supporting structure, provided that such barrier is not required for any windmill erected on dwelling or other structure which provides no opportunity for climbing for at least 6 feet; or
(b) Removal of climbing apparatus on the support structure to at least 10 feet above the ground; or
(c) Installing anticlimbing shrouds over the bottom portion of the structure 
8. Electromagnetic Interference: Interference with radio frequency communication, traceable to the operation or location of the windmill, shall be limited in accordance with all applicable sections of the Federal Communications Commission specifications. 
9. Variances: Relief from the height and setback requirements may be allowed by the Monson Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 10.

6.18.4	Cessation of Use and Obsolescence

1. If the Building Inspector determines that any windmill has been abandoned for more than 12 months, or has become a hazard, he may revoke its permit and may require that it be removed by the owner, subject to the procedures and penalties set forth in Mass. General Laws Chapter 139, Section 3A and Mass. General Laws Chapter 143, Section 9.

2.  The applicant shall obtain and record in the appropriate registry of deeds a limited right of access granted to the Town of Monson by the landowner giving the Town the right to enter the property and remove the tower and accompanying structures in the event that the use of the windmill is abandoned. All costs associated with the removal shall be assessed to the property owner.


6.19	STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (Adopted 11/27/2006)

6.19.1 Purpose and Intent.  Regulation of discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) is necessary for the protection of the Town of Monson’s water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff associated with developed land uses and the accompanying increase in impervious surface are major causes of impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands, and groundwater which result in the; contamination of drinking water supplies; erosion of stream channels; alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.  This by-law establishes minimum storm water management standards for the final conditions that result from development and redevelopment projects to minimize adverse impacts offsite and downstream which would be born by abutters, townspeople and the general public.

6.19.2 	The objectives of this by-law are:

1. To require practices to control the flow of stormwater from new and redeveloped sites into the town’s storm drainage system in order to prevent flooding and erosion;

2. To protect groundwater and surface water from degradation;

3. To promote groundwater recharge;

4. To prevent pollutants from entering the town’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and to minimize discharge of pollutants from the MS4;

5. To ensure adequate long-term operation and maintenance of structural stormwater best management practices so that they work as designed;

6. To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to storm water discharges; and

7. To establish Monson’s legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this by-law through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.

6.19.3  Applicability  For the purposes of this bylaw, there are hereby established regulated areas as shown on the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Stormwater Program Automatically Designated MS4 Areas map for the Town of Monson, dated 11/18/02. This map is hereby made part of the town zoning bylaw and is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.   No person may undertake a construction activity, including clearing, grading and excavation that results in a land disturbance that will disturb equal to or greater than one acre of land or will disturb less than one acre of land but part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one acre of land draining to the Town of Monson’s municipal separate storm sewer system, as shown on the above referenced map, without a permit from the Special Permit Granting Authority. Construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or the original purpose of the site.  Construction activities that are exempt are:
1. Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulation 310 CMR 10.04;

2. Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas associated with a single family dwelling;

3. The construction of fencing that will not substantially alter existing terrain or drainage patterns;

4. Construction of utilities other than drainage (gas, water, electric, telephone, etc.) which will not alter terrain or drainage patterns;

5. Work activities of municipal, state or federal agencies or their agents outside of the Phase II boundaries as shown on the latest U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II maps.

6. As authorized in the Phase II Small MS4 General Permit for Massachusetts, storm water discharges resulting from the activities identified in Section 6.17.3 that are wholly subject to jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act and demonstrate compliance with the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy as reflected in an Order of Conditions issued by the Conservation Commission are exempt from compliance with this by-law.


6.19.4 Permits and Procedures

1. The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) under this bylaw shall be the Monson Planning Board. Such special permit shall be granted if the SPGA determines in conjunction with the Board of Heath, the Conservation Commission, Water and Sewer Department and Highway Department that the intent of this bylaw, as well as it specific criteria, are met.  The SPGA shall not grant a special permit under this section unless the petitioner’s application materials include, in the SPGA’s opinion, sufficiently detailed definite, and credible information to support positive findings in relation to the standards given in this section.  The SPGA shall document the basis for any departures from the recommendations of the other town boards or departments in it decision.

2. The site owner or his agent shall file with the SPGA, ten (10) copies of a completed application package for a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP). Permit issuance is required prior to any site altering activity. While the applicant can be a representative, the permittee must be the owner of the site. The SMP Application package shall include:

(a) A completed Application Form with original signatures of all owners;

(b) Ten (10) copies of the Stormwater Management Plan and project description as specified in Section 6.17.5;

(c) Ten (10) copies of the Operation and Maintenance Plan as required by    Section 6.17.6  of this by-law;

(d) Payment of the application and review fees

3. Entry. Filing and application for a permit grants the SPGA or its agent, permission to enter the site to verify the information in the application and to inspect for compliance with the resulting permit.

4. Other Boards. The SPGA shall give one copy of the application package to the Conservation Commission, Highway Surveyor, Water and Sewer Department, and Building Inspector.

5. Fee Structure. The SPGA shall obtain with each submission an Application Fee established by the SPGA to cover expenses connected with the Public hearing and application review of the Stormwater Management Permit and a technical Review Fee sufficient to cover professional review. The SPGA is authorized to retain a Registered Professional Engineer or other professional consultant to advise the SPGA on any or all aspects of these plans. Applicants must pay review fees before the review process may begin.

6. Actions. The SPGA’s action, rendered in writing, shall consist of either:

(a) Approval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application based upon determination that the proposed plan meets the Standards in 6.17.5.2 and will adequately protect the water resources of the community and is in compliance with the requirements set forth in this by-law;

(b) Approval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application subject to any conditions, modifications or restrictions required by the SPGA which will ensure that the project meets the Standards in 6.17.5.2 and adequately protect water resources, set forth in this by-law;

(c)Disapproval of the Stormwater Management Permit Application based upon a determination that the proposed plan, as submitted, does not meet the Standards in 6.17.5.2 or adequately protect water resources, as set forth in this by-law.

7. Project Completion. At completion of the project the permittee shall submit as-built record drawings of all structural stormwater controls and treatment best management practices required for the site. The as-built drawing shall show deviations from the approved plans, if any, and be certified by a Registered Professional Engineer.

6.19.5  Contents of Stormwater Management Plan

1. Application. The Stormwater Management Plan shall contain sufficient information for the SPGA to evaluate the environmental impact, effectiveness, and acceptability of the measures proposed by the applicant for reducing adverse impacts from stormwater. The plan shall be designed to meet the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards as set forth in the Standards of this section and the current edition of the Department of Environmental Protection guidelines and policies.  The Stormwater Management Plan shall fully describe the project in drawings, and narrative. It shall include:

		(a) Locus map,

		(b) The existing zoning, and land use at the site,

		(c) The proposed land use,

		(d) The location(s) of existing and proposed easements,

		(e) The location of existing and proposed utilities,

		(f) The site’s existing and proposed topography with contours at 2 foot intervals,

		(g) The existing site hydrology,

		(h) A description and delineation of existing stormwater conveyances, impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows.

		(i) A delineation of 100-year flood plains, if applicable
	
		(j) Estimated high groundwater elevation in areas to be used for stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration.

		(k) The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces with runoff coefficient for each,

		(l) A drainage area map showing pre and post construction watershed boundaries, drainage area and stormwater flow paths,

		(m) A description and drawings of all components of the proposed drainage system including:

		(i) Locations, cross sections, and profiles, of all brooks, streams, drainage swales and their method of stabilization,

		(ii) All measures for the detention, retention, or infiltration of water,
		
		(iii) All measures for the protection of water quality,

		(iv) The structural details for all components of the proposed drainage systems and stormwater management facilities,

		(v) Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction specifications, and typicals, and

		(vi) Expected hydrology with supporting calculations.

	(n) Proposed improvements including location of buildings or other structures, impervious surfaces, and drainage facilities, if applicable,

	(o) Timing, schedules, and sequence of development including clearing, stripping, rough grading, construction, final grading, and vegetative stabilization,

	(p) A maintenance schedule for the period of construction, and

	(q) Any other information requested by the SPGA.

2. Standards. Projects shall meet the Standards of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy, which are as follows:

	(a) No new stormwater conveyances (e.g. outfalls) may discharge untreated stormwater directly to or cause erosion in wetlands or water of the Commonwealth.

	(b) Stormwater management systems must be designed so that post-development peak discharges rates do not exceed pre-development peak discharge rates.

	(c) Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized through the use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent practicable. The annual recharge from the post-development site should approximate the annual recharge rate from the pre-development or existing site conditions, based on soil types.

	(d) For new development, stormwater management systems must be designed to remove 80% of the average annual load (post development conditions) of Total Suspended Solids (TSS). It is presumed that this standard is met when:

	(i) Suitable nonstructural practices for source control and pollution prevention are implemented;

		(ii) Stormwater management best management practices (BMPs) are sized to capture the prescribed runoff volume; and

		(iii) Stormwater management BMPs are maintained as designed.

	(e) Stormwater discharges from areas with higher potential pollutant loads require the use of specific stormwater management BMPs.  The use of infiltration practices without pretreatment is prohibited.

	(f) Stormwater discharges to critical areas must utilize certain stormwater management BMPs approved for critical areas (see MA DEP’s Stormwater Management Volume I: Stormwater Policy Handbook). Critical areas are Outstanding Resource Waters (ORWs), cold water fisheries, and recharge areas for public water supplies.

	(g) Redevelopment of previously developed sites must meet the Stormwater Management Standards to the maximum extent practicable. However, if it is not practicable to meet all the standards, new (retrofitted or expanded) stormwater management systems must be designed to improve existing conditions.

	(h) Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent impacts during disturbance and construction activities.

	(i) All stormwater management systems must have an operation and maintenance plan to ensure that systems function as designed.

	(j) When one or more of the Standards cannot be met, an applicant may demonstrate that an equivalent level of environmental protection will be provided.

3. Project Changes. The permittee, or their agent, shall notify the SPGA in writing of any change or alteration of a land-disturbing activity authorized in a Stormwater Management Permit before any change or alteration occurs. If the SPGA determines that the change or alteration is significant, based on the design requirements listed in Section 6.17.5 and accepted construction practices, the SPGA may require that an amended Stormwater Management Permit application be filed and a public hearing held. If any change or deviation from the Stormwater Management Permit occurs during a project, the SPGA may require the installation or interim measures before approving the change.

6.19.6  Operation and Maintenance Plans

An Operation and Maintenance Plan (O&M Plan) is required at the time of application for all projects. The maintenance plan shall be designed to ensure compliance with the Permit, this by-law and that the Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards, 314, CMR 4.00 are met in all seasons and throughout the life of the system. The Operation and Maintenance Plan shall remain on file with the SPGA and shall be an ongoing requirement. The O&M Plan shall include:

	1. The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system

	2. Maintenance agreements that specify:

		(a) The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for operation and maintenance.

(b) The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and emergency repairs.

	3. Maintenance Schedule for all drainage structures, including swales and ponds.

	4. List of easements with the purpose and location of each.

	5. The signature(s) of the owner(s).

	6. Stormwater Management Easements(s).

	(a) Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner(s) as necessary for:

	(i) Access for facility inspections and maintenance,

	(ii) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the 100-year storm event.

	(iii) Direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to structures requiring regular cleanout.

(b) The purpose of each easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement signed by the property owner.

	(c) Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the SPGA.

	(d) Easements shall be recorded with the Hampden County Registry of Deeds prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completion by the SPGA.

	7. Changes to Operation and Maintenance Plans

	(a) The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must notify the SPGA of changes in ownership or assignment of financial responsibility.

	(b) The maintenance schedule in the Maintenance Agreement may be amended to achieve the purposes of this by-law by mutual agreement of the SPGA and the Responsible Parties. Amendments must be in writing and signed by all Responsible Parties. Responsible Parties shall include owner(s), persons with financial responsibility, and persons with operational responsibility.

6.19.7  Surety

The SPGA may require the permittee to post before the start of land disturbance or construction activity, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash, or other acceptable security. The form of the bond shall be approved by town counsel, and be in an amount deemed sufficient by the SPGA to ensure that the work will be completed in accordance with the permit. If the project is phased, the SPGA may release part of the bond as each phase is completed in compliance with the permit but the bond may not be fully released until the SPGA has received the final inspection report as required by Section 6.17.8.4 and issued a Certificate of Completion.

6.19.8  Inspections

The SPGA or its designee shall inspect the project site at the following stages:

	1. Initial Site Inspection: prior to approval of any plan.

	2. Erosion Control Inspection: to ensure erosion control practices are in accord with the
 	filed plan.

	3. Bury Inspection: prior to backfilling of any underground drainage stormwater
 	conveyance structures.

	4. Final Inspection. After the stormwater management system has been constructed and
	before the surety has been released, the applicant must submit a record plan detailing the
 	actual stormwater management system as installed. The SPGA or its agent shall inspect
 	the system to confirm its “as-built” features. This inspector shall also evaluate the
 	effectiveness of the system in an actual storm. If the inspector finds the system to be
 	adequate he shall so report to the SPGA which will issue a Certificate of Completion.

	5. If the system is found to be inadequate by virtue of physical evidence of operational
	failure, even though it was built as called for in the Stormwater Management Plan, it
 	shall be corrected by the permittee before the performance guarantee is released. If the
	permittee fails to act the Town of Monson may use the surety bond to complete the
	work. Examples of inadequacy shall be limited to: errors in the infiltrative capability,
	errors in the maximum groundwater elevation, failure to properly define or construct
	flow paths, or erosive discharges from basins.

6.19.9  Waivers

	1. The SPGA may waive strict compliance with any requirement of this by-law or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, where:

(a) Such action is allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations,

(b) Is in the public interest, and

(c) Is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this by-law.

	2. Any applicant may submit a written request to be granted such a waiver. Such a
 	request shall be accompanied by an explanation or documentation supporting the waiver
 	request and demonstrating that strict application of the by-laws does not further the
 	purposes or objectives of this by-law.

	3. All waiver requests shall be discussed and voted on at the public hearing for the
 	project.

	4. If in the SPGA’s opinion, additional time or information is required for review of a
 	waiver request, the SPGA may continue the hearing to a date certain announced at the
 	meeting. In the event the applicant objects to a continuance, or fails to provide requested
 	information, the waiver request shall be denied.

6.19.10  Certificate of Completion

The SPGA will issue a letter certifying completion upon receipt and approval of the final inspection reports and/or upon otherwise determining that all work of the permit has been satisfactorily completed in conformance with this by-law.

6.19.11  Enforcement

	1. The SPGA or an authorized agent of the SPGA shall enforce this by-law, regulations,
 	orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal
 	remedies for such violations.

	2. Orders.

(a) The SPGA or an authorized agent of the SPGA may issue a written order to
 enforce the provisions of this by-law or the regulations hereunder, which may
 include requirements to:

(i) Cease and desist from construction or land disturbing activity until
	 there is compliance with the by-law and the stormwater management permit;

	(ii) Repair, maintain, or replace the stormwater management system or portions thereof in accordance with the operation and maintenance plan.

	(b) Perform monitoring, analysis, and reporting;

	(c) Remediate adverse impact resulting directly or indirectly from malfunction of the stormwater management system.

	(d) If the enforcing person determines that the abatement or remediation of adverse impacts is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town of Monson may, at its option, undertake such work, and the property owner shall reimburse the town’s expenses.

	(e) Within thirty (30) days after completing all measures necessary to abate the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property owner shall be notified of the costs incurred by the town, including administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the SPGA within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notification of the cost incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a protest or within thirty (30) days following a decision of the SPGA affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a special assessment against the property owner and shall constitute a lien on the owner’s property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in G.L. Ch. 59, § 57, after the thirty-first day at which the costs first become due.


6.20  BED & BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT (Adopted 11/26/07) 

The Zoning Board of Appeals, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, may authorize a Bed and Breakfast Establishment as defined by section 1.7 by Special Permit with site plan approval in conformance with the procedures specified in Section 7.3.

6.20.1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this bylaw is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations for Bed & Breakfast establishments in districts zoned as residential and commercial to achieve the following purposes:

1. To encourage the utilization of homes in residential and commercial zoned districts which because of their size are costly and/or difficult to maintain as private residences; to provide an economic incentive to maintain and to rehabilitate older, larger residences.

2. To regulate Bed & Breakfast establishments to insure sensitivity and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods in residentially zoned districts through minimizing adverse impacts on neighboring residential uses.

6.20.2. General Description. A Bed & Breakfast establishment is a private, owner occupied residential dwelling having a mixed use as a home for the residential owner and as an accessory use for guest lodging in a residential home existing at the time of adoption of this bylaw (November 26, 2007) . The home is to be the primary and legal residence of the owner. Individual guests are prohibited from staying at any particular bed and breakfast establishment for more than twenty-one days in any one–year period.


6.20.3. Submittal and Review Requirements. A Special Permit shall be required to operate a Bed & Breakfast establishment. As a part of any application for a Special Permit, applicants shall submit, at a minimum, the information required for site plan approval.

1. The Bed & Breakfast establishment and operation shall be located within an existing
owner occupied residential dwelling. Rooms used for sleeping shall be part of the primary residential structure and shall not have been specifically constructed for rental purposes. 

2.  Up to four rooms and, not more than fifty percent (50%) percent of the entire habitable living space shall be allocated for Bed & Breakfast establishment purposes, and there shall be no more than eight (8) guests lodging at the establishment at any one time. Common areas such as kitchens are not included in this calculation.
 
3. The Special Permit authorizing a Bed & Breakfast establishment shall be issued to the
owner(s) of the property only and is not transferable to a subsequent property owner.
 
4. The private residence in which the Bed & Breakfast operation is located shall be
maintained so that the appearance of the building and grounds remain that of a
private residence. No exterior alterations are allowed other than those required to ensure safety of the structure or guests.

5. No cooking facilities, including, but not limited to, stoves, microwave ovens, toaster
ovens, and hot plates, shall be available to guests and no meals, except breakfast, shall be served to guests. Alcohol shall also be prohibited from being served on the premises to any Bed & Breakfast guest. Additionally, there shall be at least one (1) bathroom solely dedicated to the guests of the Bed & Breakfast establishment.

6. If the property is not to be served by public water and sewer, the applicant shall provide evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals that the proposed use will not have any detrimental impact on any water supply on-site or off-site. Additionally Bed & Breakfast establishments served by an existing septic system shall not be granted a special permit until receiving approval from the Board of Health.

7. Exterior lighting shall be so shaded as to prevent illumination off-site. All external
lighting, except for demonstrated security needs, shall be extinguished by 10:00 P.M.

8. There shall be provided two (2) parking spaces for the home owner and one (1) parking space for each room which the Bed & Breakfast establishment has available for rent to guests. Parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building and not be in any required building yard set back. Parking areas shall be screened from adjoining residential properties by a fence or dense plantings, not less than five (5) feet in height. All parking for a Bed & Breakfast establishment shall be located on the premises. 

9. Applicants for Special Permits under the provisions of this By-Law shall provide
sketches, drawings or plans necessary to illustrate compliance with the requirements of
this By-Law. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, at its discretion, require plans to be prepared by registered land surveyors, architects or engineers to illustrate the Special Permit application for the benefit of the Board and other Town officers such as the Building Commissioner and the Health Agent. Illustration required may include but not be limited to parking and driveway plan, room layout, sanitary facilities, and kitchen
facilities.

10. Any sign relating to a Bed & Breakfast operation shall comply with the applicable
sign By-Law as set forth in Section 5.3. However, all signs for a Bed & Breakfast
operation shall be not greater than 3 square feet in size.

11. Prior to the renting of any rooms to guests the applicant shall obtain a Certificate of
Inspection from the Monson Building Commissioner. The Certificate of Inspection
shall be renewable every year according to the applicable fee schedule.

12. Each owner must keep a daily guest register that contains the guest’s name, home address and duration of stay. The owner, upon request of the Building Commissioner, or Monson Police Chief, shall provide the daily guest register for inspection.

6.20.4 Expiration. Any special permit granted for a Bed and Breakfast use shall be personal to the applicant, shall not run with the land and shall expire upon sale or transfer of the subject’s property/business. In addition, the Bed and Breakfast special permit granted shall expire after a period of one calendar year from its date of issuance and shall be automatically renewable for successive two year periods thereafter, provided that a written request for such renewal is made to the special permit granting authority and that no objection to the renewal is made and sustained by the special permit granting authority based upon the public safety factors applied at the time that the original special permit was granted, conditions imposed by the special permit granting authority at the time the permit was issued or renewed and violations of the bylaw itself.



6.21 COMMON ACCESS DRIVEWAY (adopted 5.11.2009, revised 5.10.2010)

The Monson Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, may authorize Common Access Driveway for up to 4 dwelling units by Special Permit in conformance with the procedures specified in section 7.3, subject to the conditions set forth below.

6.21.1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this bylaw is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations for common access or shared driveways in the RR and RV districts and to achieve the following intent:

1. To enhance public safety by reducing the number and frequency of curb cuts.

2. Minimize the adverse impact on wetlands and diminish environmental degradation through the maintenance of existing vegetative and topographical conditions.

3. To encourage the protection and preservation of significant natural features and preserve the rural quality of the area.


6.21.2 Standards: Proposed common access driveways to be shared by not more than 4 dwelling units shall require a special permit from the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider the following factors in reaching its decision: whether the proposed drive creates less adverse impact to wetlands located on the lots; results in the preservation of the rural quality of the area through the reduction in the number of access ways and maintenance of existing vegetative and topographical conditions; otherwise promotes the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the town. 

1. Each lot must have adequate approved legal frontage on an existing way, or an approved estate lot, with the required lot width. For the purposes of this section, lot width is defined as: the horizontal distance (measured parallel to the Front Lot Line) between the side lot lines meeting the legal frontage for that zoning district. At no point, between the front lot line and the required building setback for the lot, shall the lot have a width less than the minimum lot width required. Frontage along the length of the common access driveway shall not be used to satisfy the zoning frontage requirements.

2. The distance of the common driveway measured from the street line to the last lot line shall not exceed a distance of seven hundred (700) feet unless a waiver is granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) in accordance with Section 6.21.6.1 of Section 6.21. The driveway shall provide safe and reasonable access for fire, police and emergency vehicles. 

3. The common driveway shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the lots to which the driveway provides access, and shall be separated from any other lots to which access is not being provided by an appropriately landscaped buffer area at least ten (10) feet in width.

4. The benefited parcels must have permanent access to the common driveway by easements recorded in the Hampden Registry of Deeds.


6.21.3 Application Requirements: The following shall accompany an application for a common access driveway special permit:

1. Plans, prepared by and carrying the seal of a registered professional engineer, shall be submitted showing the layout for the common access driveway, meeting the following specifications:

(a) A minimum cleared width of twenty four (24) feet and a minimum travel way width of eighteen (18) feet shall be maintained over the entire length of the common driveway.

(b) A maximum grade of twelve percent (12%); unless a waiver is granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) in accordance with Section 6.21.6.2 of Section 6.21.  Said driveway shall not exceed a grade of two percent (2%) within 30 feet of its intersection with the public way.

(c) The common access driveway shall have a minimum centerline radius of one hundred and twenty five (125) feet and provide adequate access and turn-around areas for emergency vehicles by a turning circle of one hundred (100) foot diameter or a hammerhead intersection with inside radius of thirty (30) feet at the end of the common driveway.

(d) The centerline intersection of the common driveway with the street centerline shall not be less than seventy five (75) degrees. The radius of the common driveway intersection with the street right of way must be sufficient to enable emergency vehicles to exit and enter the common driveway and in no case be less than twenty (20) feet.

(e) No connection to any other way except the one from which it originates.

(f) A roadway surface of a minimum of 6 inches of graded gravel, placed over a properly prepared base, graded and compacted to drain from the crown. Where the property rises in elevation from the street, the driveway shall be paved from the street to the first high point (break in grade) in order to prevent erosion toward the street. The Planning Board may require other sections of the drive to be paved and any common driveway section exceeding an eight (8) % grade shall be paved.

(g) The common access driveway including utilities, shoulders, turn-arounds, travel way, and any snow storage areas shall be laid out entirely within an access and utility easement. All stormwater runoff from the common driveway shall be contained on the property or otherwise mitigated by stormwater management best management practices to result in no net increase in pre-development peak flow rates as compared to post-development peak flow rates.  No stormwater runoff from the common driveway shall be allows to cross into or flow over the traveled portion of the public way.

(h) Easements, covenant and agreements for the subject lots containing restrictions prohibiting any additional vehicular access to said lots from other than the common driveway approved by this special permit, stating that said common driveway is a private driveway, not open to public use, and not a town way. The maintenance, operation, repair and reconstruction (including snow plowing and snow/ice removal) is the responsibility and liability of the property owners. All deed easements, easements plans, restrictions, covenants and agreements must be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board prior to their recording and prior to the issuance of any building permits.

(i) All review cost, including, but not limited to, engineering and legal, shall be borne by the applicant in accordance with the Monson Planning Board’s Rules and Regulations. 
	
2. Any deeds of ownership of lots served by a common driveway shall require that the owners of said lots must be members of a maintenance association, whose purpose is to provide for maintenance of the common driveway, which shall include, but not be limited to, snow plowing, maintaining driveway design specifications, and stormwater drainage systems. An association agreement or covenant shall be submitted with the Special Permit application guaranteeing the continuing maintenance expenses.  Such agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of Town Counsel and the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit, and shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. The deed to each lot served on a Common Driveway must reference this Maintenance Association Agreement. 

3. House numbers identifying all the homes utilizing the common driveway shall be placed at its intersection with the town road and at each subsequent turnoff from the common driveway sufficient for identification by emergency vehicles.

4. Performance Guarantee. The Planning Board shall require a performance bond or other security for the completion of the common driveway. Such security shall be posted prior to construction of the driveway, and remain in effect until the common driveway is certified as being complete. 

6.21.4 Certification: Prior to the issuance of any occupancy permits for any of the lots serviced by such common driveway, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Bard, as-built plans, prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer and a certified statement from a registered professional engineer that such common driveway was constructed in accordance with the approved plans.

6.21.5 Acceptance as a public way:   In granting a special permit for a common drive, the Planning Board shall impose a condition prohibiting the lot owners from petitioning for acceptance of the common drive as a public way.

6.21.6 Waivers: (adopted 5/10/2010) The Monson Planning Board acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) may grant the following waivers to the requirements of this section.

1.	The total distance of the common drive can be increased over 1200 linear feet as measured from the street line to the last lot line of the common drive provided that:

(a)	The common drive is constructed to suitable widths to meet the requirements of this bylaw, that adequate access and turn-around areas in compliance with Section 6.21.3(c) of this bylaw are provided at a spacing of seven hundred (700) feet maximum along with the common drive and at the end of the common drive, that adequate access and turn-around areas in compliance with Section 6.21.3(c) of this bylaw are provided at spacing of seven hundred (700) feet maximum along the length of the standard driveway and at the end of the standard driveway, if the standard drive is in excess of three hundred and fifty (350) feet in length measured from the end of the common driveway, that the standard driveway is constructed to suitable grades, alignment and width to prove access for emergency vehicles, and that the dwellings associated with the common drive access constructed beyond a distance of one thousand (1000) feet from the public way shall include a fire alarm system monitored through a private monitoring company who shall notify the central dispatch in the Town of Monson of emergency incidents.

2.  The maximum grade in excess of 12% may be allowed on limited sections of the common drive by a waiver granted by the SPGA if other items associated with design and construction of the common drive provide, in the opinion of the SPGA safe and reasonable access for owners, fire, police and emergency vehicles taking into account alignment of the common drive, the surface treatment of the common drive, the relationship of the location of the section over twelve percent (12%) of the driveway to the compliant sections of the driveway and the overall drivability of the common drive.  Section of common drive over twelve percent (12%) shall be limited to two hundred and fifty (250) feet in length for each noncompliant section.  Noncompliant sections of the common drive shall be separated by a minimum length of two hundred and fifty (250) feet of common drive meeting the requirements of Section 6.21.3.1(b). 


6.22 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT BYLAW (adopted 5/11/2009)

6.22.1 Purpose.  The purpose of this bylaw is to preserve the small-town character of Monson.

Projects must meet all design standards. Projects which meet the recommended approach shall be found to meet the standard. Because there is often more than one way to meet the standard, the Planning Board may grant waivers from the recommended approach when they find that an alternative site planning and building design approach addresses the standard equally well or better than the recommended approach. 

6.22.2 Size. Standard: No single building will be allowed for retail use with a gross leasable floor area greater than 25,000 square feet in the CC zone, and 40,000 square feet in the GC, and I zones, regardless of the number of separate businesses residing within said structure.

6.22.3 Facades and Exterior Walls and Details. Standard: Buildings should have human-scale architectural features and patterns. The elements should be integral parts of the building fabric, and not superficially applied trim or graphics, or paint. Facades visible from a public way should be articulated or use other techniques to reduce the massive scale and the uniform appearances of large retail buildings. Recommended approach:

1. Building facades must include a repeating pattern that shall include color change, texture change, and materials change. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than (thirty) 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically. Patterns can include architectural or structural bays through a change in plane of no less than 12 inches in width, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib.

2. Facades visible from a public way greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall; incorporate wall plane projections or recesses having a depth of at least 3% of the length of the façade so that no uninterrupted façade shall exceed 100 horizontal feet; or incorporate other types of articulation, facades, displays, or texture which meets the above standard without forcing structural changes to the core structure.

3. Ground floor facades facing public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other such features along no less than 60 percent of their horizontal length.

6.22.4 Roofs. Standard: variations in roof lines and features should be encouraged to add variety to, and reduce the massive scale of, large buildings. Where the standard is not possible or feasible:

1. Parapets should be used to conceal low slope or flat roofs, and roof equipment such as HVAC, from public view.

	2. Overhanging eaves, extending no less than 3 feet past the supporting walls.

	3. Three or more slope planes.

6.22.5 Materials and Colors. Standard: Exterior building materials and colors should compliment materials and colors utilized in adjoining neighborhoods. Recommended approach:

1. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality materials and include, but not be limited to, brick; clapboard, wood shingles, and textured concrete masonry units.

	2. Façade colors should be low reflectance, neutral, or earth tone colors.

6.22.6 Entrances and Entryways. Standard: Large retail buildings should feature multiple entrances. Multiple building entrances break up large walls, reduce walking distances from cars, facilitate pedestrian and bicycle access from public sidewalks, and provide convenience where certain entrances offer access to individual stores, or defined departments of a store. Entryway design elements and variations should give orientation and definition to a building. Recommended approach:

1. The sides of a principal building which face an abutting public street or large parking lot should have at least one customer entrance or a pedestrian arcade which brings pedestrians around the building to the entrance.

2. Each principal building and each store within a building must have at least one clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance, featuring no less than three of the following: Canopies or porticos, overhangs, recesses/projections, arcades, raised cornice parapets over the door, peaked roof forms, arches, outdoor patios, display windows, architectural details which are integrated into the building structure (such as tile work or moldings), or integral planters or wing walls which incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting.

6.22.7 Parking Lot Orientation. Standard: parking areas should provide safe, convenient, and efficient access. They should be distributed around large buildings in order to shorten the distance to other buildings and public sidewalks and to reduce the overall scale of the paved surface. Buildings should be located closer to streets to reduce the scale of the complex, encourage pedestrian traffic, and provide a greater focus for architectural details.

6.22.8 Rear and Back Sides. Standard: Architectural and landscaping features should mitigate the impacts of rear and sides of buildings which otherwise present a view of blank walls, loading areas, storage areas, HVAC equipment, refuse receptacles, and other such features. Recommended approach:

1. Greater setbacks, landscape buffers, screening, and fencing that is otherwise required in the zoning district. Where a façade faces adjacent residential zones, an earthen berm, no less than 6 feet in height, containing at minimum evergreen trees planted at intervals of 15 feet on center, or in clusters or clumps, shall be provided.

6.22.9 Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection, and Loading areas. Standard: Loading areas and outdoor storage areas, when visible from adjoining properties and/or public streets, should be screened, recessed, or enclosed. While screens and recesses can effectively mitigate these impacts, the selection of inappropriate screening materials can exacerbate the problem. Recommended approach:

1. Appropriate locations for loading and outdoor storage include areas between buildings, where more than one building is located on a site and such buildings are not more than 40 feet apart, or on those sides of buildings which do not have customer entrances.

2. Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses, shall not be visible from abutting streets.

3. No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of any public street, or public sidewalk.

4. Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash collection and/or compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are minimized and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials which are different from, or inferior to, the principal materials of the building and landscape.

5. Non-enclosed areas for the storage of seasonal inventory shall be defined and screened where viewable by the public with walls and/or fences.

6.22.10 Pedestrian Flows. Standard: Sidewalks and internal pedestrian circulation systems should provide user-friendly pedestrian access as well as pedestrian safety, shelter, and convenience. Recommended approach:

1. Sidewalks at least 6 feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot which abut a public street.

2. Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than 6 feet in width shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit shops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers, or other such materials for no less than 50% of its length. 

3. Sidewalks, no less than 8 feet in width, shall be provided along the full width of the building along any façade which features a customer entrance, and along any façade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six (6) feet from the façade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the façade and which provide weather protection features.

4. All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as attractiveness of the walkways.

6.22.11 Delivery/Loading.  Standard: Delivery and loading operations should not disturb adjoining neighborhoods, or other conforming uses. Recommended approach:

1. No delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 9:00 PM and 7:00 AM unless the applicant submits evidence that sound barriers between all areas for such operations effectively reduce noise emissions to that which will not disturb adjoining conforming residential uses or residentially zoned areas.

6.22.12 Financial Performance Guarantees. The Planning Board may require such appropriate conditions, limitations, and safeguards which they feel are necessary to assure the project meets the criteria of this section. To insure the project is properly constructed and used, the Planning Board may require financial performance guarantees, in a form acceptable to the Board, from major projects as a condition of granting site plan approval.

6.22.13 Impact Studies, Independent. If the project should generate more than 1000 car-trips per day, the Planning Board may require an independent impact report which may include, and not be limited to, traffic impact, storm water management, economic impact, sound impact, impact to abutting properties, impact to the town economy and character, and impact to the public safety, health, and welfare of town residents. The cost of said studies shall be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board reserves the right to select a consultant of their own choosing who has not had a contract with the developer within the last 5 years.
6.22.14  Enforcement.

1. Any special permit issued under this section shall lapse within one (1) year if a substantial use thereof has not commenced sooner except for good cause.

2. The Planning Board may periodically amend or add rules and regulations relating to the procedures and administration of this section.


Notation:  The language in section 6.22.14.(1) has been amended by order of the Office of the Attorney General by deleting the sentence “The time required to pursue and await determination of a judicial appeal pursuant to Chapter 40A of the General Laws shall be included within the one (1) year time limit”.


6.23  LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATIONS
         (adopted 10/18/2010)

6.23.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this subsection of the Zoning Bylaw is to establish appropriate criteria and standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of new large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.

The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations.

6.23.2 Applicability
This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section.  This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of existing installations or related equipment.  

6.23.3 Location (adopted 5/9/2016) amended (8/22/2016)
Large-Scale Ground Mounted Photovoltaic Installations are prohibited in the Rural Residential District, the Residential Village District, the Multiple Dwelling District, and the Reserved Land District.  Large Scale Ground Mounted Photovoltaic Solar Installations are allowed by right with site plan review in the Industrial District, the General Commercial District, the Central Commercial District and the Commercial Recreation District.

Large Scale Ground Mounted Photovoltaic Installations are subject to the following minimum lot size requirements, based on the nameplate capacity of the installation:

	Array Size (KW, DC)                                                               Minimum Lot Size

	250 to 650 KW, DC						  6 Acres

	Over 650 to 1,500 KW, DC					  13 Acres

	Over 1,500 to 3,000  KW, DC					  25 Acres

	Over 3000 KW, DC						  50 Acres  

6.23.4 General Requirements for all Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Photovoltaic Installations
The following requirements are common to all solar photovoltaic installations to be sited in designated locations:

	6.23.4.1 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
The construction and operation of all large scale solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements.  All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.

6.23.4.2 Building Permit and Building Inspection
No large scale solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.  

6.23.4.3 Fees
The application for a building permit for a large scale solar photovoltaic installation must be accompanied by the fee required for a building permit.



6.23.5 Site Plan Review
Ground-mounted large scale solar photovoltaic installations with 250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity shall undergo site plan review by the Monson Planning Board acting as the Site Plan Review Authority (SPRA) prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section.  The construction and operation of all large scale solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements.  No large scale solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.  

6.23.6 Application Requirements
All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

Pursuant to the site plan review process, the project proponent shall provide the following documents:

1.	A site plan showing:

(a)	Property lines and physical features, including roads and buildings, for the project site.

(b)	Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or structures, and a landscape plan in plan view identifying plant material to be used to screen all appurtenant structures (per 6.23.7.5) and identifying plant material or fencing to be used to satisfy the requirement for a buffer between installation and property edge as (per section 6.23.8.3).

(c)	Blueprints of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential shading from nearby structures.

(d)	One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices.

(e)	Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter.

(f)	Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer.

(g)	Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any.

(h)	Name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the project proponent, if any.

2.	Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic installation.

3.	An operation and maintenance plan which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, and general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.

4.	Proof of liability insurance.

5.	Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 6.23.11.3.

      6. Utility Notification
No large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the SPRA that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.  Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

6.23.7 Design Standards

6.23.7.1 Dimensional and Density Requirements
All construction shall comply with the yard, space, and height requirements of the zoning district(s) in which the installation is located or 75 feet set back from front, side and rear yard; whichever is greater.

6.23.7.2  Lighting
Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law.  Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties.  Lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and inward and shall incorporate full cut off fixtures to reduce light pollution.

6.23.7.3 Signage
Signs shall comply with Section 5.3 of the Monson Zoning Bylaws.  A sign consistent with Section 5.3 of the Monson Zoning Bylaw shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number shall be made visible from a right of way where the property has frontage. Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.

6.23.7.4 Utility Connections
Reasonable efforts, as determined by the SPRA, shall be made to place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider.  Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider.

6.23.7.5 Appurtenant Structures
All appurtenant structures to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall conform to the setback requirements of the zoning district in which the installation is located or 75 feet setback from front, side and rear yard; whichever is greater. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other.  Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. All appurtenant structures shall have a Landscape Plan.

6.23.8  Safety and Environmental Standards

	6.23.8.1 Emergency Services
The large scale solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the local Fire Chief.  Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan.  All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked.  The owner or operator shall provide the name, phone number, and email of the person responsible for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation.

	6.23.8.2 Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the large scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws.

	6.23.8.3  Landscaped Buffer Strip
A landscaped buffer strip is intended to provide in a reasonable time a visual barrier between the Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation and neighboring properties.  Except for vehicular and pedestrian passways, the areas shall be used only for an interplanting of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, with lawn or other suitable and appropriate ground cover. 

The buffer must provide coverage of three feet in height from the proposed grade to the top of the majority of the planting material at time of installation. Reasonable leeway may be provided by the SPRA to allow for expected growth of the buffer strip over time. The buffer strip shall occupy at least 20% of the depth between the property line and the mandated setback of the zoning district where the installation is located. Where considered appropriate in the judgment of the site plan review authority, walls and fences may be used in addition to or in lieu of plantings.  A planting plan showing the types, sizes and locations of material to be used shall be subject to the approval of the SPRA.  

The SPRA may waive the requirements of the visual barrier where it deems it advisable, for example, where a street is the dividing line between different land uses.  

6.23.9 Monitoring and Maintenance

6.23.9.1 Installation Conditions
The large scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good conditions.  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures.  Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services.  The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any access road(s) unless accepted as a public way.

	6.23.9.2 Modification Conditions
Any material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the SPRA.

6.23.10 Waivers
1.	The SPRA may waive strict compliance with any requirement of the Design Standards, Safety and Environmental Standards section of this bylaw, or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, where:
(a)	Such action is allowed by federal, state and local statues and/or regulations;
(b)	Is in the public interest:
(c)	Is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this by-law.

2.	Any applicant may submit a written request to be granted such a waiver.  Such a request shall be accompanied by an explanation or documentation supporting the waiver request and demonstrating that strict application of the by-laws does not further the purposes or objectives of this by-law.

3.	All waiver requests shall be discussed and voted on at the public hearing for the project.

4.	If in the SPRA opinion, additional time or information is required for review of a waiver request, the Board may continue the hearing to a date certain announced at the meeting.  In the event the applicant objects to a continuance, or fails to provide requested information, the waiver request shall be denied.

6.23.11  Abandonment or Decommissioning

	6.23.11.1 Removal Requirements
Any large scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 6.28.2 of this bylaw shall be removed.  The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than one hundred and fifty (150) days after the date of discontinued operations.  The owner or operator shall notify the SPRA by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.  Decommissioning shall consist of:

(a)	Physical removal of all large scale ground solar photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site.

(b)	Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.

(c)	Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion.  The SPRA may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.

	6.23.11.2 Abandonment
Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances, the solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the SPRA.  If the owner or operator of the large scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within one hundred and fifty (150) days of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town may enter the property and physically remove the installation.



		6.23.11.3 Financial Surety
Proponents of large scale ground mounted solar photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of surety through escrow account cash or surety bond to cover the cost of removal in the event the Town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount determined to be reasonable by the SPRA, but in no event to exceed more than one hundred and twenty five (125%) percent of the cost of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the project proponent.  The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer.  The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.  




6.24	REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) AND OFF-SITE     
            MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (OMMD) (Adopted at Town Meeting 5/12/2014)

1.	Purposes  

It is recognized that the nature of the substance cultivated, processed, and/or sold by medical marijuana treatment centers and off-site medical marijuana dispensaries may have objectionable operational characteristics and should be located in such a way as to ensure the health, safety, and general well-being of the public as well as patients seeking treatment.  The specific and separate regulation of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (hereafter referred to as a RMD) as Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers and Off-site Medical Marijuana Dispensary (hereafter referred to as an OMMD) facilities is necessary to advance these purposes and ensure that such facilities are not located within close proximity of minors and do not become concentrated in any one area within the Town of Monson.

Subject to the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, and 105 CMR 725.000, Registered Marijuana Dispensaries and Off-site Medical Marijuana Dispensaries will be permitted to provide medical support, security, and physician oversight that meet or exceed state regulations as established by the Massachusetts Department of Health (hereafter referred to as MDPH).

2.	Additional Requirements/Conditions

In addition to the standard requirements for uses permitted By-right, by Site Plan the following shall also apply to all Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (RMD) and Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensaries (OMMD):

a.	Use:
i.	RMD and OMMD facilities may only be involved in the uses permitted by its definition and may not include other businesses or services.

ii.	No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested within the premises.

iii.	The hours of operation shall be set by the Planning Board, but in no event shall an RMD or OMMD facility be open to the public, and no sale or other distribution of marijuana shall occur upon the premises or via delivery from the premises, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

iv.	RMD facilities that can demonstrate that they comply with the agricultural exemption under M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3 must still apply for Site Plan Approval.

b.	Physical Requirements:

i.	All aspects of the use/facility relative to the acquisition, cultivation, possession, processing, sales, distribution, dispensing, or administration of marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials must take place at a fixed location within a fully enclosed building and shall not be visible from the exterior of the business.

ii.	No outside storage is permitted.

iii.	No OMMD Facility shall have a gross floor area in excess of 2,500 square feet. 
iv.	Ventilation – all RMD and OMMD facilities shall be ventilated in such a manner that no:

1.	Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside atmosphere, and

2.	No odor from marijuana or its processing can be detected by a person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana business or at any adjoining use or property.

v.	Signage shall be displayed on the exterior of the RMD and OMMD facility’s entrance in plain sight of clients stating that “Registration Card issued by the MA Department of Public Health required” in text two inches in height.

c.	Location: (amended 11.14.2016)

i.	No RMD and OMMD facility shall be located on a parcel which is within three hundred (300) feet (to be measured in a straight line from the nearest points of each property line) of parcel occupied by:

1.	A public or private elementary, junior high, middle, vocational or high school, college, junior college, university or child care facility or any other use in which children commonly congregate in an organized ongoing formal basis, or

2.	Another RMD or OMMD facility, except that this limitation shall not apply in Industrial zones.

ii.	No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located within three (300) hundred   feet (to be measured in a straight line from the nearest points of each structure) of a residential use (including commercial residential uses such as hotels, motels, lodging houses, etc.) or residential zoning district.
         1.  The distance requirements set forth in Section 6.24(2)(c)(ii) may 		   be waived by the Site Plan Review Authority upon a specific 
               finding that the above-listed uses or structures will be 
               sufficiently buffered or separated from the proposed RMD or
               OMMD facility such that occupants of the above-listed facilities
               will not be adversely impacted by the operation of the RMD or 
               OMMD facility.
                         
(a)  If the RMD or OMMD facility requires a waiver 
      contemplated in Section 6.24(2)(c)(ii)(1) above, the
      applicant shall file a written request for the waiver with
      the Planning Board as the Site Plan Review Authority
      simultaneously with its application for Site Plan 
      Review.  The Planning Boar shall be required to make a
      specific Finding with regard to the application for such 
      a reduction prior to hearing the Application for Site 
   Plan Review.  The Planning Board shall be authorized to 
   hear the application for reduction at the same public 
   hearing as the Application for Site Plan Review.

iii.	No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located inside a building containing residential units, including transient housing such as motels and dormitories.

d.	Reporting Requirements.

i.	All Site Plan Approval holders for an RMD or OMMD facility shall provide the Police Department, Fire Department, Building Inspector and the Planning Board with the names, phone numbers and email addresses of all management staff and key-holders, including a minimum of two (2) operators or managers of the facility identified as contact persons to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the establishment.  All such contact information shall be updated as needed to keep it current and accurate.

ii.	The Building Inspector, Board of Health, Police Department, Fire Department and Planning Board shall be notified in writing by an RMD or OMMD facility owner/operator/ manager:

1.	A minimum of 30 days prior to any change in ownership or management of that facility

2.	A minimum of 12 hours following a violation or potential violation of any law or any criminal or potential criminal activities or attempts of violation of any law at the RMD or OMMD.

iii.	Permitted RMD and OMMD facilities shall file an annual report to and appear before the Planning Board no later than January 31st, providing a copy of all current applicable state licenses for the facility and/or its owners and demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions of the Special Permit.

iv.	The owner or manager is required to respond by phone or email within twenty-four hours of contact by a town official concerning their RMD or OMMD at the phone number or email address provided to the Town as the contact for the business.

e.	Issuance/Transfer/Discontinuance of Use

i.	Site Plan Approvals shall be issued to the RMD Operator.

ii.	Site Plan Approvals shall be issued for a specific site/parcel.

iii.	Site Plan Approvals shall be non-transferable to either another RMD Operator or site/parcel.

iv.	Site plan Approvals shall have a term limited to the duration of the applicant’s ownership/control of the premises as a RMD or OMMD, and shall lapse:

1.	If the permit holder ceases operation of the RMD, and/or

2.	The permit holder’s registration by MDPH expires or is terminated


v.	The permit holder shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer and the Planning Board writing within 48 hours of such lapse, cessation, discontinuance or expiration.
  
vi.	An RMD or OMMD facility shall be required to remove all material, plants equipment and other paraphernalia prior to surrendering its state Registration or ceasing its operation.


1.	Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for a RMD or OMMD the applicant is required to post with the Town Treasurer a bond or other form of financial security acceptable to said Treasurer in an amount set by the Planning Board.  The amount shall be sufficient to cover the costs of the town removing all materials, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia if the applicant fails to do so.  The Building Inspector shall give the applicant 45 days’ written notice in advance of taking such action.  Should the applicant remove all materials, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector prior to the expiration of the 45 days written notice, said bond shall be returned to the applicant.

3.	Application Requirements

In addition to the standard application requirements for Site Plan Approval, such applications for an RMD or OMMD facility shall include the following:

a.	The name and address of each owner of the RMD or OMMD facility/operation.

b.	A copy of its registration as an RMD from the Massachusetts Department of Public Health or documentation that demonstrates that said RMD or OMMD facility, and it’s owner/operators, qualify and are eligible to receive a Certificate of Registration and meet all of the requirements of a RMD in accordance with 105 CMR 725.000 of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

c.	Evidence that the Applicant has site control and right to use the site for a RMD or OMMD facility in the form of a deed or valid purchase and sales agreement or, in the case of a lease a notarized statement from the property owner and a copy of the lease agreement.

d.	A notarized statement signed by the RMD or OMMD organization’s Chief Executive Officer and corporate attorney disclosing all of its designated representatives, including officers, directors, shareholders, partners, members, managers, or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the above are entities rather than persons, the Applicant must disclose the identity of all such responsible individual persons.
e.	In addition to what is normally required in a Site Plan, details showing all exterior proposed security measures for the RMD or OMMD including lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc. ensuring the safety of employees and patrons and to protect the premises from theft or other criminal activity.

f.	A detailed floor plan identifying the areas available and functional uses (including square footage).

g.	All signage being proposed for the facility.

h.	A traffic study to establish the RMD or OMMD impacts at peak demand times.

i.	A Management Plan including a description of all activities to occur on site, including all provisions for the delivery of medical marijuana and related products to OMMDs or off-site direct delivery to patients.

4.	Findings

In addition to the standard Findings for Site Plan Approval the Planning Board must also find all the following:

a.	That the RMD or OMMD facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest;

b.	That the RMD or OMMD facility demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations;

c.	That the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of this Section and other applicable Sections of this Bylaw;

d.	 That the RMD or OMMD facility has shown that it provides adequate security measures to ensure that no individual participant will pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, and that the storage and/or location of cultivation is adequately secured; and

e.	That the RMD or OMMD facility adequately addresses issues of traffic demand, circulation flow, parking and queuing, particularly at peak periods at the facility, and it impact on neighboring uses


SECTION 7.0   - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
7.1 	BOARD OF APPEALS 

1.  There shall be a Board of Appeals, appointed by the Board of Selectmen, consisting of five (5) members appointed for terms of such length and so arranged that the term of one appointee shall expire each year.  There shall also be appointed three (3) associate members for a term of three years. No person holding an elective office shall be eligible to serve as a member or associate member of the Board of Appeals.

2.  The Board of Appeals shall have the powers as set forth in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 14.  The Board of Appeals may not grant a use variance.

3.  Special permits shall only be issued after a public hearing which must be held within 65 days after the date of filing a special permit application with the Town Clerk who shall transmit the application to the Board of Appeals.

4.  Amendments to Zoning By-laws.  The Planning Board upon its own initiative may, or upon the petition of five or more land owners in the Town of Monson, hold a public hearing for the consideration of any amendments to the zoning map or to this Bylaw, and shall report to a regular or special Town Meeting its recommendations as to what action should be taken.

5.  Repetitive Petitions Before Town Meeting.  No proposed Bylaw making a change in this zoning Bylaw, which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Town Meeting, shall be considered on its merits by the Town Meeting within two (2) years after the date of such action, unless adoption of such proposed Bylaw is recommended in the final report of the Planning Board, as required by the General Law.

6.  Repetitive Petitions Before the Board of Appeals.  No appeal, application, nor petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the Board of Appeals shall be acted upon favorably within two years after the date of the final unfavorable action unless the Board of Appeals finds, by a vote of four members of the five-member Board, specific and material changes in conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action was based, and describes such changes in the record of its proceedings, and unless all but one member of the Planning Board consents thereto and after notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings when the question of such consent will be considered.

7.  Repeal.  Any existing Bylaw or parts thereof inconsistent with this Bylaw is hereby repealed.

8.  Validity.  The invalidity of any section or provision of the Bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof.

7.2 	ENFORCEMENT OF ZONING BYLAW 

7.2.1 	This Bylaw shall be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall be appointed annually by the Board of Selectmen in the month of March to take office on the first day of April. He shall approve no applications for permits required under this Bylaw for a building of any kind for which plans and specifications, and intended use, are not in all respects in conformity with this Bylaw. He shall have full authority to prosecute in any court of competent jurisdiction any action, suit, or proceeding for the enforcement of this Bylaw.

7.2.2 	No building, no tent and no structure shall be placed, erected, or added to without a Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Said permit will be valid for a period not to exceed six months. A record of such applications, and the drawing and plans herein referred to, action taken thereon, shall be kept on file in the Town office.

7.2.3	Except as provided in Section 7.2.4, no zoning permit involving a new structure shall be issued until the following requirements are met:

1.  A drawing of the lot, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the lot and location, and size of buildings or structure existing on the lot, shall be filed.  

2.  Duplicate plans of the proposed buildings or structures with sufficient detail to show conformity to these Bylaws shall be filed.
		
		3.  All corners of the lot marked with iron pins, or stone bound.
	
	4.   Approval under Board of Health rules and regulations of a sanitary waste disposal facility 
	
	7.2.4 	A zoning permit for additions to existing structures will require a lot surveyed only where an addition may, in the Zoning Officer’s judgement, reduce any required yard, and will require percolation tests only where human occupancy of the building will be increased by additions.
	
	7.2.5 	If the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be informed or have reason to believe that any provision of this Bylaw or any permit or decision thereunder has been, is being, or is about to be violated, he shall make an investigation of the facts, including the inspection of the premises where the violations may exist. Where written complaint is made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, he shall take action upon such complaint within 14 days of receipt thereof and shall report such action in writing to the complainant and Planning Board.
	
	7.2.6 	If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds no violation or prospective violation, any person aggrieved by his decision, or any officer or Board of the Town, may within 30 days appeal to the Board of Appeals.
	
	7.2.7 	Penalties.  Any person violating any of the provisions of the Bylaw, the conditions of a permit granted under this Bylaw or any decisions rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board shall be liable to a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300) for each violation, any such fines to be enforceable through the Superior Court or Housing Court. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
	
	In addition to the procedures for enforcement described above, the provisions of this Bylaw, the conditions of a permit granted under this Bylaw, or any decision rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals or the Planning Board under this Bylaw, may be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, by non-criminal complaint pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40, Section 21d. The fine for any violation disposed of through this procedure shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
	
	Prior to the imposition of any fine for a non-criminal complaint fine, written notice of the nature of the violation shall be given to the person or persons against whom the fine is to be imposed. Said notice shall state the first date upon which fine shall be imposed for a continuing violation of the Bylaw, which date shall not be less than twenty-one (21) days from the receipt of said notice and which shall contain reference to each specific Section of the Bylaw which is being violated together with a statement of the penalty for said violation.
	
	7.2.8	Construction or operations under a building permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this Bylaw unless the use of construction is commenced within a period of one year after issuance of the permit; additionally, in cases involving construction begun with such one-year period, such construction shall be continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
	7.3 	SPECIAL PERMITS 
	
	Special permits are requested for certain uses, structures or conditions as specified in Section 3.1, Schedule of Use Regulations.
	
	7.3.1 	Purpose.  Special permits are intended to provide detailed review of certain uses and structures, which may have substantial impact upon traffic, utility systems, and the character of the Town, among other things. The Special Permit review process is intended to ensure a harmonious relationship between proposed development and its surroundings, and ensure the proposals are consistent with the purpose and intent of this Bylaw. 
	
	7.3.2 	Special Permit Granting Authorities. As specified in Table 1, Schedule of Use Regulations.
	
	7.3.3 	Special Permit Procedures.  Special permits may be issued by special permit granting authorities in accordance with Mass. General Laws Chapter 40a, Section 9 and with the following regulations.
	
	7.3.4 	Public Hearing.  Special permits shall only be issued following a public hearing held within sixty-five (65) days after filing an application with the special permit granting authority, a copy of is to be given to the Town Clerk by the applicant. The special permit granting authority will take final action on an application for special permit within ninety (90) days following the public hearing. Failure to do so will constitute approval. A unanimous vote of a three-member Board and a vote of at least four members of a five-member Board is required.
	
	7.3.5	Application Procedures
	
	1.  All applications for special permits shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the Town Clerk and located in the Town Clerk’s office and shall be accompanied by a site plan when required in accordance with Section 3.1, Schedule of Use Regulations.
	
	2.  Misrepresentation of any of the required plan items shall be cause to revoke a special permit.
	
	7.3.6 	Expiration.  All special permits that have no time restrictions imposed by the special permit granting authority shall lapse within two (2) years from the date the permit was granted, unless substantial use or construction has commenced and continues regularly.
	
	7.3.7 	Review Procedures.  The Special Permit Granting Authority shall submit one copy of said application and plan to the Board of Appeals, the Planning Board, the Board of Health, and the Conservation Commission for their review. The Boards and Commissions shall within thirty (30) days make recommendations as they deem appropriate and shall send copies thereof to the Special Permit Granting Authority and to the applicant in accordance with Chapter 40A, Section 11 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
	
	7.3.8 Criteria.  Where a special permit may be authorized by the Special Permit Granting Authority under this Bylaw, said Authority may grant, upon written application, such special permit if it finds, among other things: 
1.That the proposed use would be suitably located in the neighborhood in which it is proposed and/or the total Town;
2. That the use will be reasonably compatible with the character and scale of other uses permitted as of right in the same district;
3.  That adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the proposed use, including special attention to safe vehicular circulation;
4. The proposed use shall comply with the environmental performance standards specified in Section 5.1 of this Bylaw; 
5. The proposed use shall comply with any and all additional special permit criteria or General Regulations imposed on individual uses in Section 5 of this Bylaw;
6. The proposal will not create traffic congestion or impair pedestrian safety. Provision shall be made for convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the site and in relation to adjacent streets, property or improvements;
7. The proposed project shall not create a significant adverse impact to the quality of surface water or groundwater during and after construction, and provision shall be made for maximizing groundwater recharge;
8. The design of the project shall provide for adequate methods of disposal of sewage, refuse or other wastes generated by the proposed use;
9. The design of the project shall minimize the visibility of visually degrading elements and protect the neighboring properties from potentially detrimental or offensive uses through the use of screening or vegetated buffer zones.
		10. In reviewing site plans submitted with a special permit application, the Special Granting Authority shall consider the site plan submittal and approval requirements of Section 7.4.
	
	7.3.9 	Conditions, Safeguards, Limitations.  In granting a special permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority may, in accordance with MGL Chapter 40A, impose conditions, safeguards, and limitations. Such conditions, safeguards, and limitations shall be in writing and may include but are not limited to the following:
	
	1. Setback, front, side and rear, as a minimum in accordance with the minimum required in this Bylaw.
	
	2.  Screening of parking areas of other parts of the premises from adjoining properties or from streets by the use of walls, fences, plantings or other such devices.
	
	3.  Limitations of size, number of occupants, method or time of operation or extent of facilities.
	
	4.  Modification of the exterior design or appearance of buildings, structures, signs, or landscape materials.
	
	5.  Additional parking, loading or traffic requirements beyond the minimum required in the Bylaw.
	
		6.  Measure to protect against environmental pollution.
	
	7.  Performance bond or other security to ensure that the project meets the conditions specified in the special permit.
	
	7.3.10 	Changes, Alterations, Expansion.  Any substantial change, alteration or expansion of use allowed by special permit shall require a special permit from the appropriate Special Permit Granting Authority.
	
	7.3.11  Revocation of Special Permit (adopted 11.14.2016)   A special permit may be revoked or altered by the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) if it is determined, after a public hearing, that information was intentionally misrepresented in order to obtain a special permit or that there has been an abuse and/or misuse of the special permit.  Application for revocation or alteration of the special permit may be made by the Building Inspector, a party in interest or the SPGA.  Such applications shall be filed with the Town Clerk.  A public hearing shall be held by the SPGA within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of the application with the Town Clerk.
	
	The SPGA shall act within ninety (90) days following the close of the public hearing.  Failure by the SPGA to take final action within ninety (90) days of the public hearing shall be deemed to be a denial of said application for revocation or alteration of the special permit.  Revocation or alteration of special permits shall require a four fifths vote by the Planning Board, or a unanimous vote of the members of the Board of Appeals.
	
	7.4	SITE PLAN APPROVAL
	
	7.4.1 	Projects Requiring Site Plan Approval. No special permit or building permit shall be issued for any of the following uses unless the Planning Board has endorsed a site plan:
	
		1.  The construction or exterior alteration of a commercial structure;
	
		2.  The construction or exterior alteration of an industrial structure;
	
	3.  Residential developments requiring approval under the Subdivision Control Law (M.G.L. Chapter 41);
	
4. Any other use specified in Section 3.1, Schedule of Use Regulations, which indicates Site Plan Approval is required.

5. Any change in use or intensity of use which will affect the characteristics of the site in terms of parking, loading, access, drainage, open space or utilities. (Amended 11/27/2007)


The Planning Board will seek consultation with other Boards, including but not limited to the following: Building Inspector, Board of Health, Board of Selectmen, Conservation Commission, Highway Department, Fire Department and Police Department. The Planning Board may waive any or all requirements of site plan review for external enlargements of structures of less than 25% of the existing floor area.



7.4.2  Purpose.  The purpose of site plan approval is to further the purposes of this Bylaw and to ensure that new development is designed in a manner which reasonably protects visual and environmental qualities and property values of the Town, and to assure adequate drainage of surface water and safe vehicular access.

7.4.3 Application.  Each application for Site Plan Approval shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the current owner of record, accompanied by ten (10) copies of the site plan. The Planning Board shall, within five days, transmit one copy each to the Building Inspector, Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Board of Selectmen, Highway Department, Fire Department and Police Department.

The Planning Board shall obtain with each submission, a deposit sufficient to cover any expenses connected with a public hearing and review of plans, including the costs of any engineering or planning consultant services necessary for review purposes.

7.4.4 Required Site Plan Contents. A registered architect, landscape architect, or professional engineer shall prepare all site plans unless this requirement is waived by the Planning Board because of unusually simple circumstances. All site plans shall be on standard 24" x 36" sheets and shall be prepared at a sufficient scale to show:

1. The location and boundaries of the lot, adjacent streets or ways, and the location and owners’ names of all adjacent properties;

2. Existing and proposed topography including contours, the location of wetlands, streams, waterbodies, drainage swales, areas subject to flooding, and unique natural land features;

3. Existing and proposed structures, including dimensions and elevations;

4. The location of parking and loading areas, driveways, walkways, access and egress points;

5. The location and a description of all proposed septic systems, water supply, storm drainage systems, utilities, and refuse and other waste disposal methods;

6. Proposed landscape features including the location and a description of screening, fencing and plantings;

7. The location, dimensions, height and characteristics of proposed signs;

8. The location and a description of proposed open space or recreation areas;

7.4.5  Procedures for Site Plan Review.

1. The Planning Board shall refer copies of the application within 15 days to the Conservation Commission, Board of Health and Building Inspector, who shall review the application and submit their recommendations and comments to the Planning Board. Failure of Boards to make recommendations within 35 days of the referral of the application shall be deemed to be lack of opposition.

2. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days of the receipt of an application and after due consideration of the recommendations of the other Boards, shall take final action within 90 days from the time of hearing.

3. The period of review for a special permit requiring site plan approval shall be the same as any other special permit and shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 40A, Section 9, “Special Permits”.  Specifically, a joint public hearing to address the Special Permit application and Site Plan Approval application shall be held within sixty-five (65) days of the filing of a special permit application with the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall then have 90 days following the public hearing in which to act.

7.4.6  Site Plan Review Criteria. The following criteria shall be considered by the aforementioned Boards in the review and evaluation of a site plan, consistent with a reasonable use of the site of the purposes permitted or permissible by the regulations of the district in which it is located:

1. If the proposal requires a special permit, it must conform to the special permit requirements as listed in Section 6.2 of this Bylaw.

2. The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape, and shall be designed to protect abutting properties and community amenities. Building sites shall, to the extent feasible: (a) minimize use of wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, hilltops: (b) minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations; (c) preserve unique natural or historical features; (d) minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal and grade changes; and (e) maximize open space retention; and (f) screen objectionable features from neighboring properties and roadways.

3. Architectural style shall be compatible with the rural/historic character and scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the Town through the use of appropriate building materials, screening, breaks in roof and wall lines and other architectural techniques. Variation in detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest and avoid monotony. Proposed buildings shall relate harmoniously to each other with adequate light, air, circulation, and separation between buildings.

4. The development shall be served with adequate water supply and waste disposal systems. For structures to be served by on-site waste disposal systems, the applicant shall submit a septic system design prepared by a Certified Engineer and approved by the Board of Health.

5. The plan shall maximize the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in relation to adjacent ways. The plan shall describe estimated average daily and peak-hour vehicle trips to be generated by the site and traffic flow patterns for vehicles and pedestrians showing adequate access to and from the site and adequate circulation within the site.

6. The site plan shall show adequate measures to prevent pollution of surface or groundwater, to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and to prevent changes in groundwater levels, increased run-off and potential for flooding. Drainage shall be designed so that runoff shall not be increased, groundwater recharge is maximized, and neighboring properties will not be adversely affected.

7. The development will not place excessive demands on Town services and infrastructure.

8. Electric, telephone, Cable TV, and other such utilities shall be underground where physically and environmentally feasible.

9. Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures and other unsightly uses shall be set back or screened to protect the neighbors from objectionable features.

10. The site plan shall comply with any zoning requirements for parking, loading, dimensions, environmental performance standards, and all other provisions of this Bylaw.

Before approval of a site plan, the reviewing board may request the applicant to make modifications in the proposed design of the project to ensure that the above criteria are met.

7.4.7  Final Action The Planing Board’s final action shall consist of either:

1. A determination that the proposed project will constitute a suitable development and is in compliance with the criteria set forth in this Bylaw;

2. A written denial of the application stating the reasons for such denial; or,

3. Approval subject to any conditions, modifications and restrictions as the Planning Board may deem necessary.

7.4.8  Enforcement

1. The Planning Board may require the posting of a bond to assure compliance with the plan and conditions and may suspend any permit or license when work is not performed as required.

2. Any special permit with site plan approval issued under this section shall lapse within one (1) year if a substantial use thereof has not commenced sooner except for good cause.

3. The Planning Board may periodically amend or add rules and regulations relating to the procedures and administration of this section.


7.5      ASSOCIATE MEMBER OF THE PLANNING BOARD

There is hereby established the position of Associate Member of the Planning Board, to be appointed by the Selectmen for a term of two (2) years, who shall act on all matters within his or her jurisdiction upon the request of the Chair/Acting Chair due to the inability of an appointed member to vote, under this bylaw and under Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.


TOWN OF MONSON SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1.0 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE................................... 5
1.1 AUTHORITY………………………………………………............ 5
1.2 PURPOSES OF SUBDIVISION CONTROL – SECTION 81-M…… 5
1.3 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS………………… 6
SECTION 2.0 GENERAL…………………………………………..... 6
2.1 DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………... 6
2.2 BASIC REQUIREMENTS………………………………............ 8
2.3 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING BYLAW………………......... 9
2.4 SUMMARY OF SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES…………..... 9
2.5 EFFECT OF PRIOR RECORDING OF A SUBDIVISION PLAN…… 10
2.6 WAIVERS…………………………………………………….. 10
2.7 ENGINEERING……………………………………………… 10
2.8 AMENDMENTS…………………………………………….. 11
2.9 SEPARABILITY……………………………………………. 11
2.10 VALIDITY………………………………………………….. 11
2.11 COORDINATION WITH MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENTS & OTHER AGENCIES
2.12 FORMS……………………………………………………... 12
SECTION 3.0 PROCEDURE FOR SUBMISSION & ENDORSEMENT OF NONSUBDIVISION
PLANS (PLANS BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL)
3.1 GENERAL…………………………………………………. 12
3.2 FILING PROCEDURE…………………………………….. 12
1
3.3 CONTENTS……………………………………………….. 13
3.4 BOARD ACTION………………………………………… 13
3.5 ADMINISTRATION…………………………………….. 14
SECTION 4.0 PRELIMINARY PLAN………………………… 14
4.1 GENERAL……………………………………………….. 14
4.2 SUBMISSION…………………………………………… 15
4.3 FILING PROCEDURE………………………………….. 15
4.4 CONTENTS……………………………………………… 15
4.5 BOARD ACTION……………………………………….. 17
4.6 RELATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN TO DEFINITIVE PLAN 18
SECTION 5.0 DEFINITIVE PLAN…………………………. 18
5.1 GENERAL………………………………………………. 18
5.2 SUBMISSION………………………………………….. 18
5.3 FILING PROCEDURE……………………………........ 19
5.4 CONTENTS……………………………………………. 19
5.5 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE…………………….. 22
5.6 ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS…. 25
5.6 REVIEW PROCEDURES…………………………….. 26
5.8 APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE PLAN………………… 28
5.9 RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE…….. 31
5.10 MODIFICATION, AMENDMENT OR RECISION OF PLAN APPROVAL… 31
5.11 ACCEPTANCE OF WAYS AND FOOTPATHS…….. 31
2
SECTION 6.0 DESIGN STANDARDS………………….. 31
6.1 GENERAL…………………………………………….. 31
6.2 STREET LAYOUT AND DESIGN STANDARDS….. 32
6.3 STORMWATER DRAINAGE……………………….. 38
6.4 WATER SUPPLY……………………………………. 38
6.5 MUNICIPAL SERVICES……………………………. 38
6.6 PARKS AND OPEN SPACE………………………… 38
6.7 LANDSCAPING…………………………………….. 39
SECTION 7.0 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
7.1 BASIC REQUIREMENTS………………………….. 39
7.2 SUBMISSIONS…………………………………….. 40
7.3 ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS…… 40
7.4 DRAIN AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES………... 44
7.5 MONUMENTS………………………………………. 52
7.6 UTILITIES…………………………………………… 52
7.7 RETAINING WALLS……………………………….. 54
7.8 FINAL CLEANING…………………………………. 54
7.9 TREES AND PLANTINGS…………………………. 54
7.10 INSPECTIONS OF IMPROVEMENTS…………….. 56
SECTION 8.0 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT 57
8.1 PROJECT DESCRIPTION………………………….. 57
8.2 CIRCULATIONS SYSTEMS……………………….. 57
3
8.3 MUNICIPAL SERVICES…………………………….. 58
8.4 NATURAL CONDITIONS…………………………… 59
8.5 DESIGN FACTORS………………………………….. 60
8.6 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT……………………… 60
8.7 PHASING……………………………………………. 61
APPENDIX 1
FORMS
PLATES
4
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING
THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN
THE TOWN OF MONSON
MASSACHUSETTS
SECTION 1.0 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
1.1 AUTHORITY
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Monson by Section 81-Q of
Chapter 41 of the General Laws of Massachusetts as amended, said Board hereby adopts these
Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Monson, Massachusetts.
1.2 PURPOSES OF SUBDIVISION CONTROL - MGL CHAP 41, SECTION 81-M
The subdivision control laws has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the cities and towns in which it is, or may hereafter
be, put in effect by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing
access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary
conditions in subdivision and in proper cases parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning
Board and of a Board of Appeals under the subdivision control laws shall be exercised with due
regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be
safe and convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public
ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles, for securing safety
in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies; for insuring compliance with the
applicable zoning ordinances or by-laws; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage,
drainage and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating the ways
in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the city or town in which it is
located and with the ways in neighboring subdivision. It is the intent of the subdivision control
laws that any subdivision plan filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of such
board if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the Board of Health and to the reasonable
rules and regulations of the Planning Board pertaining to subdivision of land; provided, however,
that such board may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in Section 81-R, such portions of
the rules and regulations as is deemed advisable.
1.3 ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS
5
In accordance with Section 81-Q of Chapter 41 of the General Laws of Massachusetts as
amended the Planning Board of the Town of Monson hereby adopts the following Rules and
Regulations relative to subdivision control. The provision of Chapter 41 of the General Laws
shall apply to these regulations.
SECTION 2.0 GENERAL
2.1 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of these regulations, the terms and words defined in the subdivision control law,
MGL c. 41, section 81L, shall have the meaning given therein, unless a contrary intention clearly
appears in these definitions. The following other terms and words are defined as follows:
Abutter – All those property owners whose land abuts the proposed subdivision or land
described in a plan believed not to require approval. It shall also mean those property owners
directly across a street or road from the subject subdivision or land.
Applicant – Either the owner of the land, whether corporate or individual, stated in the
application for subdivision, or all the owners where title is held jointly, in common, or in tenancy
by the entirety. An agent, representative, or his assigns may act for the owner, provided written
evidence of such fact is submitted. Evidence in the form of a list of its officers and designated
authority to sign legal documents shall be required for a corporation.
Board – Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Monson.
Certified by (or Endorsed by) a Planning Board – As applied to a plan or other instrument
required or authorized by the Subdivision Control Law to be recorded shall mean bearing a
certification or endorsement signed by a majority of the Board to certify or endorse its approval
or other action and named in a written statement to the Register of Deeds and Recorder of the
Land Court, signed by a majority of the Board.
Consultants or Consulting Services - Includes, but is not limited to, architects, biologists and
environmental experts, chemists, engineers, geologists, landscape architects, planners, lawyers,
sanitarians, and surveyors.
Date of Submission – Shall be either the date of the next regularly scheduled Planning Board
meeting in the case of personal delivery, or the date of mailing if the plan is submitted by
registered mail, or date of receipt by the Town Clerk.
Definitive Plan – A proposed, detailed plan or a subdivision submitted by the applicant to be
recorded in the Registry of Deeds or Land Court when approved by the Planning Board.
Development Impact Statement (DIS) – A documented, written analysis of a proposed
subdivision which contains all information provided by Section 8.0 of the Regulations and which
provides the Planning Board and its agents or consultants with information necessary for plan
review. The DIS is prepared by the applicant.
6
Easement – A right in land acquired by public authority or other person to use or control
property for a utility or other purpose.
Engineer or Surveyor – Person registered by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to perform
professional civil engineering or land surveying services.
Lot – Area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries, used or available for use, as the
site of one or more buildings. Areas endorsed by the Board upon a plan as “not available for
building purposes” shall not be considered lots.
Owner – The owner of the record as shown by the records in the Hampden County Registry of
Deeds or Land Court.
Preliminary Plan – A plan of a subdivision submitted by the applicant showing sufficient
information as specified in Section 4.0 to form a clear basis for discussion and clarification of its
general contents and for the preparation of a Definitive Plan.
State Construction Standards, Massachusetts DPW Construction Standards – These
specifications are published by the Massachusetts Department of Public Works. They are
entitled Standards Specifications for Highways and Bridges, and include all supplements,
updates, revisions or future editions covering substantially the same subject matter. (All matters
left open or undetermined by these specifications shall be specified by the Board on a case by
case basis.)
Street – A “street” is (a) a public way certified as such by the Clerk of the Town of Monson and
used as a public way; or (b), a public way shown on a plan theretofore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the subdivision control law; or (c), a public way in existence when the
subdivision control law became effective as shown on the “official street map”. Privately owned
ways, abandoned ways, and proposed ways as shown on the “official street map” at the times of
its adoption are not “streets” in conformance with this definition.
Streets
Major Streets – A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is likely to carry
substantial volumes of through traffic. Refer to 6.2.6 - Table 1.
Secondary Streets – A street other than a major street, which, in the opinion of
Board, is likely to carry traffic other than just to or from lots
on that street. Refer to 6.2.6 – Type 1.
Minor Residential Street – A street which is likely to be used only by vehicles
travelling to or from lots on that street.
Dead End Streets/Cul-de-sac – A public or private vehicular right-of-way which
affords the principal means of access to abutting
property and which joins another thoroughfare at
7
only one end. (Any such thoroughfare, which
joins or intersects a dead-end street/cul-de-sac,
shall have adequate access at both ends from a
Town, County or State public way adjacent to
The subdivision. Refer to 6.2.6 – Table 1.
Subdivision – “Subdivision” shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or more lots and
shall include re-subdivision, and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdivision of the land or territory subdivided.
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a
subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law under any of the following
conditions.
1. At the time the subdivision is made, every lot within the tract so divided has frontage
on a street, as defined in the Monson Zoning Bylaws. Such frontage shall be of at
least distance as is then required by the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Monson for
erection of a building on such lot.
2. Conveyance or other instruments add to, taking away from, or changing the size and
shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the frontage
above set forth.
Subdivision, Type 1 – A subdivision for residential purposes with less than eight (8) lots.
Subdivision, Type 2 – A subdivision for residential purposes with eight (8) or more lots, and/or
business and commercial purposes.
Utilities – Private or municipal services to be furnished within the subdivision, including
telephone, cable TV, electric light and power, gas lines, sanitary sewers, water drains, water
pipes and appurtenances.
2.2 SUBDIVISION BASIC REQUIREMENTS
The subdivision of land shall conform to all applicable State and Local laws and ordinances, and
rules, and regulations of boards and departments having jurisdiction.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law of any
land within the Town, or proceed with the improvements or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the
construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a plan has
been endorsed “Planning Board Approval Not Required” or a Definitive Plan of such subdivision
has been submitted to and approved by the Board as hereinafter provided, and subsequently
recorded at the Hampden County Registry of Deeds and, in the case of registered land, with the
recorder of the Land Court.
2.3 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING BYLAWS
8
Subdivision lot divisions shall meet the requirements pertaining to lot size, frontage, and all other
requirements under existing zoning laws. No subdivision rules can dictate the size, shape, width,
frontage or use of lots except that they shall be in compliance with all applicable zoning
requirements.
2.4 SUMMARY OF SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
All plans and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects comply with the provisions of
these Rules and Regulations, unless the Board authorizes a variation there from in specified
instances.
2.4.1 Any person desiring to make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control
Law of any land within the Town shall, before proceeding with the improvement or sale of lots
in a subdivision and secure therein, submit to the Board a plan of such subdivision and secure
approval by the Board of a Definitive Plan as hereinafter provided.
2.4.2 The Board will not approve or modify and approve any plan of a subdivision of land
unless all lots and other proposals shown on said plan comply with the Zoning Bylaws of the
Town or a variance from the terms thereof has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2.4.3 The official in Town authorized to issue building permits shall not issue any permit for the
erection of a building until first satisfied that the lot on which the building is to be erected is not
within a subdivision, or that a way furnishing the access to a lot within a subdivision as required
by the Subdivision Control Law is shown on a recorded plan and that any conditions endorsed
thereon limiting the right to erect or maintain buildings on such lot have been satisfied.
2.4.4 The Board may assign as its agents appropriate Town agencies or officials and may hire
consulting services to review plans and inspect improvements at the cost of the applicant.
2.4.5 The Board on its own motion or on the petition of any interested person shall have the
power to modify, amend or rescind its approval of a plan of a subdivision, or to require a change
in a plan as a condition of its retaining to status of an approved plan after due notice and
opportunity to the owner to be heard in accordance with MGL c. 41, section 81-W. The time
requirements shall be the same as in the case of the Definitive Plan.
2.4.6 Plans intended for review at a regular meeting of the Planning Board shall be forwarded to
the Planning Board at least three full working days prior to the Planning Board meeting. The day
of the next regular Board meeting shall be considered to be the date of submission for all plans,
except that the date of mailing shall be the date of submission for Definitive Plans sent by
registered mail to the Planning Board in care of the Town Clerk. For plans transmitted to the
Planning Board in other than at a regular Board meeting or other than through the Town Clerk,
the date of submission shall be considered to be the day of the next regular Planning Board
meeting after such transmittal. Plans shall not be considered “submitted” until all required
documentation has been received.
2.5 EFFECT OF PRIOR RECORDING OF A SUBDIVISION PLAN
9
The recording of a plan of land within the Town of Monson in the Hampden Country Registry of
Deeds prior to the effective date of the Subdivision Control Law in the Town of Monson shall
not exempt the land within such subdivision from the application and operation of these Rules
and Regulations except as specifically exempt by MGL c. 41, section 81-FF.
2.6 WAIVERS
The Board may waive strict compliance with any of these Regulations if it deems it in the public
interest, is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Subdivision Control
Law, and if written record is kept of such waivers and the reasons for them.
2.7 ENGINEERING
The Definitive Plan of property shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor. Definitive
Construction plans shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer.
2.7.1 Inspection and Reimbursement for Consulting Services
1. Inspection shall be carried out at appropriate times during the development of the
subdivision as described in Section 7.0 and in the Subdivision Inspection Checklist
(Form K appended hereto). The sub-divider shall notify the Board, or an engineer
appointed by the Board, at least four (4) working days before carrying out each
operation to be inspected.
2. The Board may make arrangements with consultants to carry out such inspection on
behalf of the Town.
3. The costs of inspection shall be borne by the developer and shall be reimbursed to the
Town by certified check or money order payable to the “Town of Monson”.
Inspection costs shall include but not be limited to: on-site inspections, “portal-toportal”
travel, off-site analysis of plans, water testing, and soil testing.
4. Failure to pay any reimbursement provided in these Regulations at the stated time, or
within thirty (30) days following mailing of an invoice, whichever is earlier, shall be
sufficient grounds for the Board to disapprove or rescind its approval of a Preliminary
Plan or Definitive Plan of a subdivision. In addition, no performance guarantee shall
be released by the Town until the Board of Selectmen determine that all
reimbursements have been paid in full by certified check or money order, payable to
the “Town of Monson”.
5. The developer has the responsibility to ensure that the approved construction plans
are implemented. Use of qualified persons to furnish adequate and timely
engineering supervision during construction is required. Surveillance and field
10
revisions by Town officials or consultants appointed by the Board cannot be
construed as fulfilling this responsibility.
6. A letter of credit shall be required and shall be used by the Town to pay for any
additional consultants which it finds necessary to hire in order to carry out an
effective review of the proposed subdivision.
2.8 AMENDMENTS
These Rules and Regulations or any portion thereof may be amended from time to time in
accordance with MGL c.41, section 81-Q of the Subdivision Control Law.
2.9 SEPARABILITY
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision, phrase or word of these Regulations shall
be adjudged not valid, the adjudication shall apply only to the material so adjudged and the
remainder of these Regulations shall be deemed to remain valid and effective.
2.10 VALIDITY
The invalidity of any section, paragraph, clause or provision of these Rules and Regulations shall
not invalidate any other section, paragraph, clause or provision therein.
2.11 COORDINATION WITH MUNICIPAL DEPARTMENTS AND OTHER
AGENCIES
In the Town of Monson, certain services are provided to subdivision under the jurisdiction of
various Town Departments and other quasi-public agencies.
Compliance with the applicable regulations and requirements of these agencies and departments
shall be required before a plan is approved by the Planning Board, and certification of
performance relative to the proper construction and installation of respective utilities shall be
required before the performance guarantee can be reduced or released.
2.12 FORMS
Appended to the Regulations hereto are sample forms for the administration of these
Regulations. The administrative content of these forms may be revised from time to time by
administrative action of the Board apart from Section 2.7.
SECTION 3.0 PLANS BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL OF
NON SUB-DIVISION PLANS
3.1 GENERAL
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with the
Land Court a plan of land in the Town of Monson who believes that his plans does not require
11
approval under the Subdivision Control Law, may submit his plans as hereinafter provided, to
the Planning Board for such determination.
3.2 Filing Procedure
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with the
Land Court, a plan of land, and who believes that this plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, must submit to the Planning Board the following:
1. A reproducible original and four (4) copies of his/her plan.
2. Application Form B appended hereto, signed by the owner and providing all
information requested.
3. A review fee, in the amount of $35.00 for each lot shown on the plan.
4. All supporting evidence necessary to show that the plan does not require approval.
Any person submitting a Plan Believed Not to Require Approval and any necessary documents
as may be required in these Rules and Regulations to the Board for approval shall give written
notice to the Town Clerk by delivery, or by registered, or certified mail. Receipt of such a plan
by Town Clerk shall constitute the date of submission.
If, in the judgement of the Board, consulting services are necessary or appropriate, the applicant
shall, prior to a determination on the Plan Believed Not to Require Approval by the Board,
reimburse the Town for the full cost of such services. All such consultants shall be selected by
the Board. Reimbursement shall be by certified check or money order made payable to the
“Town of Monson”.
3.3 Contents
The plan shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet and shall contain the following information:
1. Title, boundaries, true north arrow, date of submission, scale and legend.
2. The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicants and the Registered
Land Surveyor.
3. Names of all abutters as they appear in most recent tax list.
4. Location, dimensions and purposes of all easements, both existing and proposed,
within and adjacent to the land in question. Location and use of any existing
structures on the land.
12
5. Location, names, lines and widths of all existing streets and any common or public
areas (if more than one lot is proposed).
6. The plan shall show the entire area in which the division takes place and all boundary
lines, dimensions of all lots, sites or division, lot areas in square feet, with all lots
designated numerically and in sequence.
7. Frontage and area of any remaining adjoining land owned by the applicant. If on the
plan an area is left for the future possible construction of a road to back or adjacent
land, a ten (10) foot wide slope easement shall be shown on all lots abutting such road
area to enable proper slope construction if and when the road is built. The slope
easements shall go with the easement for future roadway and utility construction of
the road area.
8. Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signature of the members of
the Board. The zoning classifications of the land that contains the property, and
location of any zoning boundary lines that lie within the area and a reference to the
Town Zoning Map.
3.4 Board Action
If the Planning Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall within twentyone
(21) days after date of submission, and without a public hearing, endorse on the plans the
words, “Approval Under The Subdivision Control Law Not Required”. Said endorsement shall
be signed by a majority of the Board or by a person authorized by the Board.
Where the Board determines that in its opinion adequate access (as contemplated by MGL c. 41,
section 81-M and Section 1.2 of these Regulations) does not exist, then the Board shall
determine that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision Control Law.
If the Planning Board determines that in its opinion the plan requires approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, it shall within twenty one (21) days of submission give written notice
of its determination to the Town Clerk and applicant and return the plan to the applicant.
Before the Board makes its determination, it shall review or have a consultant review the
correctness of all street information and compliance with the Monson Zoning Bylaw. If, in the
judgement of the Board, consulting services are necessary or appropriate, the applicant shall
reimburse the Town for the full cost of such service prior to the endorsement of the plan.
If the Board fails to act upon a submitted plan within twenty one (21) days after its submission, it
shall be deemed to have determined that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not
required.
3.5 Administration
13
One copy of the plan with a notation of its action shall be retained by the Board, the remaining
copies shall be filed with the Town Clerk, the Board of Assessors and the Building
Commissioner.
4.0 PRELIMINARY PLAN
4.1 General
Before submitting an application for the subdivision of land, the applicant shall familiarize
himself/herself with the Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land and the Board
of Health Regulations governing Minimum Requirements for Disposal of Sewage in Un-sewered
Areas, together with applicable local ordinances and bylaws.
A Preliminary Plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the applicant to the Planning Board for
discussion and approval by the Board. The submission of such a Preliminary Plan will enable
the sub-divider, the Board and other municipal agencies to discuss and clarify the problems of
such subdivision before a Definitive Plan is prepared. The degree of review and effectiveness of
the Board’s comments shall be in direct proportion to the accuracy and amount of information
provided by the applicant on the Preliminary Plan. It is strongly recommended that a
Preliminary Plan be filed in every case.
Prior to submission of the Preliminary Plan to the Planning Board for approval, the sub-divider
should discuss the Plan with the Board of Health, Board of Selectmen, Conservation
Commission, School Committee, Fire Department, Police Department and Highway Department
to obtain their recommendations. These recommended actions should be transmitted to the
Board by the respective agencies. These recommendations may be incorporated in the
Preliminary Plan with any changes and additions suggested by the Board.
4.2 Submission
Any person submitting a Preliminary Plan of a subdivision and necessary documents as may be
required in these Rules and Regulations to the Board for approval shall give written notice to the
Town Clerk by delivery, or by registered, or certified mail. Receipt of such a plan by the Town
Clerk shall constitute the date of submission.
The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of the Preliminary Plan and all necessary information
to the Board. The applicant shall submit a copy of Request for Determination of Applicability as
submitted to the Monson Conservation Commission. The Board shall forward copies of the plan
to other Town agencies and or departments for their review.
4.3 Filing Procedure
1. Ten (10) copies of his/her Preliminary Plan.
2. Application Form C, appended hereto, signed by the applicant and providing all
information requested.
14
3. A filing fee in the amount of $50.00 per lot. The filing fee shall be in the form of a
certified check or money order made payable to the “Town of Monson”, or written
evidence that said filing fee has been paid to appropriate Town official.
4. A letter of credit in the amount of three thousand ($3000.00) dollars to expire not
sooner than one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of filing of the Definitive
Plan. Said fee shall be used by the Town to pay for any additional consultants who it
finds necessary to hire to carry out an effective review of the proposed subdivision.
5. Ten (10) copies of a draft Development Impact Statement (DIS).
4.4 Contents
The applicant is required to submit a Preliminary Plan of the entire parcel of land, which shall
show tentative proposals with a sufficient degree of accuracy and completeness of data to make
the proposals clear.
The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn at a scale of 1” = 100’ maximum, on 24” x 36” sheets. Said
plan shall show sufficient information about the subdivision or form a clear basis for discussion
of its problems and for the preparation of the Definitive Plan. In addition, the plan shall show at
least the following information.
1. Proposed subdivision name or identifying title, boundaries, north point, date, scale,
legend and title “Preliminary Plan”, and block for approval in the lower right hand
corner.
2. Name and address of the owner or owners of record, the applicant and the Registered
Professional Engineer, Land Surveyor, and other designer with professional stamp.
3. Names and Addresses of all abutters and those owners of land separated from the
subdivision only by a street, as determined by the most recent tax list.
4. Existing or proposed lines of streets, sidewalks, ways, lots, easements and public or
common areas within the subdivision in a general manners, purpose of easements
shall be indicated.
5. Proposed system of drainage, including the location of all swamp, marsh and
lowland, water bodies, streams, open drains and ditches, natural or man made, and
flowage rights, public and private, adjacent to or within the proposed subdivision in a
general manner.
6. Approximate boundary lines of all proposed lots or division of land with their
approximate areas and dimensions, lots to be numbered in sequence. Lot numbering
is to be approved by the Assessors.
15
7. Location, names and present widths of streets bounding, approaching or within
reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
8. Topography of the land in a general manner at a ten (10) foot contour interval or
better, based on USGS data and SCS soil maps if available, including major features
such as wooded areas, ditches, wetlands, floodplains, stone walls, rock outcroppings
and trees over eighteen (18) inches d.b.h.
9. Location of existing buildings.
10. On land to be subdivided in un-sewered areas, such information as is required by the
Monson Board of Health Rules to determine the general feasibility of subsurface
sewage disposal.
11. Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and adjacent to the
subdivision.
12. Zoning classification of all land shown in the plan including overlay zoning such as
floodplain, of water supply protection districts, the applicant is urged to prepare
acetate overlays in order to expedite Board review.
13. A key map showing all the proposed subdivision streets extended to show the
intersection of at least two existing streets to a scale of one (1) inch equals one (1)
thousand feet.
14. Proposed street grade, where land slopes are greater than five (5) percent, the Board
shall require information on proposed street grades so that consideration may be
given to them at the time of submission of the Preliminary Plan.
15. When multiple sheets are necessary, match lines shall be used and referenced. An
index graphically indicating the arrangement of said standard (24” x 36”) sheets at a
suitable scale shall be provided.
16. A locus or location plan at USGS scale showing the subdivision and its location to the
surrounding roadways and physical features.
During discussion of the Preliminary Plan, information required for the Definitive Plan and the
financial arrangements will be developed.
4.5 Board Action
After submission, the Preliminary Plan will be reviewed by the Planning Board, Board of Health
and other municipal agencies and departments to determine whether it is in compliance with
these Rules and Regulations and with those additional requirements of other municipal agencies
and departments. These recommendations may be incorporated in the Preliminary Plan with any
changes and additions suggested by the Board.
16
The Preliminary Plan, when submitted, will be studied to determine if it is in compliance with
these Rules and Regulations.
Within forty five (45) days after the Preliminary Plan is submitted, the Planning Board shall hold
a Public Hearing. The Planning Board, as well as the Board of Health, shall approve,
disapprove, or approve with modification the Preliminary Plan, noting thereon any changes that
should be made. In the case where the subdivision of land will occur in an un-sewered area, the
Board shall not approve a plan until after the receipt of a report from the applicant’s consultant,
describing on-site sewage disposal suitability. A disapproval by the Board will be accompanied
by a detailed statement of reasons for the action. Other municipal agencies or departments
should notify the Planning Board within thirty (30) days after the Preliminary Plan is submitted
of their respective approval or disapproval of the Plan, and if disapproved, shall list their reasons
in writing.
The applicant shall submit a request for Determination of Applicability with the Monson
Conservation Commission at the time or submission of the Preliminary Plan.
The Planning Board shall file a certificate of its action with the Town Clerk, and shall send
notice of its action by certified mail to the applicant. One copy of the Plan shall be returned to
the sub-divider and the others retained by the Board. Failure of the Planning Board to act upon a
Preliminary Plan within forty five (45) days after submission shall be deemed to constitute
approval of such a plan.
4.6 Relation of Preliminary Plan to Definitive Plan
Approval of the Preliminary Plan by the Planning Board does not constitute approval of a
subdivision, but does facilitate the procedure is securing approval of the Definitive Plan. In
addition, such approval does not in any way authorize the owner to proceed with construction of
roadways and/or other work in the subdivision.
5.0 DEFINITIVE PLANS
5.1 General
A Definitive Plan or a subdivision must be submitted to the Planning Board for approval.
A Definitive Plan shall be governed by the Subdivision Regulations in effect at the time of
submission of such plan or in effect at the time of the submission of the Preliminary Plan,
provided that a Definitive Plan evolved there from shall have been submitted to the Planning
Board within seven (7) months from the date of submission of the Preliminary Plan.
A Definitive Plan shall also be governed by the zoning in effect at the time of submission of such
plan or a Preliminary Plan from which a Definitive Plan is evolved in accordance with the
provision of Section 5 of Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws as amended.
5.2 Submission
17
Any person submitting a Definitive Plan and any necessary documents as may be required in
these Rules and Regulations to the Board for approval shall give written notice to the Town
Clerk by delivery, or by registered or certified mail. Receipt of such plan by the Town Clerk
shall constitute the date of submission.
If, in the judgement of any Town Board or department charged with review of said plans,
consulting and inspection services are necessary or appropriate, the applicant shall, prior to a
determination on the Definitive Plan by the Board, reimburse the Town for the full cost of such
services. All such consultants and inspectors shall be selected by the Planning Board.
Reimbursements shall be certified check or money order made payable to the “Town of
Monson”.
5.3 Filing Procedure
Any person who submits a Definitive Plan of a subdivision to the Planning Board for approval
shall file with the Board the following:
1. On original reproducible drawing to be retained by the applicant and submitted to the
Board by request.
2. Ten (10) contact prints (dark line on white background) made from the original
drawing.
3. A property executed application Form D, appended hereto, signed by the applicant
and providing all information requested.
4. Filing fee in the amount of $100.00 per lot, if a Preliminary Plan was filed or $200.00
per lot, if no Preliminary Plan was filed, e.g. $100.00 dollars (or $200.00 dollars)
times the number of new buildable lots shown on the Definitive Plan, the filing fee
shall be in the form of a certified check or money order made payable to the “Town
of Monson”.
5. One set of two overlays shall be prepared on acetate the same scale as the Definitive
Plan; these overlays shall illustrate the following features:
(a) Overlay #1 – One hundred year floodplains, wetlands, aquifer recharge areas.
(b) Overlay #2 – Soils (including soil types), slopes greater than 12%.
6. Certified List of Abutters Form L, appended hereto, signed by the applicant and
providing all information requested.
7. Ten (10) copies of the Development Impact Statement prepared by the developer.
18
8. Ten (10) prints of street plans and profiles of every proposed street.
5.4 Contents
The Definitive Construction Plan shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer and a
Definitive Plan of property prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor. Plans shall be submitted on
Mylar in accordance with Hampden County Registry of Deeds suitable for filing. The plan shall
be at a scale one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet, unless otherwise specified by the Planning
Board, and of a sheet size not to exceed 24” x 36” outside dimensions. If multiple sheets are
used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision, and all plans,
layouts, profiles, cross-sections and application shall be deemed to constitute the Definitive Plan.
The Definitive Construction Plan shall contain the following information:
1. The subdivision name, boundaries, true north arrow, date, scale, legend, and title
“Definitive Plan”, a block for approval in the lower right hand corner.
2. Data required in Sections 4.4 (2) through 4.4 (7).
3. Locations of existing buildings to remain.
4. Major site features, such as existing stone walls, fences, buildings, trees larger than
36” in diameter, rock ridges and out-croppings, swamps, flood plains, historic
features, and wooded areas, the plan shall identify which of the above shall remain
undisturbed.
5. Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and adjacent to the
subdivision.
6. Existing and proposed topography at a two (2) foot contour interval for gentle slopes
(less than 10%) and a five (5) foot contour interval for steep slopes 10% or greater.
7. Key plan, showing location of the subdivision at a scale of one (1) inch, equals one
(1) thousand feet and an accurate index plan at a scale of one (1) inch equals two (2)
hundred feet or a scale matching that used on the individual Assessors map (full size)
on which the proposed development is located.
8. Location of stone bounds to be set at the intersections of street lines, angle points, and
changes in direction of curvature of streets.
9. Names of proposed streets which shall have been previously approved by the
Planning Board.
19
10. Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction, width and length of every
street and way line, lot line and boundary line, and to establish these lines on the
ground.
11. Size and location of existing and proposed water supply facilities.
12. Size and location of all fire hydrants, pump, water lines between hydrants and pump,
and source (s) of water for fire fighting.
13. Location and results of all percolation tests to evaluate sub surface conditions for
each lot in the prospective subdivision; these tests will be done if the individual sewer
systems are proposed. The tests will be done in accordance with the State Sanitary
Code and the regulations of the Board of Health and a minimum of 33% of the lots
shall have percolation tests completed.
14. Where a storm drainage line discharges into a drainage area, a profile will be shown
of the drainage area to determine condition, and proposed method of stabilization.
15. Cross sections and construction details including:
a) Roadway section showing paving, crown, berm, shoulder, width, walk, and all
other components or features.
b) Drainage details for catch basins, man-holes, inwalls and all other components
or features, with specific references to the appropriate sections of the State
Construction Standards.
c) Drainage trench or waterway relocation section.
16. A street layout plan on a separate twenty four (24) inch by thirty six (36) inch sheet,
horizontal scale one (1) inch equals forty (40) inches, for each street in the
subdivision showing exterior lines, roadway lines, partial lot lines, curb lines,
intersection angles, points of tangency, and rail of curves; also included on the street
layout plan shall be location, size, type of construction, elevations and invert,
whenever applicable, of all pipes and conduits of the:
a) Water Supply System, including pumps, valves, stubs, gates, hydrants, and
similar equipment.
b) Storm Drainage System, including manholes, pipes, culverts, catch basins and
appurtenant structures.
c) Sanitary Sewerage System, including piping, manholes, pumps, community
septic tanks, and appurtenant equipment.
20
d) Natural Gas Supply System, including pipes, pumps, valves, gates and similar
equipment.
e) Electrical, Telephone and Cable TV Supply Systems, including piping,
handholes, transformer pad mounts, and similar equipment.
f) Lighting System, including location of street light poles.
17. Zoning classification of all land shown in the plan including overlay zoning such as
floodplain, wetlands, or water supply protection districts; the applicant is urged to
prepare acetate overlays in order to expedite Board review.
18. A Plan of the applicant’s contiguous un-subdivided land showing possible or
contemplated development and street layout.
19. Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signatures of the members of
the Planning Board on each sheet of the Definitive Plan.
Where the applicant elects to secure completion of required improvements by
covenant (rather than bonds or surety), there shall be a notation above such space as
follows:
Approved_________________________, subject to covenant conditions set forth in a
covenant executed by____________________________________,
dated_______________ and recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds,
Book No:_______________, Page No:________________________.
5.5 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
5.5.1 General
Before endorsement of the Board’s approval of a Definitive Plan of a subdivision, the applicant
shall agree to complete the required improvements specified in sections entitled Design
Standards and/or Construction Standards. These improvements for the construction of ways and
the installation of municipal services are to be secured in accordance with Section 81U of the
Subdivision Control Law. The amount of the guarantee shall be approved by the Planning Board
and sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements plus a 10 percent
contingency factor.
5.5.2 Approval with Bonds or Surety, (Use Form G)
The applicant shall either file a performance bond secured by surety, or deposit monies or
negotiable securities with the Town Treasurer (in an amount determined by the Board to be
sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements). Such bond or money or
negotiable securities must be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Town Counsel
or Counsel to the Board, and as to sureties by the Board of Selectmen, and shall be contingent on
21
the completion of such improvements within two (2) years of the date of the bond or the date of
deposit of money or negotiable securities.
If the Board shall decide at any time during the term of the performance bond that:
1. Improvements have been installed in a satisfactory manner in sufficient amount to
warrant a reduction in the face amount of such bond; or
2. The character and extend of the subdivision requires additional improvements,
previously waived, then the Board may modify its requirements for any or all such
improvements and the face value of such performance bond shall thereupon be
reduced or increased respectively by an appropriate amount.
5.5.3 Approval with a Covenant
Instead of filing a bond or depositing a surety, the applicant may request approval of his
Definitive Plan on condition that a covenant with the land will be duly executed, recorded and
inscribed on the Plan or on a separate sheet attached to the Plan and recorded in the Hampden
County Registry of Deeds. Such covenant shall provide in part that no lot may be built upon or
sold until all of the improvements as required in these regulations have been completed and
approved as provided hereafter.
Covenant may be released at the Board’s discretion, if remaining improvements are bonded to
the Board’s satisfaction.
Before endorsement of approval of a Definitive Plan, there shall be filed by the applicant a
properly executed Approval with Covenant Contract (Use Form E ).
Prior to delivering to the applicant a Certificate of Performance (Use Form F) whereby the
restrictions relating to the lot or lots listed therein shall be terminated, the Board shall determine
to its satisfaction that such improvements have been completed so as to adequately serve such lot
or lots.
5.5.4 Approval with a Mortgage Agreement
After sufficient improvements have been made by the applicant to give the Board reason to
release one or more lots from a performance guarantee and following the recording of a first
mortgage on a lot or lots in the subdivision given as security for advances to the sub-divider by a
lender, the Board may, at its option, release lots from the operation of a performance guarantee
without receipt of a bond or deposit of money upon delivery to the Board of an agreement with
the Board which agreement shall be executed by the applicant and the lender and shall provide
for the retention by the lender of sufficient funds otherwise due the applicant to secure the
construction of ways and the installation of utilities. Said agreement shall provide for a schedule
of disbursements which may be made to the applicant upon completion of various stages of the
work and shall further provide that in the event the work is not completed within the time set
forth by the applicant, any funds remaining undisbursed shall be available to the Town of
22
Monson for completion of the unfinished work and correction of deficiencies. All of the above
as specified under the provision of M.G.L., Chapter 41, Section B14, as amended.
5.5.5 Reduction of Bonds or Surety
The penal sum of any such bond, or the amount of any deposit held may, from time to time, be
reduced by the Planning Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released by said Board,
in whole or in part. If release is by reason of covenant, a new plan of the portion to be subject to
the covenant may be required.
5.5.6 Completion Time Schedule
The performance guarantee, whether by bond, deposit of money or covenant, as previously
described herein, shall be contingent upon the completion of such improvements as required in
these Rules and Regulations within two (2) years of the date of such bond, deposit of money, or
covenant.
There shall be as least a two year (2) period between the completion date of all improvements
and the expiration date of any bond or deposit of money. Said two year (2) period shall give the
Town the opportunity to complete the necessary improvements in case:
1. The developer is unable to do so; and/or
2. The Board denies any requests for an extension of time.
Upon written request from the applicant, the Planning Board may, at its discretion, grant an
extension of time, and such agreement shall be executed and affixed to the bond or covenant.
In the case of a surety company bond, such an agreement shall not be effective until the surety
delivers to the Board a written statement that the surety agrees to the proposed alteration of the
completion schedule and that such alteration shall not relieve or affect the liability of the surety
company.
In the case of a covenant, the Board may grant final approval of the Definitive Plan conditional
upon the completion of the construction of all ways and installation of utilities within a specified
time period from date of said covenant. Failure to complete such improvements shall
automatically rescind approval of the plan.
Failure to complete all improvements as required by these Rules and Regulations within the time
allotted shall cause the Board:
1. To draw upon the performance guarantee (surety bond or deposit of money) in order
to complete said improvements; and/or
2. Schedule a public hearing in order to rescind approval of the subdivision in
accordance with appropriate sections of M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81.
23
5.5.7 Final release of Performance Guarantee
Full security, in whatever form provided, shall not be released by the Selectmen until they
receive written certification from the Planning Board of the following.
1. The integrity of road pavement, drainage and other improvements have been verified
by one full calendar year of use or existence;
2. Provisions for the continued maintenance of improvements have been accepted by the
Board;
3. The recorded plans have been received;
4. The Town has been reimbursed for the full cost of consulting services.
Upon completing work on any lot or lots, applicant shall notify the Town Clerk and the Board.
If the Board determines that the work has been completed, it shall release the bond or covenant
on such lot or lots and return the bond or deposit.
If the Board determines that the work has not been completed, it shall within forty five (45) days
notify the Town Clerk and the applicant of the details wherein the work fails to comply with its
rules and regulations.
5.6 Additional Subdivision Requirements
5.6.1 Development Impact Statement
For a complete description, refer to Section 8.0.
5.6.2 Water Supply Protection District
Any portion of a proposed subdivision which lies within the limits of the Water Supply
Protection District shall conform to the requirements of said district as stated in the appropriate
section of the Monson Zoning Bylaw.
5.6.3 Wetland Protection
In accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, no person shall remove, fill, dredge or alter
any bank, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow or swamp bordering on any existing creek, river,
stream, pond, lake or any land under said waters or subject to flooding without filing written
notice of intention to perform said work with the local Conservation Commission and/or
Department of Environmental Protection.
In order to determine if the proposed subdivision or parts thereof are subject to the provisions of
the Wetland Protection Act, the applicant shall submit a Request for Determination of
Applicability to the Monson Conservation Commission.
24
5.6.4 Sewer Extension Permits
Under the provision of M.G.L. Chapter 21, Section 43, an application must be submitted by the
Applicant to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Resource
Protection on the appropriate forms, for a permit to allow construction of any sewer extensions
of a public sewerage system, including construction plans for pumping stations, forced mains,
siphons and other appurtenances.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to furnish the Planning Board and Monson Water &
Sewer Commission at the time of submission of the Definitive Plan, preferably with the
Preliminary Plan, with the necessary data, specifications and construction plans of the proposed
sewer extension project, as required on the application, said application form to be subsequently
completed and signed by the Selectmen for submittal to the Bureau of Resource.
5.6.5 Restrictive Covenants
The applicant shall submit, whenever applicable, as part of his/her/their application, any and all
documents, such as home owners’ association rules and regulations of any commonly
owned/shared land, detention pond, open space, recreation area, etc. Said documents shall be
submitted by the Planning Board to the Board of Selectmen and the Town Counsel appointed by
the Board of Selectmen, and their responses shall be given in writing within thirty (30) days of
the date of submittal.
5.6.6 Easements
All easements to be granted by the developer to the Town shall be shown on the subdivision
plans with bearings and distances, and their purpose shall be clearly stated. In addition, the
applicant shall submit, as part of his application, easement documents, suitable for recording,
deeding said easements to the Town. The easements shall be submitted by the Planning Board to
the Board of Selectmen and the Town Counsel, and their response shall be given in writing
within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal.
5.7 Review Procedure
Before approval of the Plan, the applicant shall comply with all the reasonable rules and
regulations of the various Town Departments. Copies of the Zoning Bylaw, General Bylaws, the
Board of Health Regulations and other appropriate information may be obtained from the
respective Departments. Also before final approval of the Plan, the applicant shall insure that
lots in a Definitive Plan be in conformity with the applicable zoning regulations, and failure of
the lots to so comply will be adequate grounds for disapproval of the Definitive Plan.
5.7.1 Review By The Board of Health
At the time of the filing of the Definitive Plan with the Planning Board, two (2) copies shall also
be filed by the applicant with the Board of Health. The Board of Health shall within forty five
25
(45) days of filing report to the Planning Board in writing with signatures of a majority of its
members, its approval or disapproval of the Plan, as required by M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section
81U. A copy of such report shall be sent to the applicant. If the Board of Health disapproves
such plan, it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such plan
cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public health, and include such specific
findings and the reasons therefore in such report, and, where possible, shall make
recommendations for the adjustments thereof. Approval of the Planning Board shall then only
be given provided that the applicant documents having reviewed the plan with the Board of
Health, and only on the condition that the designated lots of land shall not be built upon or
served with utilities (including septic tanks and drainage) without prior consent of the Board of
Health. The Planning Board shall endorse on the plan such conditions specifying the lots or land
to which such condition applies. Failure of the Board of Health to report shall be deemed as
approval by the Board of Health. In the event approval by the Board of Health is by failure to
make a report, the Planning Board shall note on the Plan that health approval is by failure to
report.
All subdivisions shall connect to the Town sanitary sewerage system where this system is
available and where it is feasible to do so. Every lot not served by the Town sewerage system
shall have an adequate approved sewage disposal system satisfactory to the Board of Health.
5.7.2 Review By The Conservation Commission
At the time of the filing of the Definitive Plan with the Planning Board, one (1) copy shall be
filed by the applicant with the Conservation Commission for review. The making of a report by
the Conservation Commission to the Planning Board concerning a proposed Definitive Plan shall
not be treated so, nor deemed to be approval of, an Order of Conditions or any other approval
provided by the Wetland Protection Act or regulations issued there under, or by any local
wetlands bylaw; and, a request by Planning Board for such a report shall not be treated as, nor
deemed to be, a Notice of Intent or any other application provided by the Wetland Protection Act
or regulations issued there under, or by any local wetland bylaw.
5.7.3 Review by Other Town Agencies
The Planning Board shall, upon submission of a Definitive Plan, transmit one copy to any other
Town agency and/or department, and any consultants selected by the Board for their review.
Comments and recommendations shall be made to the Planning Board within twenty one (21)
days following receipt of a copy of the plan. Failure of any Town agency and/or department to
report shall be deemed approval of the Plan by that agency and/or department.
5.8 Approval of The Definitive Plan
5.8.1 Public Hearing
26
Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval of the Definitive Plan is given, a
public hearing shall be held by the Board. Said Public Hearing shall be held after the Board of
Health makes its report or after the forty five (45) day period to report expires.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing, and of the subject matter, sufficient for
identification, shall be given by the Board at the expense of the applicant by advertisement in a
newspaper of general circulation in successive weeks, the first publication being not less than
fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing. If there is no such newspaper in Town, then
such Notice shall be posted in a conspicuous plan in the Town Hall for a period of not less than
fourteen (14) days before the day of such hearing.
The applicant shall mail notice of the hearing by registered mail to all owners of land abutting
upon the subdivision or separated from such land only by a street as appearing in the most recent
tax list submitted by the applicant (See Form M). The applicant or his representative should be
present at the hearing.
5.8.2 Approval, Modification or Disapproval
1. After the required Public Hearing and after the report of the Board of Health (or lapse
of forty five (45) days without such report), the Planning Board shall approve, modify
and approve, or disapprove such Plan. In determining whether or not the Plan
conforms to these Regulations, the following criteria shall be considered:
a) Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions.
b) Determination that development at this location, as proposed in the
Definitive Plan, does not entail unwarranted hazard to the health,
safety or welfare of future residents of the subdivision or to others
because of possible natural disasters, traffic hazard, or environmental
degradation.
c) Conformity with the Design Standards included in or cited by these
Regulations.
d) Conformity with all applicable zoning requirements.
e) Consistency with the purposes of the Subdivision Control Law.
2. A definitive Plan disapproved by the Board of Health shall not be approved by the
Planning Board until the deficiencies noted by the Board of Health have been
corrected. In the event of disapproval, the Board shall state in detail wherein the plan
does not conform to these regulations or the recommendations of the Board of Health.
Favorable action shall require a majority vote of the Board members. If the Board
modifies or disapproves such Plan, it shall state with its vote the reasons for its action.
3. Time limits for action by the Board.
27
a) Where a preliminary plan has been submitted and acted upon or where at lease
forty five (45) days have elapsed since submission of the Preliminary Plan, an
applicant may file a Definitive Plan. The failure of the Planning Board either
to take final action or to file with the Town Clerk a certificate of such action
regarding a Definitive Plan submitted by an applicant within ninety (90) days
after such submission, or ninety (90) days after the postmarked date if the Plan
is submitted by mail, or such further time as may be agreed upon at the written
request of the applicant, shall be deemed to be an approval thereof. Notice of
such extension of time shall be filed immediately by the Planning Board with
the Town Clerk.
b) Where no Preliminary Plan has been submitted and acted upon or where forty
five (45) days have not elapsed since submission of such Preliminary Plan,
and a Definitive Plan is submitted, the failure of the Planning Board to take
final action regarding a plan submitted by an applicant within one hundred
thirty five (135) days after such submission, or one hundred thirty five (135)
days after the postmarked date if the Plan is submitted by mail, or such further
time as may be agreed upon at the written request of the applicant, shall be
deemed to be an approval thereof. Notice of such extension of time shall be
filed immediately by the Planning Board with the Town Clerk.
5.8.3 Approval is not Acceptance
Approval of the Definitive Plan, or subsequent release of security upon completion of
construction, does not constitute the laying our or acceptance by the Town of streets and
easements within a subdivision. Compliance with the existing Laws of the Commonwealth and
Bylaws and procedures of the Town of Monson are all required before acceptance of any street
or easement. Such acceptance is at the discretion of the Town.
5.8.4 Endorsement of the Plan
Approval, or approval with modifications, if granted, shall be endorsed on a reproducible
drawing of the Definitive Plan in a form acceptable to the Registry of Deeds by the signatures of
a majority of the Board, but not until all of the following events have occurred:
1. The expiration of twenty days without notice of appeal to the superior court, or, if
appeal has been taken, the expiration of twenty (20) days after the entry of a final
decree of the court sustaining the approval of such plan.
2. The Town shall be reimbursed the full cost of all consulting services rendered up to
the time of approval of the plan.
3. A performance guarantee shall be submitted and approved as provided in Section 5.4
of these Regulations; the Developer is to provide the Town with a satisfactory
28
performance guarantee within thirty (30) days after the twenty (20) day appeal period
has expired, and upon acceptance of the guarantee, the Plan will be endorsed within
thirty (30) days by the Planning Board.
4. The necessary corrections, whenever applicable, on the plan, easements, master
deeds, or restrictive covenants, etc., have been made if conditional approval was
given to the satisfaction of the Board.
Failure of the applicant to meet the above requirements shall be full and sufficient reason to
withhold endorsement.
The Plan bearing such endorsement shall be delivered by the Planning Board to the person who
submitted such plan.
After the Definitive Plan has been approved and endorsed, the applicant shall furnish the Board
with four (4) copies thereof, and with a reproducible permanent original.
5.8.5 Recording of Plan and Notification of the Board
1. Within ten (10) days after the Definitive Plan, as approved and endorsed, has been
recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds and in the case of registered land,
with the recorder of the Land Court, the applicant shall notify the Board in writing of
the date of such recording and provide written evidence of such recording.
2. Upon the receipt of notification of recording, the Board shall file one print with the
Town Clerk, Board of Assessors and the Building Inspector. In accordance with the
statute, where approval with covenant is noted thereon, the Building Inspector shall not
issue any permit for the construction of a building on any lot within the subdivision
without receipt from the Board of a copy of the Certificate of Performance (Form F).
5.9 Release of Performance Guarantee
1. Procedures for Full or Partial Release
Upon the completion of improvements required by these Rules and Regulations, the
sub-divider may request either partial or full release of the bond, deposit or covenant
by sending a written statement in duplicate that said construction or installation has
been given and request for release by registered mail to the Planning Board and the
Town Clerk. Release will be granted only following written approval by an engineer
appointed by the Planning Board and any other Town Officials concerned with the
work performed. If the Board determines that said construction or installation has not
been completed, it shall specify to the sub-divider in writing the details wherein said
construction and installation fails to comply with these Rules and Regulations.
2. Procedures for Partial Release
29
The Planning Board may grant partial release from the bond, deposit or covenant for
partial completion of improvements, provided that the completed portion provides a
reasonable system for circulation and utilities pending completion of the rest, and
provided that appropriate arrangements have been made for later disposition of such
interim facilities as temporary turnarounds.
5.10 Modification, Amendment or Recision of Plan Approval
If the applicant fails to submit the required performance guarantees and other documentations
and the endorsement of the plan by the Planning Board is delayed more than six (6) months, the
Planning Board, on its own motion, shall exercise its power to modify, amend, or rescind its
approval of the subdivision plan or to require a change in the plan as a condition of said plan
retaining the states of an approved plan.
5.11 Acceptance of Ways and Footpaths
Approval by the Board of a Definitive Subdivision Plan shall not constitute the laying out or
acceptance of by the Town of any streets, bikeways, or footpaths within a subdivision.
6.0 DESIGN STANDARDS
6.1 General
6.1.1 Basic Requirements
State Construction Standards shall be followed, and all matters left open or undefined in those
Standards shall be specified by the Board on a case by case basis. Specification of matters not
covered by the State Construction Standards shall be made by the Board or its engineering
consultant on a case by case basis, based wherever possible on the publications of the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or other publications
cited in these regulations.
6.1.2 Street Plans and Access
Proposed streets shall be in harmony with existing and proposed thoroughfares and streets
appropriate to the topography, and designed to afford safe access to the abutting lots, giving due
consideration to contours and natural features. They shall be consistent with the Master Plan of
the Town prepared by or being prepared by the Board. Where required by the Board, provision
shall be made in the proper locations for the extension of streets to abutting undeveloped land.
Each lot in a subdivision shall have access to and frontage on a public way or on a way shown on
an approved plan of subdivision.
30
6.1.3 Lot Size and Frontage
All lots shall be of such size and dimensions as to at least meet the minimum requirements of the
Zoning Bylaw.
6.1.4 Protection of Natural Features
All natural features, such as large trees, watercourses, wetlands, scenic points, historic spots, and
similar community assets which will add attractiveness and value to the property shall be
preserved. Six (6) inches of top soil shall be replaced on all disturbed earth within the
subdivision.
6.1.5 Re-subdivision
Re-subdivision of all or part of land covered by an existing plan shall be governed by regulations
in force at the time of re-submission. Such re-subdivision shall show clearly the areas being replatted
and the file number of all previous plans of these same areas, together with filing dates.
6.2 Street layout and Design Standards
6.2.1 Location
1. All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel. Due consideration shall also be given
by the sub-divider to the attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain the
maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision.
2. If adjoining property is not subdivided but is, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
suitable for ultimate development, provision shall be made for the proper projection
of streets into such property, by continuing appropriate streets within the subdivision
to the exterior boundary line thereof.
3. No privately owned reserve strip which controls access to land dedicated to public
use, or which may be so dedicated will be permitted.
4. Streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing streets, as far as adequate
to ensure free circulation of vehicular travel. This section is intended to enable the
Board to ensure both adequate access to the subdivision from adjacent streets and
continuity of travel within the subdivision itself.
5. Sidewalks, grass strips, and curbs shall be required.
6. As far as practicable, roads shall follow natural contours.
6.2.2 Alignment
31
1. Visibility from the centerline of a street shall never be less than stopping site distance
as defined by AASHTO (current edition).
2. The vertical alignment at grade changes or minimum stopping sight distance at three
and one half (3.5) feet above the pavement shall be as specified by AASHTO (current
edition).
6.2.3 Street Jogs
Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out either directly opposite each
other or with a minimum offset of two hundred (200) feet between their centerlines. This
minimum offset shall be observed whenever one or more streets entering opposite sides of
another street are existing, whether located within or outside the boundary of the proposed
subdivision.
6.2.4 Intersections
Streets and ways shall be laid out so as to intersect in accordance with the standards as shown in
the following:
1. Except where it is impracticable because of the character of the land, streets shall
intersect so that within seventy five (75) feet of the intersection, the street lines are at
right angles. The grade of intersection streets shall not exceed plus or minus 2%. No
structure or planting that will impair corner visibility will be permitted within thirty
(30) feet of street intersections. Intersecting streets entering at angles of between 60°
and 120° with the intersected street center line may be approved with greater
visibility distances. Ninety (90°) degree intersecting streets are encouraged.
2. The vertical grade of either intersecting street shall not exceed a slope of three (3)
percent for a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the intersection.
3. Street signs bearing approved street names shall be provided and installed by the
developer at his expense at all street intersections. Sign style shall be submitted to the
Board for their approval.
6.2.5 Storm and Surface Drainage
1. General - Adequate disposal of surface water shall be provided for in a manner
satisfactory to the Planning Board, and shall address runoff from the proposed
subdivision. Such system may include a system of storm drains, culverts, ditches,
under drains, detention basins, drywells, and related installations, including catch
basins, gutters and manholes, and shall be designed and installed to provide adequate
disposal of surface water, including control of erosion, flooding, storm water
management and standing water from or in the subdivision and adjacent lands. A
catch basin to manhole system of drainage is required.
32
When, in the opinion of the Planning Board, development of an area will increase
runoff substantially to downstream properties, it shall require that a detention area be
constructed. Such detention area will be designed to handle the one hundred (100)
year storm without drainage and such size shall be determined by using the flood
routing procedure as described in the U.S.D.A Soil Conservation Service Technical
Release No.55. Storm water calculations shall be prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer using two methods of calculations. One method shall be as
described in U.S.D.A Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No.55. Drainage
conveyance systems shall be designed using the larger of two calculation capacities.
2. Piped Systems
a) The construction of the drainage system, including methods of construction
and quality of material used, shall be in conformity with the Definitive Plan
and Section 200 of the Mass Highway Standard Specifications.
b) The design capacity of the drains shall be determined by the rational method,
unless the engineer exhibits satisfactory evidence that another approach is
more appropriate for the specific case. The engineer shall design the drainage
system in accordance with natural drainage boundaries of the total
contributing drainage area.
c) Drainage pipe within the roadway shall be reinforced concrete, or ACCM pipe
with appropriate joints as approved by the Town Engineer, and have a
minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches. Catch basins to manholes may be
twelve (12) inches in diameter.
d) Stormwater shall not be permitted to cross any roadway upon the surface but
must be piped underground. Stormwater runoff shall not be permitted to flow
upon the road surface for a longer distance than four hundred (400) feet before
it enters the underground system or is diverted off the roadway to ditches or
swales.
e) Proper connections may be made with any existing public drainage system
with four hundred (400) feet of the subdivision, if that system has the capacity
to absorb the flows from the project areas, and is permitted by the Board of
Selectmen. Cost of all work in the Town way shall be paid by the developer.
f) No open water body or pond shall be filled in, and no wet or swampy area
shall be filled in unless approval has been obtained in accordance with M.G.L.
Chapter 131.
g) Where open stream channels exist within a subdivision, adequate provision
shall be made for properly maintaining them or for properly enclosing them, if
absolutely necessary. It is the Town’s intent to preserve and maintain the
33
natural features of such streams and any development should be planned
accordingly. All work shall be done in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 131.
h) Drainage pipe shall be bedded in compacted screened gravel to a depth of six
(6) inches below the bottom of the pipe in earth and twelve (12) inches in
rock. Gravel bedding shall be carried to the spring line of the pipe. Selected
material containing no large boulders shall then be hand placed to an elevation
of one (1) foot above the top of the pipe and compacted. Mechanical
equipment may be used to backfill the trench above this point.
i) Manholes and catch basins shall be precast, cast in place, block and a typical
detail noting materials, dimensions, and construction details shall be
submitted for approval.
j) Drain manholes shall be located at every change in grade or direction of the
drainage line, at catch basin connections, and shall not exceed four hundred
(400) feet apart in continuous system.
k) Iron casting for manhole frames and covers and catch basin frames and grates
shall be extra heavy in accordance with Massachusetts Department of Public
Works Standards.
Manhole cover shall have three (3) inch lettering to read
“DRAIN”.
Catch Basin grates shall be Type A-1 or A-3.
l) If sub-drainage is required, perforated cement, or ACCM pipe shall be used in
bedding of three quarter (3/4) inch to one and one quarter (1 ¼) inch washed
stone brought to the spring line of the pipe. The remaining trench shall then
be backfilled with coarse bank run gravel or coarse sand.
6.2.6 Street Widths
The classification of town streets shall be as designated in the Plan of Circulation, and the
classification of new streets and streets not shown on such Plan shall be as determined by the
Planning Board. The following standards shall apply:
Table 1 Width of Roads in Local Streets
Right of Way
Classification Width-Feet Max. Grade Paved Width Design Speed
Major (Arterial) 80 4% 50, (2) – 30 40 MPH
Secondary (Collector) 60 or 70 5% 40 40 MPH
Minor (Lane) 50 or 60 8% 24 or 30 30 MPH
34
Cul-de-Sac / Dead End 50 10% 24 30 MPH
Streets designed to serve business and industrial areas shall have sixty (60) foot width and forty
(40) foot paved width.
Street grades shall be not less than 0.5% to assure proper surface runoff.
In establishing the proposed road width, the developer shall also consider the future growth of
the surrounding area.
The centerline of the roadway shall coincide with the centerline of the right-of-way unless
otherwise requested by the Board.
6.2.7 Cul-de-Sacs / Dead End Streets.
1. Dead end streets shall not exceed seven hundred (700) feet in length or serve more
than twenty (20) dwelling units, and shall terminate in a paved turnaround one
hundred and twenty (120) feet in diameter. Where a dead end street may be extended
in the future, the turnaround, and the full street width, shall extend to the subdivision
boundary. Property street line diameter shall be one hundred and forty (140) feet.
2. The developer shall make every effort to avoid the creation of dead end streets.
3. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be allowed only where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, it is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and where it is
a part of a street or way that eventually will be extended into adjoining property. The
design of a temporary turnaround shall be satisfactory to the Planning Board, and
clearly shown on the plan as temporary in nature, and such property lines shall be
those which would normally have been required or used without the turnaround.
There shall be no release of the covenant until the permanent road construction is
complete.
4. Regardless of the above, no temporary cul-de-sac shall be allowed if the street length
exceeds the limit set in these Rules and Regulations.
5. Temporary dead end or cul-de-sac streets shall conform to the provision of alignment,
width, and grade that would be applicable to such streets if extended.
6. Layout of turnaround beyond the normal street right-of-way lines shall be in the form
of an easement to the Town of Monson covering said premises included in the
turnaround. When the Street is extended into adjoining property, the easement shall
become null and void.
7. Cross grades in the Cul-de-Sac shall be 3% + OT – ½% sloping from the radius point
of the pavement to the outer diameter of the paved surface.
35
6.2.8 Adequate Access from Public Ways
1. Where the street system with a subdivision does not connect with or
have, in the opinion of the Board, adequate access from a Town, County or State
public way, the Board may require, as a condition of approval of a plan, that such
adequate access be provided by the sub-divider, and / or that the sub-divider make
physical improvement of access to and within such a way, either from the boundary
of the subdivision to a Town, County or State public way, or along such public way
for a distance which, in the opinion of the Board, is sufficient to provide adequate
access to the subdivision
2. Where the physical condition or width of a public way from which a subdivision has
its access is considered by the Board to be inadequate to either provide for emergency
services or carry the traffic which is expected, in the opinion of the Board, to be
generated by such subdivision, the Board may require the sub-divider to dedicate a
strip of land for the purpose of widening the abutting public way to a width at least
commensurate with that required within the subdivision, and to make physical
improvements to and within such public way to the same standards required within
the subdivision. Any such dedication of land for the way and any such work
performed within such public way shall be made only with permission of the
governmental agency having jurisdiction over such way, and all costs of any such
widening or construction shall be borne by the sub-divider.
3 Access shall be from a way accessed in Monson.
6.2.9 Cross Section
Street construction shall conform to Typical Cross Sections demonstrating good engineering
practices. The Typical Cross Section shall include the paved roadway, curbing’s, sidewalks,
grass strips or utilities.
6.3 Stormwater Drainage
An adequate system of stormwater drainage shall be provided, and no natural watercourse shall
be altered or obstructed in such a way as to reduce the natural run-off capacity, unless substitute
means of run off are provided. The Board may require culverts and other stormwater drainage
installations where it deems necessary to connect with one or more natural watercourses. All
necessary easements for drainage shall be provided, whether on or off the site.
6.4 Water Supply
In the case of a subdivision served by a public water supply, all necessary mains, branch offsets,
fire hydrants and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed as approved by the Monson
Water & Sewer Department.
6.5 Municipal Services
36
Where, in the judgement of the Planning Board, a subdivision can be connected to an existing
public water supply and sewer system, the Board may require the extension of such municipal
services to and within the subdivision. Cost of easements and all work related to the subdivision
shall be paid by the developer.
6.6 Parks and Open Space
Before approval of a plan, the Board shall in proper cases require the plan to show a park or
parks suitably located for playground or recreation purposes, or for providing light and air. Such
parks shall be not unreasonable in area in relation to the amount of land being subdivided and the
prospective uses of such land. When so determined, said Board shall, by appropriate
endorsement on the plan, require that no building may be erected on such park or parks land for
three years without approval of the Board.
6.7 Landscaping
Appropriate reseeding and replanting of the non paved areas of street right-of-ways is a
component part of the construction of a subdivision, and is to be completed by the sub-divider.
1. Existing vegetation shall be disturbed to a minimum. Except when necessary to
conform to road, driveway and drainage standards or to eliminate blind intersections
or poor site lines at curves, major earth movements shall be avoided. Drainage
ditches wherever possible shall be graded to resemble natural streams.
2. In construction areas of the right-of-way topsoil shall be removed and spread over
land exposed during grading operations. Shoulders and graded slopes shall be seeded
on completion, planted with shrubs or given similar approved landscape treatment.
Excess topsoil may be removed from the site at the completion of the project but only
with approval from the Planning Board and verification from the Planning Board
Inspector/Agent of the excess material.
3. At entrances to subdivision from major roads and along other portions of the right-ofway,
the Board may require the planting of groups of shrubs and trees for aesthetic
effect and as an inducement to new homeowners to enhance their property.
4. Diseased and dead trees within street right of ways shall be removed, and healthy
existing trees shall be preserved where possible. The sub-divider shall provide either
by preserving existing trees or planting new trees, one tree for each fifty (50) feet of
street length, not less than eight (8) feet tall and one and one half (1 ½) inches in
diameter, on each side of each street, of a species approved by the tree warden and
wire using utilities.
5. No tree or shrub branches will be permitted on any street within thirty (30) feet of a
corner intersection that will interfere with corner visibility.
37
7.0 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
7.1 Basic Requirements
The sub-divider shall provide all of the improvements required herein and installed at his/her
own expense. All work done under this section shall be done under the direction of the Board,
including registered engineer (s) and any other consultants appointed by the Board. The subdivider
shall promptly reimburse the Town for the full amount of the cost of such engineer (s)
and other consultants.
No road constructed for private use may be presented to the Town for acceptance at any time
after the effective date of these Road Specifications unless constructed in accordance with the
terms of these Specifications.
In addition to the standards specified in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of
Public Works:
1. “ Standard Specifications for Highways, Bridges and Waterways” current edition, as
amended, (to be referred to hereto as the “Standard Specifications”);
2. “Construction Standards”, current edition, as amended (to be referred to hereto as the
“Construction Standards”), the following minimum specifications hall govern the
installation of all roadways, utilities and other improvements in the subdivision.
7.2 Submissions
The following drawings and data shall be submitted for approval prior to clearing or grading of
any land for or the construction of any roadways, etc.:
1. Accurate layout of existing and proposed streets, easements or rights of way
including those for utilities, sewers, drainage either on or off site, with accurate
bearings and distances including arc length, radii and central angle of all curves.
2. Accurate location of monuments with accurate references to the Massachusetts
coordinate system.
3. The location of all existing and proposed stormwater sewers, catch basins, manholes,
bridges and culvers. Pipe sizes and invert elevations of all drainage structures shall
be shown together with outfall into existing sewers or natural watercourses.
4. Road profiles, showing accurate existing and finish grades. A typical cross section of
the entire right of way and other road construction plans including drainage structures
shall also be submitted.
5. Watershed data and calculations for the design of drainage structures.
38
7.3 Roadway Construction Standards
7.3.1 Subgrade Preparation
1. Within the roadway area including driveway aprons, sidewalks, and grass strips, all
loam, organic material, clay and soft material shall be stripped from the line of the
streets for the full length and width, to a minimum of four (4) feet excavation depth,
unless data is shown to indicate current foundation is sufficient.
2. When fill is placed, it shall be placed and compacted in layers not deeper than twelve
(12) inches loose, except the last layer which shall not exceed four (4) inches in
depth.
3. The fill shall be ordinary borrow specified and placed as in the relevant provision of
Section 150 of the Mass Highway Standard Specifications.
4. The subgrade shall be shaped and finish graded at the required depth below and
parallel to the proposed pavement surface, in conformance with the Typical Street-
Cross Section.
5. Upon completion of the subgrade preparation, an inspection by an engineer so
appointed by the Town shall be required and in no case shall the gravel base begin
until the subgrade preparation has been approved as described in Section 7.10 and the
Subdivision Inspection Checklist (Form I hereto appended).
7.3.2 Gravel Base
1. The gravel base shall be gravel borrow meeting M1. 03.0 Type A specifications,
except that the top four (4) inches shall be gravel borrow meeting M1.03.1
specifications.
2. When spreading the gravel, care should be taken to rake forward and distribute the
largest stones so they will be at the bottom of the gravel base course and evenly
distributed.
3. The gravel borrow shall be laid to a depth indicated in Table 2.
4. All gravel base material shall be thoroughly compacted.
5. The gravel base surface shall be shaped and finish graded at the required depth below
ad parallel to the proposed pavement surface, in conformance with the Typical Street
Cross Section.
6. After completion of the gravel base, an inspection by an engineer so appointed by the
Town shall be required and in no case shall surfacing of the roadway begin until the
39
gravel base has been approved as described in Section 7.10 and the Subdivision
Inspection Checklist (Form I appended hereto.)
7.3.3 Surfacing of the Roadway
The roadway and driveway aprons shall be paved the entire width, including under the berms,
and the surface treatment shall be compacted bituminous concrete placed in two (2) layers.
No paving shall be applied to frozen gravel base, nor shall any pavement be applied when the
local air temperature is less than 32°F., or when any form of atmospheric precipitation is
occurring.
All bituminous concrete shall be spread by an approved mechanical spreader in a uniformly
loose layer to the full width required and to such thickness that each course when compacted
shall have the required thickness and shall conform to grade and the Typical Street Cross
Section.
1. Pavement Binder Course - The first layer or binder course shall be asphalt concrete,
in accordance with Section 420, Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement Type I-1
(Binder Course Mix). It shall be laid to a depth indicated in Figure 1 and Table 2.
The binder course shall be allowed to set after application for one full winter until the
following spring thaw is complete and all the frost in the roadway areas has melted
and drained off. At that time the owner shall request an inspection by an engineer so
appointed by the Town and in no case shall the wearing course be applied until the
binder course has been inspected and approved as described in Section 7.10 and the
Subdivision Inspection Checklist (Form K hereto appended).
2. Pavement Wearing Course - The second layer or wearing course shall be placed no
sooner than the binder course. The wearing course shall be Class I Bituminous
Concrete Pavement Type I – 1 (Top Course Mix), in accordance with Section 460 of
the Standard Specifications. It shall be laid to a depth indicated in Figure 1 and Table
2.
The wearing course shall be rolled to a smooth surface showing no ridges or
depressions from the roller, preserving the proper crown.
Finished roadway and driveway apron surfaces less that the required thickness or
containing any soft or imperfect places will not be approved.
All roadways shall be brought up to the finish grade as shown on the Definitive Plan,
and all manhole covers, grate boxes, gas drips and other access to underground
utilities shall be set flush with the surface of the road, grass strip or sidewalk.
40
Inspection of the binder course by an engineer appointed by the Town before laying
the wearer course is required. A leveling course shall be laid as directed by the
engineer before laying the wearer course.
Table 2 Required Depth of Pavement Section
Pavement Sections Support
Wearing Course 1 ½ “
Binder Course 2 ½ “
Gravel Base 18 “
7.3.4 Shoulders
Shoulders shall not be allowed in place of sidewalks, curbs and grass strips, unless permission is
specifically granted by the Planning Board.
7.3.5 Curbs/Berms
1. Curbs/berms shall be constructed of bituminous concrete in accordance with
applicable Plates, available upon request. Curbs shall be place by an approved
bituminous concrete curb machine true to line and grade indicated on the Plan –
Profile drawings. Immediately prior to placement of the curb, the surface of the road
receiving the curb shall be coated with approved bitumen.
2. All curbs/berms shall be bituminous concrete curb type A (Cape Cod standard
specifications provisions on 501) and curb height shall be a minimum of six (6)
inches above the finished wearing course.
3. Curbs shall be installed on both sides of all roads where road grade exceeds 3%.
4. Under special conditions, especially constructed berms or gutters may be required by
the Planning Board.
7.3.6 Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be required. Sidewalks may be placed on one or both sides of the street at a
width determined by the Planning Board. All sidewalks shall conform to the material and
construction methods as specified in Section 701 of the Mass Highway Standard Specifications.
Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet width with a three (3) foot grass strip.
7.3.7 Grass Strips
41
1. Grass strips shall be provided on each side of the roadway, between the curb and the
sidewalk.
2. The finished grade of such grass strips shall have a slope of one half (½) inch per
foot.
3. The top six (6) inches of grass strip shall consist of good quality loam extending to
the right of way, screened, raked, and rolled with at least a 100 pound roller to grade.
The loam shall be seeded with lawn grass seed applied in sufficient quantity to assure
adequate coverage, rolled when the loam is moist. Loaming and seeding shall be in
accordance with Sections 751 and 765 of the Mass Highway Standard Specifications.
4. The minimum width of any grass strip shall be seven (7) feet.
7.3.8 Street Signs and Street Lights
Street signs bearing approved street names shall be provided and installed by the developer or
contractor at his expense at all street intersections, and they shall conform to Town standards.
Street lighting shall be required on one side of the street.
7.3.9 Guard Rails
Guard rails shall be installed as required by site conditions or by the Board, based on State
Construction Standards or the publications of the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO). Guard rails shall be SS beam, installed according to
standard specifications.
7.3.10 Slopes
Slopes shall be loamed, rolled, fertilized and seeded with a good grass seed. Developers shall
provide specifications for seeding.
7.4 Drainage and Drainage Structures
7.4.1 Responsibility
The responsibility for adequate drainage shall rest with the developer. This shall include the risk
involved in connecting with existing drainage facilities (if any) provided by the Town.
Where property adjacent to the subdivision, but within the same watershed, is not subdivided,
provision shall be made for property projection of the drainage systems by continuing
appropriate drains and easements to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision at such size and
grade as will allow for such projection. Drainage rights which are appropriate, sufficient, and
42
necessary to handle drainage from the subdivision and adjacent areas shall be secured for the
Town.
7.4.2 Groundwater Drainage
As construction progresses, unforeseen groundwater conditions may be encountered which
require additional sub-drains or curtain drains. These conditions include potential problems if
construction is in progress at a time of low water table or other dry conditions. The Board
reserves the right to require appropriate systems to accommodate the problem.
7.4.3 Drainage and Drainage Structures
1. All roads shall be properly drained and sufficient culverts, manholes and catch basins
installed as approved by the Board. No portion of any road shall drain in one
direction more than three hundred and fifty (350) feet without catch basins on both
sides of the road. Culverts shall be sized based upon the following design standards:
a) Culverts to be installed to carry runoff from existing streams shall be designed
to satisfy requirements of a hundred (100) year storm.
b) Proposed culverts and ditches to be installed for street drainage shall be
designed to satisfy requirements of a twenty five (25) year storm.
2. All drainage pipes shall be at least fifteen (15) inches in diameter and installed with a
minimum cover of four (4) feet, and shall be pitched not less than .005 feet per one
(1) foot; for shallow slopes, a cleansing velocity must be maintained. All drainage
structures shall be indicated as to size and location on plan profile sheets. In addition,
drawings and calculations showing size of watershed area and quantity of water
drained by each culvert that either crosses, or is a part of, the roadway drainage
system or subdivision drainage system shall be submitted. Drainage rights of way
through lots shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
3. Class A concrete or stone masonry headwalls shall be located at culvert ends and
constructed in accordance with applicable Plates available upon request.
7.4.4 Catch Basins and Manholes
1. General - Adequate disposal of surface water shall be provided for in a manner
satisfactory to the Planning Board, and shall address runoff from the proposed
subdivision. Such system may include a system of storm drains, culverts, ditches,
under drains, detention basins, drywells, and related installations, including catch
basins, gutters and manholes, and shall be designed and installed to provide adequate
disposal of surface water, including control of erosion, flooding, stormwater
management and standing water from or in the subdivision and adjacent lands. A
catch basin to manhole system of drainage is required.
43
2. Piped System
a) The construction of the drainage system, including methods of construction
and quality of materials used, shall be in conformity with the Definitive Plan
and Section 200 of the Mass Highway Standard Specifications.
b) Drainage pipe within the roadway shall be reinforced concrete, or ACCM Pipe
with appropriate joints, and have a minimum diameter of fifteen (15) inches.
c) Stormwater shall not be permitted to cross any roadway upon the surface but
must be piped underground. Stormwater runoff shall not be permitted to flow
upon the road surface for a longer distance than four hundred (400) feet before
it enters the underground system or is diverted off the roadway to ditches and
swales. Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the roadway on
continuous grades at intervals of not more than four hundred (400) feet, at all
sags in the roadway, and near the corners of the roadway at intersecting
streets, to prevent surface water from crossing the intersection.
d) Proper connections may be made with any existing public drainage system
within four hundred (400) feet of the subdivision, if that system has the
capacity to absorb the flows from the project areas, and approval is given by
the Town of Monson’s Board of Selectmen.
e) No open water body or pond shall be filled in, and no wet or swampy areas
shall be filled in unless approval has been obtained in accordance with M.G.L.
Chapter 131.
f) Where open stream channels exist within a subdivision, adequate provision
shall be made for properly maintaining them or for properly enclosing them, if
absolutely necessary. It is the Town’s intent to preserve and maintain the
natural features of such streams and any development should be planned
accordingly.
g) Drainage pipe shall be bedded in compacted screened gravel to a depth of six
(6) inches below the bottom of the pipe in earth and twelve (12) inches in
rock. Gravel bedding shall be carried to the spring line of the pipe. Selected
material containing no large boulders shall then be hand placed to an elevation
of one (1) foot above the top of the pipe and compacted. Mechanical
equipment may be used to backfill the trench above this point.
h) Manholes and catch basins shall be precast, cast in place, block and a typical
detail of such noting materials, dimensions, and construction details shall be
submitted for approval.
44
i) Drain manholes shall be located at every change in grade or direction of the
drainage line, at catch basin connections, and shall not exceed four hundred
(400) feet apart in a continuous system.
j) Iron casting for manhole frames and covers and catch basin frames and grates
shall be extra heavy in accordance with Massachusetts Department of Public
Works Standards.
1. Manhole cover shall have three (3) inch lettering to read “DRAIN”
2. Catch basin grates shall be Type A-1 or A-3.
k) If subdrainage is required, perforated cement, or ACCM pipe shall be used in
bedding of three quarter (¾) inch to one and one quarter (1 ¼) inch washed
stone.
7.4.5 Culverts and Under Drain Pipe
7.4.5.1 General
In order to replicate the flood control value of undisturbed lands, provide compensatory storage
of storm water runoff, and comply with the Town of Monson’s Zoning Bylaws, the Town of
Monson may allow the construction of stormwater detention basins provided that:
1. The design and construction is in compliance with M.G.L. Ch. 131 § 40.
2. The design and construction does not conflict with the Town Bylaws or the Zoning
Bylaws of the Town of Monson.
3. The design and construction do not conflict with any other laws, rules and regulations, or
standards of any government agency which may have jurisdiction in such matters.
4. The design includes a positive flow outlet from the basin.
5. The location is not in an area such that the sudden release of water, due to failure, would
result in loss of life, injury to persons, damage to residences or buildings or cause
interruptions of use or service of public utilities.
6. The design and construction meet the specifications as noted in the Standard
Specifications.
7.4.5.2 Contents
The following information shall be required to be submitted as part of the Definitive Plan.
45
1. Name and addresses of all abutters to the drainage easement for the basin as they appear
in the most recent tax list.
2. Water courses, ponds, marshes, flood plains, rock outcrop, and other significant natural
features within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed high water mark (as determined
by the one hundred (100) year storm frequency).
3. A drainage area map outlining the watershed area; the map shall show the watershed
boundary; the drainage pattern; location of bridges; culverts and other structures that
affect the flow of water; location of roads, buildings, property lines and fences or walls;
and a north arrow.
4. A minimum two (2) foot contour interval plan with spot grades shown as needed or
required to describe the basin and adjacent area; this plan shall be accompanied by a
profile of the basin including the principal and emergency spillway and/or outlet with all
appropriate inlet and outlet elevations.
5. Drainage calculations for proposed and existing conditions, done for a minimum twenty
five (25) year and one hundred (100) year storms. Critical volume calculations should be
checked by an independent alternate method using both short duration/high intensity and
long duration storms.
6. Soil logs, test pits and percolation test within the basin area to determine existing
conditions of the underlying soil and groundwater; this information shall be shown on a
plan, and described in a report certified by a Registered Professional Engineer and carry
his/her official seal. Groundwater level tests will be considered valid only if they are
done between March 1st and May 31st .
7. Detailed drawings of all structures including culverts, trash racks, anti-seep collars, risers,
fencing and all other appurtenant works.
8. Stabilization specifications including seeding, mulching, and rip-rapping.
9. Construction notes required to assist in layout, construction, and checking of the
completed facility.
10. All drainage design information, drawings and runoff calculations must be prepared,
signed, dated, and stamped by a Massachusetts Registered Professional Engineer using
standard acceptable engineering methods. The runoff calculations should be based on
soil conditions expected to prevail during the anticipated effective life of the structure.
A one hundred (100) year design frequency storm is required for all stormwater detention basins.
7.4.5.3 Design Standards
Storage Capacity
46
The capacity of a basin shall be defined as the volume at the elevation of the crest of the spillway
which is available for the storage of water during the planned useful life of the structure.
Shape
1. The basin shape shall follow existing contours as closely as possible.
2. The bottom of the basin shall pitch a minimum of one quarter (¼) inch per foot toward
the outlet.
3. The slope from the design high water level to the basin bottom shall not be steeper than a
ratio of 3:1. The approach area to the design high water level shall not exceed a slope of
5:1 for a distance of twenty five (25) feet from the high water level.
4. All side slopes shall be properly seeded. It the side slopes exhibit seepage or movement
during construction, then rip-rap stabilization shall be required
5. The recommended maximum depth is between two and a half (2½) and five (5) feet.
However, deeper basins may be considered.
6. The basin bottom elevations shall be at least two (2) feet above the observed seasonal
high groundwater elevation.
7. A fifteen (15) foot wide gravel surface access roadway with a grade no greater than ten
(10) percent shall be constructed as an access way for the Town of Monson.
Appurtenances
Swales
1. A paved or rip-rap swale may be required from the outlet pipe to the inlet pipe.
Inlet and Outlet Structures
1. The inlet pipe shall be sufficiently stabilized and rip-rapped at its outlet per accepted
engineering methods.
2. If the inlet of the outlet pipe is designed with an anti-debris device, then it is
recommended that only the lower half of the pipe is fitted with such a device.
3. An emergency overflow shall be provided in case of unexpected circumstances. (Note:
Retention of stormwater runoff is not allowed).
Easements
47
1. Twenty five (25) foot wide drainage easements shall be provided for all drainage lines
discharging stormwater into and carrying stormwater away from the basin.
2. A twenty five (25) foot wide easement shall be provided around the perimeter of the of
the high water mark of the basin.
3. Twenty (20) foot access easements shall be provided for vehicle access to the basin. Said
easements shall be located in an area which does not exceed a grade of ten (10%) percent
on the approach to the basin, nor exceed a cross grade of three (3%) percent.
Landscaping
1. The side slopes (as required in the Standard Specifications), earthen dams, twenty five
(25) foot wide easement around the entire basin perimeter, and other disturbed areas shall
be loamed and seeded. Seed shall be a “conservation mix” or similar mixture which is
compatible with the soil and moisture conditions. The area should require minimal
maintenance and be kept in a meadow like condition.
2. All the areas shall be hydro-seeded to minimize erosion and promote fast growth.
Fencing
1. Fencing may be required by the Planning Board for all detention basins exceeding two
and one half (2½) feet maximum depth.
2. Specifications shall be as follows:
a) Materials: zinc coated steel, two (2) inch mesh, nine (9) gauge.
b) Gates: twelve (12) foot minimum in width and placed in two separate locations as
specified by the Planning Board.
c) Height: six (6) foot minimum.
d) Post Set: Ten (10) foot centers in concrete.
Signs
1. At least one sign shall be installed warning the public of hazards of flood water. No
individual sign shall exceed six (6) square feet.
Maintenance
48
1. A maintenance reserve fund shall be established by the sub-divider for unexpected repairs
and/or long term capital costs associated with the detention basin.
2. The maintenance reserve fund shall be set up as an interest bearing account in a local
bank under the name of “Town of Monson” (name of the subdivision) Stormwater
Detention Basin Maintenance Account.
3. The Town Engineer shall recommend to the Planning Board the amount required to
establish the maintenance account.
4. The maintenance account shall be established and the deposit book turned over to the
Town Treasurer before endorsement of the Planning Board’s approval of the Definitive
Plan.
Ownership
1. Ownership of the detention basin shall remain with the owner of the lot (s) on which the
basin is located.
2. The Town of Monson shall have the right to enter and re-enter the detention basin area
for purposes of maintenance.
Construction
1. The detention basin is to be constructed prior to the initiation of the construction of the
roadway.
2. Such basin shall function as a sediment basin during initial construction of the roadway.
3. All silt must be removed from the basin and disposed of properly prior to the accepting of
the road and associated easements by the Town.
4. The sign as required in the Standard Specifications shall be created during the initiation
of construction and utilization of the basin as a sediment basin.
7.5 Monuments
1. Monuments shall be placed at points of curvature and tangency and angle points.
2. Monuments shall be of stone or reinforced concrete, not less than four (4) inches square
and thirty (30) inches long, with a brass or copper plug, drill hole or cross marking and be
set flush with finished grades.
49
3. All monuments shall be set by a Registered Surveyor and installed by the developer or
contractor at his expense.
7.6 Utilities other than Drainage Structures
7.6.1 General Standards
The installation of utilities and underground structures shall conform to the following general
standards:
1. All public and private sewers, surface water drains, water and gas pipes, electric,
telephone and Cable TV lines, together with their appropriate underground structures,
within the street right of way, shall be placed underground at the discretion of the Board
2. Underground utilities shall be installed after the street has been excavated to subgrade.
3. The location of the utilities shall conform to the Definitive Plan and the Typical Street
Cross Section.
4. Material used surrounding and supporting pipes and conduits in the utility trenches shall
be screened gravel compacted at least six (6) inches in diameter around pipes, unless the
trenches are in ledge, or other unsuitable material which requires twelve (12) inches of
the compacted, screened gravel.
5. Gravity sewer lines shall be true to line and grade with no horizontal or vertical curvature
permitted.
6. No footing drains, roof drains or storm water drains shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer system.
7. All underground utilities shall be properly inspected, tested and approval given by
respective utility representative and Planning Board representative before the back filling
of trenches and placement of gravel base courses and pavement.
8. The water and sanitary sewer systems shall be tested and approved prior to installation of
base course (s) and pavement.
9. All lot connections shall be installed to the right of way line, and marked or surveyed as
to be easily located in the future.
7.6.2 Sanitary Sewer System
1. Wherever, in the opinion of the Planning Board, the public sewerage system is
reasonably accessible and where connection to it is feasible, the applicant shall properly
50
connect all lots in the subdivision to the public sewerage system. Said sewage system
collectors shall be located on south and west roadways.
2. The methods of construction and type of materials used shall conform to the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works Standards and Specifications, or the Town of
Monson Water and Sewer Commission Standards and Specifications, where applicable.
3. A sewer extension permit application shall be filed by the applicant.
7.6.3 Water
1. Water mains, whether those of a public utility or a private or a community water supply
system, shall be laid along the north and east side of the roadway and be in accordance
with specifications of the local Water Commission. In no case shall pavement of a
roadway be begun until all water mains and laterals are completed under affected portion
of the roadway.
2. Where available and feasible, all lots in a subdivision shall connect to the appropriate
water service system.
3. All water mains, fittings, gates and hydrants shall be installed in conformity with the
specifications of the Water Commission and in accordance with the Definitive Plan as
approved by the Planning Board.
4. Where connection to a water district system in infeasible, the applicant shall make
provisions to serve every lot with an adequate supply of potable water approved by the
Board of Health.
5. A laboratory test of the water quality shall be required and submitted to the Board of
Health for all private, on site systems.
7.6.4 Gas
Gas mains shall be laid along the south and west edges of the roadway and be in accordance with
specifications of the local Gas Company. In no case shall any pavement of roadway be begun
until all gas mains and laterals are completed under affected portion of the roadway.
7.6.5 Electrical, Telephone and Other Wires
All electrical, telephone, fire alarm, cable TV and other wires and cables shall be installed
underground, unless in the opinion of the Planning Board and the appropriate utility company,
such installation is impractical or not in the best interest of the Town.
7.7 Retaining Wall
51
Retaining walls shall be installed where deemed necessary by the Board and they shall be
designed by a Registered Engineer.
7.8 Final Cleaning
Upon suspension or completion of the work or any portion thereof, the developer or contractor
shall remove from all public or private property all temporary structures, tools and equipment,
rubbish or waste materials resulting from his operations. All ditches shall be filled, all sewers,
drains, catch basins and manholes cleaned and flushed, streets, walks, curbs and other structures
cleaned and repaired and the whole work left in a neat and clean condition.
7.9 Trees and Plantings
7.9.1 Existing Trees
Trees on the site, especially those over twelve (12) inches in diameter should be preserved.
Following is a list of recommended measures for the protection of trees:
1. There should be no operation of heavy equipment or storage of any materials under said
tree within is natural drip line.
2. No grading or filling should be done within the drip line.
3. Supplemental irrigation should be provided to all trees as needed during the summer
months to insure healthy maintenance.
4. No black top paving or vehicle parking shall be located under evergreen trees. No more
than twenty (20%) percent of the area under any deciduous tree’s natural drip line may be
so paved.
5. All drainage from paved areas should be directed away from root zones.
7.9.2 Street Trees
1. The sub-divider is required to plan suitable broadleaved deciduous shade trees along
roads, or ways, unless specifically exempted by the Board. All trees shall be the
equivalent of well rooted nursery grown stock free of injury, harmful insects, and
diseases. They shall be well branched, and the branching structure should be sound.
2. Acceptable types of street trees may be selected from a list appended to these regulations,
which includes large growing, medium growing, and small growing deciduous trees.
3. Large growing trees shall be spaced at intervals of forty five (45) to fifty five (55) feet,
medium growing trees at intervals of thirty (30) to forty (40) feet, and small growing
trees at intervals of twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet. Trees on one side of the street may be
set either opposite or diagonally to trees on the opposite side. If overhead wires are
52
present, large or medium growing trees to be planted along the same side as such wires
should be planted within the set back area of the property rather than adjacent to the
paved way. Small growing trees with low branching characteristics should be planted
within the front yard setback area in all cases.
4. Minimum acceptable sizes of trees to be planted shall be as follows:
a) Large growing - two and a half (2½) inch trunk diameter, caliper at one (1) foot
above the ground.
b) Medium growing – two and a half (2½) inch trunk diameter, caliper at one (1)
foot above the ground.
c) Small growing - nine (9) feet crown height, five (5) feet spread.
5. Planting operations shall be as specified in Section 8, Subsections A, C, E, and F of the
Recommended Standard Specifications for Planting Trees, Shrubs, and Vines, Associated
Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts.
6. Requirements for support stakes, guy wire and cable, ground anchors, horse, and
wrapping material shall be those contained in Section 6 of the Recommended Standard
Specifications for Planting trees, shrubs, and vines, compiled and issued by the
Associated Landscape Contractors of Massachusetts, Inc.
7. The sub-divider shall be responsible for maintenance of planted trees and replacement of
those which have died or become diseased from the time of planting through one full
growing season.
7.9.3 Bank Plantings
1. All cut or fill bankings that tend to wash or erode shall be planted with suitable, well
rooted, and low growing plantings. All plants shall be the equivalent of nursery grown
stock in good health, free fro injury, harmful insects, and diseases.
2. Suitable planting types shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval. Such
plantings shall include very low growing (4 inch to 12 inch), low growing (12 inch to 30
inch), and herbaceous plantings. Perennial grass turf installed as sod is an acceptable
alternative for the planting of banks.
3. If bank plantings are of a type that are properly spaced at close intervals, eight (8) inches
to twelve (12) inches of loam shall be spread over the entire bank. If the plantings are to
be widely spaced they may be planted in loam pits.
4. Mulch (wood chips or equal) shall be spread heavily among plantings for weed and
erosion control.
53
5. The sub-divider shall be responsible for maintenance of bank plantings and replacement
of those which have died or become diseased from the time of planting through on full
growing season.
7.9. 4 Corner Plantings
Requirements for plantings adjacent to street intersections shall be the same as those for Bank
Plantings with the following exceptions:
1. Turf may be provided by seeding as well as by planting sod.
2. Bushy shrubs and herbaceous plantings that would tend to obscure visibility are not
permitted within thirty (30) foot of the intersection of the curbs adjacent to the corner lot.
7.9.5 Cul de Sac Plantings
Unless called for by the Planning Board, there shall be no Cul de Sac plantings.
7.10 Inspections of Improvements
Inspections during the work shall be arranged with the subdivision inspector appointed by the
Town of Monson prior to starting construction, who will provide the sub-divider with a checklist
covering these inspections. The Board’s engineer will sign this checklist after satisfactory
completion of each step by the developer. Inspections shall be requested at least forty eight (48)
hours in advance of each inspection by notice to the Town’s Inspector. Inspections shall be
made after each step indicated above.
All documentation of material types for roadway construction and all weight slips for bituminous
material shall be furnished to the Town’s Inspector on request (see Form K “Subdivision
Inspection Checklist” appended hereto).
8.0 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT
A Development Impact Statement (DIS) is a documented, written analysis of a proposed
development which provides the Planning Board and Town officials with information necessary
for plan review.
It is a developer’s responsibility to prepare and document the DIS in sufficient detail to permit an
adequate evaluation by the Planning Board. This is one reason why it is to the advantage of the
developer to prepare and submit to the Board a Preliminary Plan including a draft DIS. It is
necessary to respond to all sections of the DIS form, except when a written exemption is granted
by the Planning Board.
The development impact statement shall identify:
NAME OF THE PROJECT: ACREAGE:
54
TYPE OF PROJECT: OWNER (S):
LOCATION: PLANNER:
PARCEL NUMBER (S) ENGINEER:
ZONING DISTRICT (S) ARCHITECT:
8.1 Project Description
1. Number of Units: Total of Low Income; Single Family; Two Family; Multi Family;
Other.
2. Type of Ownership (list number of units for each): Condominium; Rental; Private.
3. Number of Bedrooms: Two Family; Multi Family; Other.
4. Approximate Price per Lot/Unit: Private; Condominium; Rental.
8.2 Circulation System
8.2.1 Street Design
Explain reasons for locations of streets, stubs and intersections.
8.2.2 Street Classification and Traffic
Classify the streets and stubs within the development according to the street classification set
forth in Section 6.2 of these regulations; project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart
the site per average day and peak hour, using “Trip Generation Standards” by Institute of
Transportation Engineers.
8.2.3 Parking
Discuss the number, opportunities for multiple use and screening of parking spaces.
8.3 Municipal Services
8.3.1 Municipal Water and Sewer
Project the generation of sewage based on standards in 314-CMR by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection; project the consumption of water based on standards
established by DEP.
8.3.2 Private Water Supply
55
Discuss the types of wells proposed for the project, means for providing fire supply, and any
special problems which might arise.
8.3.3 Private Sewage Disposal
Discuss the types of system, level of treatment, suitability of soils and results of percolation tests,
deep observation holes and test borings. Identify groundwater flow fields in the area of the
proposed subdivision, establish the capability of the soil to renovate sewage effluent, and
determine the dilution effects on the effluent through recharge (mainly precipitation) and
dispersion.
8.3.4 Storm Drainage
Discuss the storm drainage system including the projected flow from a fifty (50) year storm,
name of the receptor stream, and any flow constrictions between the site and the receptor stream.
8.3.5 Fire Protection
Discuss the type and capability of fuel storage facilities, location of storage areas for hazardous
substances, special requirements and distance to fire station.
8.3.6 Recreation
Indicate the distance to, and type of, any public facilities. Discuss the type of private recreation
facilities to be provided with the development.
8.3.7 Schools
Project the student population of the project for the K – 6, 7th , 8th and 9th – 12th levels and indicate
the distance, capacity, and present enrollment of the nearest elementary and secondary schools.
Describe the basis or methodology for all projections of student population.
8.4 Natural Conditions
Describe the following elements of natural conditions, identifying short term (those occurring
primarily during project construction) and long term (those remaining after the completion of
project construction) impacts on each:
8.4.1 Topography
Indicate datum, source, date, slopes greater than fifteen (15%) percent; provide contours at two
(2) foot intervals, with graphic drainage analysis showing annual high water mark; show location
of existing structures, including fences and walls.
8.4.2 Soils
56
Indicate soils and land types, utilizing all government soil surveys covering the project areas,
including but not limited to prime agricultural land, depth to bedrock, and extent of land which
has been filled.
8.4.3 Mineral Resources
Indicate extent and economic importance of mineral resources, extent and means of proposed
extraction, and rehabilitation measures.
8.4.4 Depth to Water Table (Groundwater Level)
Show location and provide test results of soil percolation or other subsurface tests for each lot in
a proposed subdivision.
8.4.5 Aquifer Recharge Areas
8.4.6 Wetlands
8.4.7 Water Courses
8.4.8 One Hundred Year Floodplains
8.4.9 Vegetative Cover
Provide an analysis of vegetative cover, including identification of general cover type (including
but not limited to wooded, open areas, cropland, wetlands, etc.)
8.5 Design Factors
Describe briefly the following features. Photographs are helpful.
1. Present visual quality of the areas.
2. Location of significant viewpoints.
3. Historic structures.
4. Architecturally significant structures.
5. Type of architecture for development.
8.6 Environmental Impact
This section shall deal separately with both short term and long term impacts. A narrative
statement shall be submitted, documenting all mitigative measures taken to:
57
1. Prevent surface water contamination, changes in surface water level or both.
2. Prevent groundwater contamination, changes in groundwater level or both.
3. Maintain slope stability.
4. Prevent erosion, sedimentation, or other instability in soils or vegetative cover.
5. Reduce noise level.
6. Preserve significant views.
7. Ensure compatibility with surrounding land use.
8. Protect wetlands and floodplains, and ensure compliance with the Wetlands Protection
Act (M.G.L. Chapter 131 § 40 and § 40A).
8.7 Phasing
If the development of the site will take place over more than one year, supply a schedule
showing how the development will be phased. A flow chart is helpful. This time table shall
include the following elements:
1. Stripping or clearing of site, or both.
2. Rough grading and construction.
3. Construction of grade stabilization and sedimentation control structures.
4. Final grading and vegetative establishment.
5. Landscaping.
6. The construction of any public improvements shall be specified explaining how these
improvements are to be integrated with the development.
7. Suitable construction schedule providing number of units planned for completion each
year of project.
58
APPENDIX 1
FORMS
A Title Block for all Drawings
B Application for Endorsement of Plan believed Not to Require Approval
C Application for Approval of Preliminary Plan
D Application for Approval of Definitive Plan
E Covenant
F Certificate of Performance
G Performance Bond (Secured by Bank Book)
H Plan Distribution Check List
I Inspection Check List
J Certified List of Abutters
K Notice of Public Hearing
PLATES
1. Endwalls
2. Catch Basin
3. Manhole
4. Underdrain and Curbs
59
FORM A
Approved Monson Planning Board Application Filed
Date Preliminary Plan Filed
By Definitive Plan Filed
Notes Road Profile Plan Filed
Approved by Board of Health
Plan Approved
Bond or Covenant Filed
Fee Attached Yes No
Approval Block Required - Lower Right Hand Corner
60
FORM B
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT
OF PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
File a completed form with each copy of the plan
Monson, Massachusetts
___________________
date
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned believing that the accompanying plan of property in the Town of
Monson does not constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control
Law, herewith submits said plan for a determination and endorsement that Planning
Board approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
1. Name of Applicant_________________________________________________
Address __________________________________________________
2. Name of Engineer or Surveyor________________________________________
Address __________________________________________________
3. Deed of Property recorded in___________________________________Registry,
Book_______________________Page__________________________________
4. Location and Description of Property
Signature of Owner(s)______________________
Address_____________________________
_____________________________
61
FORM C
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN
File a completed form with each copy of the plan
Monson, Massachusetts
______________________
date
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Preliminary Plan of property
located in the Town of Monson for approval as a subdivision as allowed under the
Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of
Land of the Planning Board in the Town of Monson.
1. Name of Sub-divider_______________________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________
2. Name of Engineer or Surveyor_______________________________________
Address_________________________________________________________
3. Deed of Property recorded in_________________________________Registry
Book____________________________Page___________________________
4. Location and Description of Property
Signature of Owner(s)__________________
Address______________________________
_______________________________
A list of the names and addresses of the abutters of this subdivision is attached.
Verification will be made by the Planning Board.
62
Page 2 of 2
FORM C
FOR PLANNING BOARD USE ONLY
1. Application, 10 prints, 10 copies of draft development impact statement,
filing fee, and reproducible (mylar) received_____________(date)
2. Acknowledgement of receipt by Town Clerk_____________________________(date)
3. Reviews made by Town Officials, Departments or Consultants
Board of Health___________________________________________________(date)
Highway Department_______________________________________________(date)
Water & Sewer Department__________________________________________(date)
Fire Department___________________________________________________(date)
Police Department_________________________________________________(date)
Conservation Commission___________________________________________(date)
Engineering Consultant_____________________________________________(date)
Other____________________________________________________________(date)
4 Planning Board action (see meeting minutes)____________________________(date)
Approved__________Modified and approved___________Disapproved___________
5 Reproducible returned to applicant____________________________________(date)
FOR BOARD OF HEALTH USE ONLY
Application, print, and development impact statement received______________(date)
Board of Health action______________________________________________(date)
Approved___________Modified and approved______________Disapproved__________
Action and comments relayed to Planning Board_________________________(date)
63
Page 1 of 2
FORM D
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE PLAN
File a completed form with each copy of the plan
Monson, Massachusetts
_______________________
date
To the Planning Board:
The undersigned herewith submits the accompanying Definitive Plan of property located
in the Town of Monson for approval as a subdivision under the requirements of the
Subdivision Control Law and the Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of
Land of the Planning Board in the Town of Monson.
1. Name of Subdivider________________________________________________
Address__________________________________________________________
2. Name of Engineer or Surveyor________________________________________
Address__________________________________________________________
3. Deed of Property recorded in _________________________________Registry,
Book__________________Page______________________________________
4. Location and description of property:
Signature of Owner(s)________________________
Address___________________________________
___________________________________
A list of names and addresses of the abutters of this subdivision is attached.
Verification will be made by the Planning Board.
Page 2 of 2
64
FORM D
FOR PLANNING BOARD USE ONLY
1. Application – 10 prints, 1 original, 1 set of acetate overlays, filing fee and
10 copies of Development Impact Statement
Received____________________________________(date)
2. Reviews made by Town Officials, Departments or Consultants;
Board of Health_____________________________________________(date)
Highway Department_________________________________________(date)
Water & Sewer Department____________________________________(date)
Fire Department_____________________________________________(date)
Police Department___________________________________________(date)
Conservation Commission_____________________________________(date)
Engineering Consultant_______________________________________(_date)
Other______________________________________________________(date)
3. Notice of Public Hearing executed by Planning Board________________(date)
4. Public Hearing held___________________________________________(date)
5. Certified List of Abutters by Town Assessor________________________(date)
Abutters notified______________________________________________(date)
6 Performance guarantee supplied
Form E submitted, or
Form G submitted____________________________________________(date)
7. Planning Board action (see meeting minutes)_______________________(date)
Approved_________Modified and approved__________Disapproved_________
8. Original returned to applicant___________________________________(date)
(Page 1 of 2)
65
FORM E
COVENANT
The undersigned__________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________of_______________________
County, Massachusetts, hereinafter called the “Covenanter”, having submitted to the
Monson Planning Board, a definitive plan of a subdivision, entitled__________________
________________________________________________________________________
Dated_________________made by___________________________________________
Does hereby covenant and agree with said Planning Board and the successors in office of
said Board, pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81U, as amended that:
1. The covenantor is the owner of record of the premises shown on said plan.
2. This covenant shall run with the land and be binding upon the executors,
administrators, heirs, assigns or the covenantor, and their successors in title to the
premises shown on said plan.
3. The construction of ways and the installation of municipal services shall be
provided to serve any lot in accordance with the applicable Rules and Regulations
of said Board before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other than by
mortgage deed; provided that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged
premises by foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of the mortgaged
premises or part thereof may sell any such lot, subject only to that portion of this
Covenant which provides that no lot so sold shall be built upon until such ways
and services have been provided to serve such lot.
4. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance subject to this covenant
by a single deed of the entire parcel of land shown on the subdivision plan or of
all lots not previously released by the Planning Board without first providing such
ways and services.
5. This covenant shall take effect upon the approval of said plan.
6. Reference to this covenant shall be entered upon said plan and this covenant shall
be recorded when said plan is recorded.
66
(Page 2 of 2)
FORM E
The Undersigned__________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Wife, husband, of the covenantor hereby agree that such interest as I, we, may have in
said premises shall be subject to the provisions of this covenant and insofar as is
necessary release all rights of tenancy by the courtesy, dower, homestead and other
interest therein.
Executed as a sealed instrument this___________________day of___________________
_________________________ __________________________
_________________________ __________________________
_________________________ __________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
_________________________ss. ______________________20__
Then personally appeared___________________________________________________
And acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be_________________free act and deed,
before me
_____________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires_________
67
(Page 1 of 2)
FORM F
CERTIFICATE OF PERFORMANCE
(Covenant Approval Release)
Monson, Massachusetts
_________________20__
The undersigned, being a majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Monson,
Massachusetts, hereby certify that the requirements of work on the ground called for by
the Covenant dated_________________, 20___, and recorded in____________________
_________________Land Registry District as Document No:__________________, and
noted on Certificate of Title No:_______________, in Registration Book____________,
Page____________ have been completed to the satisfaction of the Planning Board as to
the following enumerated lots on Plan entitled___________________________________
recorded with said Deeds, Plan Book_____________, Plan____________, (or registered
in said Land Registry, Plan Book________________, Plan____________, and said lots
are hereby released from the restrictions as to sale and building specified thereon.
Lots Designated on said Plan as follows:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Majority of the Planning Board
_________________________________ _________________________________
_________________________________ _________________________________
68
(Page 2 of 2)
FORM F
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
________________________ss. _________________________20__
Then personally appeared_______________________ one of the above named members
of the Planning Board of the Town of Monson, Massachusetts, and acknowledged the
foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of said Planning Board, before me
_____________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires_________________
69
(Page 1 of 2)
FORM G
PERFORMANCE BOND SECURED BY BANK PASSBOOK
____________________20__
AGREEMENT made this date between the Town of Monson and
_____________________________________of_________________________________
hereby binds and obligates himself/itself/his or its executors, administrators, devises,
heirs, successors and assigns to the Town of Monson, a Massachusetts municipal
corporation, in the sum of
__________________________________________Dollars, (all) or, ________________
of said sum to be used to insure the performance by the obligor of all the covenants,
conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the application dated and in the
covenant signed by
____________________________________and dated________________________20__
under which approval of a definitive plan of a certain subdivision entitled
____________________________________and dated________________________20__
has been or is hereinafter granted by the Monson Planning Board.
In the event the obligor should fail to perform his obligations on said project in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Monson Planning Board, the Town of
Monson may use these funds, or an part thereof, to satisfy and complete the obligor’s
obligation on said project.
Upon completion of all the work required to be completed by the obligor aforesaid on or
before__________________________20__ the said Bank Book shall be returned to the
obligor with all interest accrued thereon.
70
(Page 2 of 2)
FORM G
The Town of Monson, acting by and through its Planning Board hereby agrees to accept
the aforesaid Bank Book as security for the performance of the project as aforesaid.
Majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Monson
____________________________________ _________________________________
____________________________________ _________________________________
Owner, and/or Contractor, and/or Developer
____________________________________
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
______________________, ss ____________________________20__
Then personally appeared___________________________________________________
One of the above named members of the Planning Board of the Town of Monson,
Massachusetts and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of
said Planning Board, before me
__________________________________
Notary Public
_______________________________
My Commission expires
The ________________________________Bank of______________________________
hereby recognizes and accepts the conditions of this notice of agreement.
_________________________________
Authorized Signature
To be executed in five (5) copies, all of which are to be considered originals. (Note: two
(2) copies of Form G are to be forwarded to the above Bank, one (1) signed copy returned
to the Planning Board, and one (1) signed copy given to the Town Treasurer.
71
FORM H
Plan Distribution Check List
FILING OF APPROVED PLANS CHECK LIST
Agency # Required Date Received By
Complete set of plans required
Registry of Deeds
1
Town Clerk 1
Board of Selectmen 1
Highway Department 1
Water & Sewer Department 1
Building Commissioner/
Zoning Enforcement Officer
1
Planning Board 2
Street & Lot Layout only
required
Board of Assessors 1
Police Department 1
Board of Health 1
Fire Department 1
This check sheet to be returned to the Planning Board upon completion. This sheet to be
completed within thirty (30) days (calendar) upon receipt of approval from the Planning
Board of Definitive Plan. No work as defined in the Definitive Plan shall be commenced
before this list is completed and returned to the Planning Board.
72
(Page 1 of 2)
FORM I
SUBDIVISION INSPECTION CHECKLIST
Name of Subdivision_______________________________________________________
Name of Application_______________________________________________________
SUBJECT OF INSPECTION INITIALS OF AGENT DATE OF INSPECTION
Clearing of Right of Way
Subgrade Preparation
Roadway Construction Material
Types
Below Grade Drainage
Sanitary Sewer Installation
Water Installation
Fire Alarm Installation
Gravel Base
Curb Installation
Binder Course
Surface Drainage
Berm Installation
Sidewalk Construction
73
(Page 2 of 2)
FORM I
SUBDIVISION INSPECTION CHECKLIST
Name of Subdivision_______________________________________________________
Name of Applicant________________________________________________________
SUBJECT OF INSPECTION INITIALS OF AGENT DATE OF INSPECTION
Bicycle Path Construction
Street Trees and Planting
Grass Strips
Street Lights
Street Signs and Monuments
Final Clean Up
Wearing Course
Final Inspection at End of
Two (2) Years
File Reference__________________________
74
FORM J
CERTIFIED LIST OF ABUTTER
_________________________20__
To the Planning Board of the Town of Monson:
The undersigned, being an applicant for approval of a definitive plan of a proposed
subdivision entitled
________________________________________________________________________
Submits the following plan to the land in the subdivision listing the names of the
adjoining owners I their relative positions and indicating the address of each abutter on
the plan or in a separate list, including owners of land separated from the subdivision
only by a street.
__________________________________
Signature of Applicant
__________________________________
Address
__________________________________
__________________________________
__________________________________
Date
To the Planning Board of the Town of Monson
This is to certify that at the time of the last assessment for taxation made by the Town of
Monson, the names and addresses of the parties assessed as adjoining owners to the
parcel of land shown above were as above written, except as follows:
_________________________________
Assessor
75
FORM K
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
Town of Monson, Massachusetts
_______________________________, having submitted a Definitive Plan of a
(owner)
subdivision of land ________________________________________________________
(location)
as shown on a plan by______________________________________________________
(surveyor)
a public hearing will be held thereon at the Municipal Office Building, 110 Main Street,
Monson, on_____________________________ at ______________________, in
(date) (time)
accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81-T as amended.
_____________________________________
Chairman, Monson Planning Board
76


